Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Progress in CFD Simulations of Fluidized Beds for Chemical and Energy 
Process Engineering 

Falah Alobaid a, *, Naser Almohammed a, Massoud Massoudi Farid b, Jan May a, Philip R¨oßger b, 
Andreas Richter c, Bernd Epple a 
a Technical University of Darmstadt, Institute for Energy Systems and Technology, Otto-Berndt-Straße 2, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany 
b TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Chair of Energy Process Engineering, Fuchsmühlenweg 9, 09599 Freiberg, Germany 
c TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Professorship for Modeling of Thermochemical Conversion Processes, Fuchsmühlenweg 9, 09599 Freiberg, Germany   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Gas-Solid Flows 
Fluidized-Bed Systems 
CFD Numerical Methods 
Two-Fluid Models 
Discrete-Particle Model 
Hybrid Models 
Hard-Sphere Model 
Soft-Sphere Model 
Coarse-Grained Parcel Model 
Non-Spherical Particle Models 
Drag Models 
Chemical Reactions 
Mass and Heat Transfer 
Turbulence 
Combustion and Gasification, CO2  Capture 
Wetting and Drying 
Steam Reforming 
Mixing and Segregation 
Coating and Granulation 
Agglomeration and Breakup 
Deposition 
Polymerization 
Blast Furnace 
Lime Shaft Kiln 
Fluid Catalytic Cracking 
Methanol-To-Olefins 

Gas-solid fluidized beds have drawn the attention of engineers and researchers as an effective technology for a 
large variety of applications, and numerical simulations can play an increasingly relevant role in their devel-
opment  and  optimization.  Although  real-time  simulations  will  require  substantial  progress  in  the  accuracy, 
capability, and efficiency of numerical models, future developments could herald a new era of so-called virtual 
reality  for  process  engineering,  featuring  interactive  simulations  instead  of  stepwise  experimental  scale-up 
studies and cost-intensive empirical trial-and-error methods. This review paper provides a significant body of 
knowledge on the developments of CFD mathematical models and how they can be applied in various fluidized- 
bed systems. The review is divided into three main parts. The first part (Mathematical modeling) describes the 
state-of-the-art numerical models of gas-solid flows (two-fluid model, soft-sphere model, hard-sphere model, and 
hybrid  model) and their fundamental assumptions (gas-solid, particle-particle, and particle-wall interactions). 
Special attention is devoted to the forces and the moments of the forces acting on particles, the parcel modeling, 
the homogeneous and structure-dependent drag models, the non-spherical particle models, the heat and mass 
transfer, and the turbulence. The second part of this review (State-of-the-art studies) is dedicated to the body of 
literature, focusing on how these numerical models are applied to fluidized-bed systems used in chemical and 
energy  process  engineering.  Relevant  works  on  simulation  in  the  literature  up  to  2021  are  analyzed,  com-
plemented by an overview of popularly used commercial and in-house simulation codes. Particular attention is 
paid to those studies that include measurement validation, to achieve a fundamentally competitive comparison 
between the different numerical models. The pros and cons of applying CFD models to fluidized-bed systems are 
studied  and  assessed  based  on  the  existing  body  of  literature.  The  third  part  of  this  review  (Conclusion  and 
prospects)  highlights  current  research  trends,  identifying  research  gaps  and  opportunities  for  future  ways,  in 
which CFD can be applied to fluidized beds for energetic and chemical processes.  

* Corresponding author: Falah Alobaid, Technical University of Darmstadt, Institute for Energy Systems and Technology, Otto-Berndt-Straße 2, 64287 Darmstadt, 

Germany, Tel.: +49 (0) 6151 16 23004, Fax: +49 (0) 6151 16 22690 

E-mail addresses: falah.alobaid@est.tu-darmstadt.de (F. Alobaid), naser.almohammed@gmail.com (N. Almohammed), Massoud.Massoudi-Farid@iec.tu-freiberg. 
de (M. Massoudi Farid), jan.may@est.tu-darmstadt.de (J. May), Philip.Roessger@iec.tu-freiberg.de (P.  R¨oßger), A.Richter@iec.tu-freiberg.de (A. Richter), bernd. 
epple@est.tu-darmstadt.de (B. Epple).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100930 
Received 2 October 2020; Received in revised form 30 April 2021; Accepted 4 May 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930Availableonline28December20210360-1285/©2021TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Abbreviations 

EMMS 
FAM 

air reactor 

ADMFB  air dense medium fluidized bed 
ANSYS-FLUENT commercial CFD software 
AR 
BARRACUDA commercial CFD software 
BF 
BFB 
C 
CAL 
CALG 

blast furnace 
bubbling fluidized bed 
coke / char 
carbonate-looping process / calcium-looping process 
carbonate-looping gasification / calcium-looping 
gasification 
cube averaging method 
combined-cycle power plant 
carbon capture and storage 
carbon capture and storage/utiliszation 
cumulative distribution function 
circulating fluidized bed 
computational fluid dynamics 

CAM 
CCPP 
CCS 
CCS/U 
CDF 
CFB 
CFD 
CFD-DEM computational fluid dynamics-discrete element method 
CFD-DPM computational fluid dynamics-discrete-particle model 
CFD-PBM computational fluid dynamics-population balance 

equation 

methane 

combined heat and power 
chemical-looping combustion 
chemical-looping gasification 
chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling system 
compact micro -fluidized bed 
carbon monoxide 
carbon dioxide 

CGDEM  coarse-grained discrete element method 
CH4 
CHNOS  carbon-hydrogen-nitrogen-oxygen- sulfur 
CHP 
CLC 
CLG 
CLOU 
CMFB 
CO 
CO2 
COMSOL Multiphysics commercial CFD software 
chemical percolation devolatilization 
CPD 
computational particle fluid dynamics 
CPFD 
composite-particle center method 
CPM 
central processing unit 
CPU 
carbon stripper 
CS 
closely-packed sphere model 
CSM 
continuous stirred-tank reactor 
CSTR 
CxHy 
general hydrocarbon 
diffusion-based method 
DBM 
dual circulating fluidized bed 
DCFB 
dense discrete particle model / dense discrete phase model 
DDPM 
DDPM-DEM dense discrete particle model-discrete element method 
DEM 
DIFB 
DNS 
DO 
DOF 
DPM 
DPPFB 
DPT 
DPVM 
DQMOM direct quadrature method of moments 
DRW 
DTRM 
EAM 
ECT 
ECVT 
EDC 
EDM 
EEL 
ELL 

discrete element method 
directly-irradiated fluidized bed 
direct numerical simulation 
discrete ordinates 
degree of freedom 
discrete-particle model / discrete phase model 
dense-phase pulsed fluidized bed 
dilute phase transport 
divided particle volume method 

discrete random walk 
discrete transfer radiation model 
energy-based agglomeration model 
electrical capacitance tomography 
electrical capacitance volume tomography 
eddy dissipation concept 
eddy dissipation model 
Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian model 
Eulerian- Lagrangian-Lagrangian 

gasification carbon stripper 
graphical processing unit 
hydrogen 

energy minimiszation multi-scale 
force-based agglomeration model / fractal agglomerate 
model 
force-balance, fixed bed or fluidized bed 
fluid catalytic cracking 
fast fluidization 

hybrid model 
high-performance computer 
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
immersed boundary method 
internally circulating fluidized bed 
integrated gasification combined-cycle 
inertia-equivalent sphere model 
kinetic theory of dense gases 
kinetic theory of granular flows 
kinetic theory of rough spheres 
lattice Boltzmann method 
large eddy simulation 

FB 
FCC 
FF 
FPQMOM fixed-pivot quadrature moments 
FP-TES  particle Thermal Energy Storagethermal energy storage 
GCS 
GPU 
H2 
HDCFB  high-density circulating fluidized bed 
HM 
HPC 
HVAC 
IBM 
ICFB 
IGCC 
ISM 
KTDG 
KTGF 
KTRS 
LBM 
LES 
LES-DEM large eddy simulation-discrete element method 
LES-DPM large eddy simulation-discrete-particle model 
LG 
LN 
MAM 
MC 
MFM 
MHD 
MM 
MOM 
MP-PIC  multiphase particle-in-cell 
MSB-TGA micro-spouted-bed thermogravimetric analyzer 
MSFB  magnetic-field-assisted fluidization 
MSM 
MSW 
MTO 
MUSCL  monotonic upstream-centered scheme for conservation 

light gases 
light naphtha 
momentum-based agglomeration model 
Monte Carlo 
multi-fluid model 
magnetohydrodynamics (magneto-fluid dynamics) 
mixture model 
method of moments 

multi-sphere model 
municipal solid waste 
methanol-to-olefins 

laws 

Nnitrogen 
nitrogen oxides 
non-spherical particulate system 
oxygen 
oxygen carrier 
oxygen carrier aided combustion 

MZCR  multi-zone circulating reactor 
N2 
NOx 
NSPS 
O2 
OC 
OCAC 
OpenFOAM CFD software 
PBE 
PCFB 
PCM 
PDF 
PDH 
PFB 
PFR 
PHFCFB  pressuriszed high-flux circulating fluidized beds 
PIV 
PPP 
PR-DNS  particle-resolved direct numerical simulation 
particle radiation factor 
PRF 
particle size distribution 
PSD 
porous sphere model 
PSM 
QMOM  quadrature method of moments 

population balance equation 
pressuriszed circulating fluidiszed bed 
composite-particle method / particle center method 
probability distribution function 
propane dehydrogenation 
pulsed-fluidized bed 
plug flow reactor 

particle image velocimetry 
particles per parcel 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009302F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

RANS 
RANS-DPM Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes simulation - discrete- 

Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes simulation 

particle model 
refuse -derived fuel 
rotating fluidized bed in a static geometry 
fluidizedresidue fluid catalytic cracking 
root- mean- square 
Reynolds stress transport model 
residence time distribution 
sequential agglomerate model 

RDF 
RFB-SG 
RFCC 
RMS 
RSTM 
RTD 
SAM 
SE-SMR  sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming 
SF 
SMR 

solid fuel 
steam methane reforming 

sulfur oxides 
single-particle method 

SOx 
SPM 
SQMOM  sectional quadrature method of moments 
SRF 
SSMM 
SSW 
TFM 
TGA 
TGM 
VGO 
VPE 
VSM 
WSGG  weighted sum of grey gases  

solid recovered fuel 
standard method of moments 
same statistic weight method 
Two-fluid model 
thermogravimetric analyzer 
two-grid method 
vacuum gas oil 
virtual process engineering 
volume-equivalent sphere model 

1. Introduction 

In 1922, the first commercial fluidized-bed reactor (Winkler gasifier) 
was operated in Germany; this was then followed by the first operation 
of a circulating fluidized bed in 1939. Since that time, the scope of ap-
plications for gas-solid fluidized-bed systems has expanded to include a 
large variety of energetic, chemical, and metallurgical processes. These 
include  applications  around  olefin  polymerization,  fuel  synthesis 
(Fischer–Tropsch synthesis), combustion and gasification of solid fuels, 
fluid coking and flexi-coking processes, catalytic cracking of heavy hy-
drocarbons, calcination processes, reduction/oxidation of ores, granu-
lation processes in the food and fertilizer industry, and CO2  capture in 
thermal  power  plants  using  chemical  or  carbonate-looping  processes 
[1,2] (see Fig. 1.1). Researchers have divided these processes into four 
main  groups,  namely  organic  synthesis  reactions,  mineral  processing, 
pharmaceutical and energy applications (among others Van de Velden 
et al. [3,4] and Mahmoudi et al. [5-7]). 

For many decades, experimental measurements, usually at the lab- 
scale,  have  been  considered  the  main  basis  for  developing  and 
designing commercial-scale reactors. However, it is difficult to describe 
the hydrodynamic characteristics of gas-solid flows, despite the exten-
sive  experimental  work  carried  out  by  many  researchers  using  quite 
different reactor designs, operating modes, and conditions. The major 
challenge remains in understanding and predicting the flow regime that 
the solid phase undergoes within the gas phase. For instance, either a 

homogeneous or heterogeneous gas-solid flow regime takes place, which 
in turn results in very distinctive forms of flow structures over a wide 
range  of  time  and  space  scales.  Numerical  models  provide  beneficial 
options to study the modification of the fluidized-bed system and gain 
knowledge  of  the  flow  structures  and  their  effects  on  fluidization  for 
improved  design  and  scale-up  procedures.  However,  substantial  im-
provements in their accuracy (agreement between simulation and real 
process),  capability  (scale  and  resolution  of  the  simulation),  and  effi-
ciency  (computational  effort)  are  still  required  [8].  Ongoing  de-
velopments could herald a new era of virtual process engineering (VPE) 
of fluidized-bed systems, where engineers numerically design, improve, 
scale-up, or control the processes in real-time without time-expensive 
and costly experiments. This is precisely the subject of this review paper. 
Review papers that systematically analyze scientific publications on 
certain topics are very valuable, but few have been written. In 1986, 
Gidaspow [9] presented one of the first review papers on the hydrody-
namic models used  to simulate fluidization  systems (his  book “Multi-
phase flow and fluidization: continuum and kinetic theory descriptions”, 
published in 1994, is still the most complete introduction to the multi-
phase flow [10]). The Gidaspows’ review was followed by many other 
studies. Relevant review papers found in the literature include Crowe 
[11]  (in  1982,  a  state-of-the-art  review  of  trajectory  and  two-fluid 
models  for  one-dimensional  and  two-dimensional  flows),  Deen  et  al. 
[12]  (in  2007,  a  state-of-the-art  review  of  discrete-particle  models 
applied to gas-solid flows prevailing in fluidized beds), Zhu et al. [13] 

Fig.  1.1. Fluidization  technology  on representative  sectors  of  chemical and  energy process  engineering:  (a) circulating  fluidized  bed boiler  (with  permission of 
Valmet Oyj), (b) sorption tailings roasting plant (with permission of ENGINEERING DOBERSEK GmbH, (c) wood gasifier in Güssing (Creative Commons license), and 
(d) fluid catalytic cracking (with permission of MAN Energy Solutions). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009303F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

(in 2008, a state-of-the-art review of discrete-particle models of partic-
ulate systems), Wang [14] (in 2009, a state-of-the-art review of Eulerian 
simulation of Geldart A particles in fluidized beds), G´omez-Barea and 
Leckner  [15]  (in  2010,  a  state-of-the-art  review  of  the  CFD  models 
applied to biomass gasification in fluidized beds), Loha et al. [16] (in 
2014,  a  state-of-the-art  review  of  Euler-Euler  and  Euler-Lagrange 
models  applied  to  fluidized  bed  gasification),  Deen  [17]  (in  2014,  a 
state-of-the-art  review  of  direct  numerical  simulation  of  gas-particle 
mass,  momentum  and  heat  transfer  in  particulate  systems),  Kuerten 
[18] (in 2016, a state-of-the-art review of direct numerical simulation 
and large eddy simulation of particle-laden turbulent flows), Zhong et al. 
[19]  (in 2016,  a  state-of-the-art review of  two-fluid, discrete element 
method  and  multiphase  particle-in-cell  models  for  gas-solid  flows 
coupled with heat and mass transfer), Ariyaratne et al. [20] (in 2018, a 
state-of-the-art  review  of  Euler-Euler  and  Euler-Lagrange  models  for 
multiphase  flows),  and  Zhang  et  al.  [21]  (in  2019,  a  state-of-the-art 
review of Euler-Euler model for the simulation of particle mixing and 
separation  fluidized  beds).  Most  recent  reviews  were  published  by 
Golshan et al. [22] (in 2020, a state-of-the-art review of discrete element 
method applied to chemical process systems), Kuang et al. [23] (in 2020, 
a  state-of-the-art  review  of  discrete  element  method  applied  to  pneu-
matic conveying), Nakhaei et al. [24] (in 2020, a state-of-the-art review 
of  the  CFD  models  of  gas-solid  cyclone  separators),  Kieckhefen  et  al. 
[25]  (in  2020,  a  state-of-the-art  review  of  discrete  element  method 
applied to process engineering), Wang [26] (in 2020, a state-of-the-art 
review  of  the  continuum  theory  for  dense  gas-solid  flow),  Ngo  and 
Lim [27] (in 2020, a state-of-the-art review of multiscale Eulerian CFD 
models of chemical processes). Although the topics discussed range from 
black-box  models  to  three-dimensional  computational  fluid  dynamic 
models, the reviews are mostly specific to one or two modeling tech-
niques and/or to a narrow field of application. This first-of-its-kind re-
view  paper  provides  researchers,  developers,  and  practitioners  with 
detailed information on multi-scale techniques for simulating gas-solid 
flows.  The  development  of  3D-CFD  models  and  how  they  have  been 
applied to various gas-solid fluidized-bed systems are shown and com-
plemented  with  an  in-depth  evaluation  of  recently  published  works. 
Finally, the review concludes with concrete recommendations for this 
field of research. 

1.1. Motivation 

At the beginning of the 21st century, human beings find themselves 
in a contradictory situation with regard to energy demand and global 
climate change. On the one hand, significant growth in the global energy 
demand is expected to take place in the next decades [28]. On the other 
hand,  human  activities  have  caused  a  dangerous  rise  in  the  global 
average temperature of the land and sea surface by approximately 1.0 ±
◦
0.2 
C above pre-industrial levels [29]. It is widely believed that a large 
proportion  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  originated  anthropogenically 
from  the  use  of  fossil  fuels  (e.g.  natural  gas,  oil,  and  coal)  and 
non-conventional  fuels  (e.g.  oil  shale  and  tar  sand  bitumen),  with 
additional  contributions  coming  from  manufactured  materials  (e.g. 
concrete),  deforestation,  soil  erosion  and  agriculture  (including  live-
stock). The global society actively supports measures to create a flexible 
and low-carbon energy economy in order to attenuate climate change 
and  its  devastating  environmental  consequences.  These  measures 
include the process optimization, the implementation of carbon capture 
and storage/utilization technologies, and the promotion of renewable 
energy sources for power generation, including the possible electrifica-
tion of the heating and transport sectors, as briefly described below:  

1)  The  improvement  of  engineering  processes  in  contexts  such  as 
thermal power plants or cement and metallurgical industries reduces 
the emitted emissions that contribute to global climate change and 
present  a  hazard  for  people’s  health  and  environment  [30-32]. 
Several  measures  can  be  considered  here,  such  as  the  increase  in 

process  efficiency  and  flexibility,  the  enhancement  of  the  plant 
operation mode in terms of the load change times and the rate of 
shutdown/start-up, or the retrofitting with modern flue gas cleaning 
devices for particulate matter, nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides 
(SOx) and carbon dioxide (CO2). Most of the recent improvement of 
power plant efficiencies are due to increased steam properties (e.g. 
avalanche of supercritical circulating fluidized-bed boilers in China 
[33,34]), which benefitted from the CFD simulations, while the so-
lutions for intermittent energy sources are hardly affected by the CFD 
and a dynamic process simulation is preferred [31].  

2)  The technologies of carbon capture and storage/utilization (CCS/U) 
represent an effective approach to achieve a considerable reduction 
in CO2  emissions. A distinction is made between three CO2  capture 
methods,  namely  pre-combustion,  post-combustion,  and  oxy-fuel 
[35].  In  the  pre-combustion  approach,  the  solid  fuel  is  gasified  at 
higher-pressure levels in an entrained-flow gasifier or a fluidized-bed 
system, employing steam and oxygen as gasification agents. Using a 
synthesis gas cleaning unit, the carbon dioxide and the trace gases 
can  be  removed.  Finally,  the  synthesis  gas  is  converted  into 
value-added  chemicals  or  combusted  in  a  combined-cycle  power 
plant [36,37]. The nominal process efficiency of the combined-cycle 
power plant (CCPP) can reach 60 %. Large-scale CCPPs with a net 
electrical power of 780 MWel and an efficiency level up to 62.2 % are 
now running in Irsching, Germany [38,39], Bouchain, France [40, 
41], and Tambak Lorok, Indonesia [42]. Taking into account the fact 
that the global average thermal efficiency of coal-fired power plants 
is  34  %  [43,44],  the  widespread  consensus  is  that  outdated 
higher-emission  generation  units  should  be  replaced  with  modern 
combined  heat  and  power  (CHP)  plants  and/or  highly  efficient 
CCPPs equipped with carbon capture. The post-combustion process 
has the advantage that existing processes can be retrofitted with a 
CO2  capture  method.  The  carbon  dioxide  in  the  flue  gas  can  be 
captured using two main methods, namely chemical flue gas scrub-
bing or carbonate-looping process, which uses limestone as a solid 
sorbent,  moving  between  interconnected  circulating  fluidized-bed 
reactors (the carbonator and calciner) [45-47]. In the oxy-fuel pro-
cess, fossil fuel is combusted with pure oxygen. After the flue gas is 
cleaned of pollutants and the steam is separated by a condensation 
process, the flue gas consists of pure CO2 that can be compressed for 
transport and storage/reuse. The chemical-looping process, which is 
considered  an  energy-efficient  oxy-fuel  method,  has  recently  been 
introduced to capture CO2  with a low energy input [48,49]. Solid 
particles of metal oxide are used as oxygen carriers, and these par-
ticles  circulate  between  two  coupled,  circulated  fluidized  beds 
known as the air and fuel reactors.  

3)  The third approach to achieve a considerable reduction in emissions 
is to replace fossil fuels with alternative energy sources (e.g. biomass, 
refuse-derived  fuel  (RDF),  solid  recovered  fuel  (SRF),  tire-derived 
fuel  (TDF),  and  sewage  sludge)  [50-53].  Furthermore,  the 
increased  use  of  renewable  energy  sources  such  as  wind  power, 
photovoltaics,  or  hydropower  has  a  positive  effect  on  the  global 
emissions balance and contributes to a decrease in CO2 emissions in 
the power generation sector. The electrification of the heating and 
transport sectors also offers a great opportunity for achieving zero 
emissions.  However,  the  increased  expansion  of  intermittent  elec-
tricity generation, notably wind power and photovoltaics in the en-
ergy grid, can lead to the seemingly paradox situation of negative 
electricity  prices  at  times  of  low  demand  and/or  high  renewable 
electricity output, or, equally, peak electricity prices at times of high 
demand and/or low renewable electricity output. The main reason 
for  this  is  the  inflexibility  of  dispatchable  baseload  power  plants. 
Potential  solutions  to  maintain  a  secure  supply  are  as  follows:  a) 
expansion of high-voltage transmission infrastructure, b) enrolment 
in demand response programs, c) modifications to system operations, 
d)  large-scale  energy  storage,  and  e)  flexibly  dispatchable  power 
generation  associated  with  CCS/U  technologies.  As  each  of  these 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009304F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

solutions differs in its potential impact, technological maturity, and 
economic viability, the future electricity system will comprise all of 
these concepts to varying degrees, with the possible integration of 
value-adding  processes  apart 
the 
power-to-fuel process. The latter is known as carbon-neutral fuels or 
e-fuels (e.g. hydrogen, methane, gasoline, diesel fuel, or ammonia) 
and  can  be  produced  from  renewable  energy  sources  by  the  elec-
trolysis of water to make hydrogen that can be used to hydrogenate 
the  carbon  dioxide  captured  from  thermal  power  plants  or  air,  or 
derived from carbonic acid in seawater [54]. 

from  electricity  such  as 

Gas-solid fluidized-bed systems are today the leading technology for 
a large variety of processes listed above. They have overtaken conven-
tional  technologies  and  are  expected  to  continue  maintaining  their 
technological leadership in the chemical and metallurgical industries. 
Furthermore, a significant change is taking place in the energy market 
due to the increasing trend toward the decarbonization of existing and 
newly  built  power  generation  assets  using  alternative  energy  sources 
(biomass- and waste-derived fuels). The demand for fuel flexibility with 
an improved operation mode (e.g. rate of load change) is also increasing, 
leading a multi-fuel, flexible boiler design to become the new standard, 
and fluidized beds are perfectly suited to these requirements [55-58]. 
The basic idea of gas-solid fluidized beds is that there is a balance be-
tween the downward gravity forces of the solid weight and the upward 
forces  generated  by  the  gas  flow.  Monodisperse  particles,  or  poly-
disperse particles with different densities, shapes, and size distributions 
within one order of magnitude (e.g. between 0.1 mm and 1 mm or 0.2 
mm and 2 mm) can be successfully treated. In the case of turbulent and 
fast fluidization reactors, finer particles may be carried over from the 
fluidized-bed  reactor  with  the  gas  stream,  so  external  recycling  is 
required to maintain the bed inventory. The strong mixing between the 
gas  and  solid  phases  makes  the  reaction  chemistry  inside  the  reactor 
better  to  control.  However,  it  should  be  mentioned  here  that  the 
gas-solid mixing and the mixing of gases are limited; for instance tem-
perature differences between various zones of the circulating fluidized 
bed furnace have been measured (the temperature can be reached up to 
1000 
C  or  more  in  the  core  of  the  CFB,  while  the  average  bed  tem-
perature is 800-900 

C) [59]. 

◦

◦

1.2. Fluidized-bed systems 

A fluidized bed is a bulk of solid particles located in a vertical vessel, 
with gas flowing into the reactor from the bottom via a porous plate or 
nozzles. The forces exerted by the gas on the particles result in a physico- 
chemical phenomenon known as fluidization, where the bed of partic-
ulate materials is converted into a fluid-like state, offering an effective 
means  of  gas-solid  interaction.  Different  variables  can  influence  the 
fluidization regime, such as the mechanical and physical properties of 
solids,  the  particle  size  and  shape,  the  bed  geometry,  the  distributor 
type,  the  vessel  interiors,  and  the  gas  properties  (e.g.  pressure,  tem-
perature, and velocity). Geldart [60] classified the particles, based on 
their fluidization behavior, into four groups: C (cohesive), A (aeratable), 
B  (bubbling or  sand-like),  and  D  (coarse  or  spoutable).  The  map  was 
obtained  empirically  for  air  at  an  ambient  temperature  and  has  been 
widely used in research into the gas-solid flows (see Fig. 1.2 (b)). The 
graphical representation of the transitions between the different particle 
classifications can be expressed by appropriate equations in terms of the 
surface-volume mean diameter of particles (Sauter mean diameter) in 
μm and the density of the gas and solid phases in kg/m3 [61]. 

A  distinction  is  made  between  different  fluidization  regimes  (see 
Fig.  1.2  (a)),  namely  fixed  bed,  bubbling  fluidized  bed  (BFB),  and 
circulating  fluidized  bed  (CFB).  Empirical  equations  can  be  used  to 
determine  the fluidization velocity at the  transition of subsequent re-
gimes (summarized, e.g. by Zhang et al. [62]). The fluidization regime is 
crucial to understand the heat and mass transfer inside the reactor and 
can  be  determined  using  a  unified  flow  regime  map  for  gas-solid 

suspensions, e.g. the fluidization regime map developed by Reh [63] and 
further extended by Grace [64] and Kunii & Levenspiel [2] (see Fig. 1.2 
(c)). The x-axis of the flow map denotes the Archimedes number and the 
y axis is the particle Reynolds number, while the letters A, B, C, and D 
refer to the Geldart particle classification. 

For many decades, lab-scale experiments on fluidized-bed reactors 
have  led  to  empirical  approaches  for  calculating  e.g.  the  minimum 
fluidization velocity, the bubble formation, the particle attrition, and the 
axial solid mass fraction distribution [65]. Numerical simulation makes 
it  possible  to  bypass  a  long  process  of  planning  and  constructing  ex-
periments, providing a quick evaluation of local and global flow field 
variables (e.g. the temperature, velocity, and concentration) at the in-
dustrial  scale.  However,  the  reliable  simulation  of  large-scale  fluid-
ized-bed systems is hindered by a failure to accurately understand the 
fundamentals of gas-solid flows (e.g. gas-particle, particle-particle, and 
particle-wall interactions). The main challenge is the large separation of 
scales (from micro-scale and meso-scale to macro-scale), i.e. the largest 
flow structures occur at macro-scales (reactor scale can be in the order of 
meters),  whereas  the  fundamentals  of  gas-solid  flows  take  place  at 
micro-scale (micrometres and smaller) [12]. In order to deal with this 
issue, a multi-scale simulation concept was developed that includes four 
different  levels  with  various  resolutions  of  physical  mechanisms.  The 
basic  idea  behind  the  multi-scale  simulation  concept  is  that  the 
smaller-scale simulation models that take into account gas-particle and 
particle-particle/wall interactions are used to develop effective closure 
relations  (with  the  aid  of  experimental  data)  that  can  be  applied  to 
simulation  models  with  larger  length  and  time  scales  [66-68].  Many 
experiments have shown that the main characteristics of gas-solid flows 
can be described using these closure relations. However, according to 
Deen  et  al.  [12],  there  is  no  guarantee  that  all  the  fundamentals  of 
gas-solid  flows  between  small-scale  and  large-scale  processes  can  be 
captured by effective interactions. Fig. 1.3 offers a schematic represen-
tation of the four simulation models, namely direct numerical simula-
tion, discrete-particle methods, two-fluid, and quasi-single-phase. 

1.3. Numerical models 

Due to the increasing development of computational performance, 
numerical simulations are gaining particular importance in the predic-
tion  of  gas-solid  flows  ,  studying  design  modifications,  and  com-
plementing experimental data. Taking into account how the gas phase 
influences the solid phase and vice versa, as well as how particles in-
fluence  other  particles  and  walls  (gas-particle,  particle-particle,  and 
particle-wall  interactions),  one  can  differentiate  between  various 
coupling  approaches,  namely  the  one-way  dispersed  phase  model 
(gas → particle),  two-way  coupling  (gas↔particle)  and  four-way 
coupling (gas ↔  particle/wall ↔  particle) (see Fig. 1.4). The one-way 
coupling  approach  is  preferred  for  very  dilute  gas-solid  flows  εp  <
(cid:0) 6, where the particles follow almost instantaneous flow quantities 
10
and  have  almost  no  influence  on  flow  turbulence  structures.  In  this 
approach, the impact of the particles on the gas phase is not relevant and 
is therefore not taken into consideration in the numerical model. If the 
(cid:0) 3, the momentum 
volumetric fraction of solid is between εp < 10
exchange between the gas phase and the solid phase is sufficiently large 
to influence the gas flow structure, and the two-way coupling approach 
(cid:0) 3, gas- 
is recommended. For a higher volumetric fraction of solid εp > 10
particle, particle-particle and particle-wall interactions have to be taken 
into  consideration  (four-way  coupling  approach).  According  to  Loth 
et al. [72], there is a three-way coupling scheme, in which the gas and 
particle  affect  each  other and  the particle  wakes  and  other gas-phase 
disturbances affect the motion of other particle’s motion, e.g. drafting 
of a trailing particle. 

(cid:0) 6 ≤ 10

For  the  representation  of  gas-solid  flows,  there  are  different  CFD 
models  available,  namely  the  two-fluid  model,  the  discrete-particle 
model,  the  hybrid  model,  and  the  direct  numerical  simulation  model 
[18,75].  In  these  approaches,  the  solid  phase  is  calculated  as  a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009305F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 1.2. (a) fluidization regimes and pressure drop versus superficial fluidization velocity (reproduced from reference [2]; solid line: real bed; dashed line: an ideal 
bed), (b) particle classifications as defined by Geldart (reproduced from reference [60]), and (c) fluidization regime map developed by Reh & Grace (reproduced from 
references [2,63,64]). 

quasi-continuum or discrete phase, while the fluid phase is presented in 
each case as a continuum (see Fig. 1.5). Several different terms are found 
in  the  literature  for  the  aforementioned  approaches,  because  of  the 
personal preference and background of authors. The bold terms given in 
Table 1.1 are frequently quoted in the literature and will therefore be 
employed in this study, while the italic terms are the alternative names 
for the same method. 

In  the  following,  the  numerical  models  used  to  simulate  gas-solid 
flows are briefly highlighted, but they will be described in more detail 
in the Mathematical modeling section:  

• In the mixture model, the physical values of gas and dispersed phases 
are represented as volume-averaged values by solving the balance 
equations  of  a  single-phase  mixture  flow  that  may  contain  many 
species  (mainly  gas  species  but  also  solid  species  are  treated  as  a 
pseudo-fluid). That is the reason why this model is referred to in the 
literature  as  the  mixture  model.  The  mixture  model  assumes  that 
there is a homogeneous distribution of particles in the gas phase as 
well as a thermodynamic equilibrium between the two phases, i.e. 

the velocity and temperature differences between the gas phase and 
the dispersed solid particles are negligibly small, which is only the 
case for a limited number of gas-solid systems with low solid content, 
e.g.  pulverized-fuel  combustion  systems  [76].  The  majority  of 
gas-solid  flows  (e.g.  fluidized-bed  systems)  involve  temperature 
gradients  and  a  strong  momentum  transfer  between  the  phases. 
Therefore, a higher modeling approach is required to maintain the 
specific  accuracy  of  the  physics.  The  advantage  of  the  mixture 
modeling approach to other numerical methods lies in the compa-
rably low processing power, enabling the simulation of large-scale 
systems [77,78] (e.g. combustion chamber with a height of 100 m 
and  cross-section  area  of  400  m2)  within  just  a  few  days  for  a 
converged steady-state solution. The benchmark 1 MWth pulverized 
fuel combustion pilot facility at the Technical University of Darm-
stadt, with a height of 6.7 m and a cross-section area of 0.8 m2, was 
simulated for the co-combustion of torrefied biomass with hard coal 
[79]. The wall-clock time for a converged steady-state solution lasted 
approximately  5  days  using  a  global  reaction  mechanism  with  22 
reactions and 19 species. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009306F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 1.3. Multi-scale simulation concept (reproduced from reference [68], snapshots reproduced from references [69-71], with permission of authors and Elsevier).  

Fig. 1.4. Classification of gas-particle interaction regimes (interphase coupling) after Elghobashi (reproduced from references [72-74], with permission of Elsevier).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009307F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 1.5. Models for representing gas-solid flows.  

• The  more  sophisticated  continuum  approach,  i.e.  the  two-fluid 
method,  treats  the  fluid  and  solid  as  interpenetrating  continuum 
phases  and offers the possibility to take into  account chemical re-
actions and mass transfer between the two phases. The challenges of 
this  approach  are  how  to  deal  with  the  kinetic  and  collisional 
transport  of  the  particles,  including  gas-particle,  particle-particle, 
and particle-wall interactions, while representing the solid phase as 
an interpenetrating continuum. Closure terms of an empirical nature 
are  used,  based  on  the  kinetic  theory  of  granular  flows  (KTGF), 
allowing a solid to have the physical properties of a gas. The kinetic 
theory of granular flows is explained in detail by Gidaspow [10] and 
is related to the kinetic theory of dense gases (KTDG) [80]. The basic 
idea behind KTGF is that the particles are in continuous and chaotic 
motion due to interaction within the gas phase (for dilute systems) 
and with the particles or walls, or both (for dense gas-solid flows). A 
temperature is defined that is a measure of fluctuations in the par-
ticles’  velocities.  This  is  known  as  the  granular  temperature.  The 
solid viscosity, the solid pressure, and the solid stress are a function 
of  the  granular  temperature,  whose  time  and  position  vary 
throughout the computational domain. The modeling of the granular 
temperature  is  achieved  using  an  additional  balance  equation, 
similar  to  the  energy  equation  of  the  fluid  phase.  In  recent  years, 
time-dependent numerical studies ranging from laboratory-scale to 
industrial-scale  fluidized  beds  have  been  carried  out,  revealing 
detailed information on gas-solid strands, bubbles, and solid clusters 
of different length and time scales. Usually, the two-fluid method is 
selected  as  a  compromise  between  the  accuracy  of  the  numerical 
solution  and  the  computational  effort,  which  is  still  considerably 
high. For example, the benchmark 1 MWth carbonator reactor (9 m in 
height and 0.6 m in diameter) at the world’s third-largest research 
facility for the carbonate-looping process - at the Technical Univer-
sity of Darmstadt - was simulated using 10 modern CPUs [81]. The 
processing time lasted approximately 4.65 hours of wall-clock time 
for  1  s  of  simulation  time  using  EMMS  as  a  drag  model  while 
excluding  the  reaction  mechanism.  The  highest-performance 
two-fluid simulation in terms of computational resources and mesh 
size was carried out at the University of Toulouse [82]. The reactor 
geometry (a height of 30 m and a diameter of 5 m) was discretized 
with approximately one billion mesh and the simulation was run on 
36,000 cores using efficient massively parallel CFD solvers. 

• In the discrete-particle method, the gas phase is modeled as a con-
tinuum and the solid phase is treated as a disperse phase, in which 
individual  particles  are  tracked  transiently  in  the  computational 
domain. The discrete-particle method is distinguished by its particle 
collision detection methodology, either stochastic or deterministic. 

The  detection  of  particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  is 
crucially important in terms of both the computational effort and the 
simulation accuracy. The idea behind the stochastic collision models 
is that the motion of each particle is calculated independently of the 
remaining particles. However, information on other particles should 
be  available  in  order  to  generate  virtual  collision  partners,  whose 
properties are derived by the local average values of these particles. 
The  probability  of  a  collision  occurring  between  the  investigated 
particle and the virtual particle can then be expressed using random 
numbers, while the particle time step is assumed to be constant. In 
the deterministic collision detection models, each particle is tested 
for  a  possible  collision  with  other  partners  (particle  or  wall).  The 
particle time step in deterministic collision detection models is either 
constant  or  adaptive  (variable).  For  the  deterministic  collision 
detection model with an adaptive particle time step, also known as 
the event-oriented method, no collision will occur during successive 
time steps: it is only at the time (t + Δtadap) that one particle collides 
with other particles or walls [83]. For the discrete particle simula-
tions  with  stochastic  or  deterministic  collision  detections,  two 
models are widely used for particle-particle and particle-wall colli-
the 
sions,  namely  hard-sphere  and  soft-sphere  models. 
hard-sphere  model  (used  with  the  stochastic  collision  detection 
model  or  deterministic  collision  detection  model  with  adaptive 
particle  time  step),  instantaneous  and  single  binary  collisions  are 
possible between the collision partners, which are assumed as rigid 
spheres (or ideal spheres) and thus no deformation of the particles 
occurs during the impact. The properties of particles after the colli-
sion  (e.g.  velocity,  position,  and  temperature)  are  related  to  the 
properties of particles before the collision through momentum and 
energy  balances  (i.e.  other  forces  acting  on  the  colliding  particles 
during  the  collision  are  not  taken  into  account)  [84].  The 
hard-sphere model has been used in a limited number of studies on 
fluidized  bed  systems  since  it  cannot  handle  multiple  collisions, 
occurring  in  nearly  stagnant  zones  (e.g.  annulus  region)  with  low 
particle  velocities,  due  to  the  extremely  high  CPU  time  required. 
However,  the  hard-sphere  model  leads  to  a  comparable  computa-
tional  cost  as  the  soft-sphere  model  in  regions  with  high  particle 
velocities (e.g. spout region, or core zone) with more accurate pre-
dictions against experiments. 

In 

The particles in the soft-sphere model (used for the deterministic 
collision  detection  model  with  constant  particle  time  step)  can 
overlap  each  other  or  penetrate  the  wall.  This  model  is  usually 
quoted in the literature as the discrete element method (DEM) and in 
ANSYS-FLUENT  as  the  dense  discrete  particle  model-discrete 
element  method  (DDPM-DEM).  In  this  model,  a  particle-particle 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009308F
.

A
l
o
b
a
i
d

e
t

a
l
.

Table 1.1 
Overview of the numerical models and terms used to simulate gas-solid flows.  

Terms 

• Mixture model (MM)  
• Homogeneous model  
• Quasi-single-phase model  
• Three-equation model (for one-dimensional cases) 

• Two-fluid model (TFM)  
• Multi-fluid model  
• Eulerian n-fluid model  
• Euler-Euler model  
• Two-phase model  
• Multiphase Euler model  
• Euler-Euler two-phase model  
• Multiphase Euler-Euler model  
• Eulerian model  
• Eulerian-Granular Model  
• Eulerian-Eulerian CFD Model  
• CFD-PBM  
• Six-equation model (for one-dimensional cases) 
• Discrete-particle model (DPM)  
• CFD-DPM  
• Euler-Lagrange model  
• Eulerian-Lagrangian model  
• Eulerian-Lagrangian-Lagrangian model  
• Multiphase Euler-Lagrange model  
• Single-particle model  
• Point-particle model  
• Lagrangian point-particle model  
• CFD-DEM or CFD/DEM  
• Coarse-grained CFD-DEM or coarse-grained CFD-DEM  
• CFD-CGDEM  
• DPM with the hard-sphere model  
• CFD-DPM with the hard-sphere model  
• DPM with the soft-sphere model  
• CFD-DPM with the soft-sphere model  
• EMMS-DPM  
• DDPM-DEM (in ANSYS-FLUENT software)  
• Discrete Phase Model (DPM) (In ANSYS-FLUENT software, particle/wall ↔ particle 
interactions can be taken into consideration or completely ignored (so-called one-way 
coupled discrete particle modeling that used for very dilute systems) 

• Hybrid model (HM)  
• Multiphase particle-in-cell (MP-PIC) (in the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software)  
• Dense discrete phase model (DDPM or DDPM-KTGF) (in ANSYS-FLUENT software)  
• Continuum particle model (CPM)  
• Hybrid EE-EL model  
• Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian (EEL) 
• Particle-resolved direct numerical simulation model (PR-DNS)  
• Resolved Eulerian-Lagrangian model (e.g. immersed boundary methods, body-fitted 

method)  

• Lagrangian-Lagrangian model (e.g. Lattice Boltzmann models)  
• Resolved DNS-DPM  
• Resolved DNS-DEM 

Volume forces (e.g. 
gravitational and 
magnetic forces) 

Gas ↔ particle interactions 
(e.g. drag, Basset and 
Saffman forces) 

Particle/wall ↔ particle interactions 
(e.g. contact and adhesive forces) 

Comments  

Closure relations 

Unresolved 

Unresolved  

• For very dilute systems  
• Low computational cost  

Closure relations 

Closure relations  

• Unresolved  
• Closure relations based on the 

kinetic theory of granular flows 
(KTGF)  

• Closures required for gas↔particle interactions  
• Two-way coupling without KTGF  
• Four-way coupling with KTGF  
• For dilute to dense systems  
• Moderate to high computational cost  
• Applied to monodisperse or polydisperse 

systems with a limited particle size distribution 
(due to the computational cost)  

Resolved 

Closure relations  

• Resolved using:  

1)  Deterministic collision 

models:  
▸  Hard-sphere model  
▸  Soft-sphere model (discrete 
element method (DEM))  
2)  Stochastic collision models  

• Closures required for gas↔particle interactions  
• Two-way coupling without hard- or soft-sphere 

model  

• Four-way coupling  
• For dense systems  
• High computational cost, especially with 

deterministic collision models  

Resolved 

Closure relations  

• Closure relations based on:  

1)  Particle normal stress model  
2)  Kinetic theory of granular 

flows (KTGF)  

• Closures required for gas↔particle interactions  
• Four-way coupling  
• For dense systems  
• Moderate to high computational cost  

Resolved 

Resolved 

Resolved  

• Resolved gas↔particle interactions (no closures 

required)  

• Very high computational cost   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

collision takes place when the distance between center points of two 
particles  is  smaller  than  the  sum  of  both  radii.  Likewise,  a 
particle-wall  collision  occurs  if  the  distance  between  the  particle 
center point and the wall surface is smaller than the particle radius. 
Depending on the penetration depth, the resulting contact force is 
modeled using a spring-damper-slider system. 
Currently,  the  discrete-particle  method 

is  computationally 
expensive  as  a  means  of  tracking  a  few  million  particles  within  a 
reasonable  time.  For  instance,  the  simulation  of  a  fluidized-bed 
system  containing  10  kg  monodisperse  sand  particles  with  an 
average  diameter  of  150  µm  involves  approximately  2.2  billion 
particles, which oversteps the technical feasibility of modern com-
puters and even high-performance clusters. According to Yang et al. 
[85],  the  modeling  of  particulate  systems  with  a  magnitude  of 
amplitude  O  (106)  is  now  feasible  using  CPUs.  The graphical  pro-
cessing  unit  (GPU)  can  deal  with  up  to  250  thousand  particles  in 
real-time, but the number of tracked particles still falls significantly 
below a fluidized-bed application even at a lab-scale (see Fig. 1.6). 
Furthermore, the particle size distribution is continuous so that the 
number of particles can be even higher than the numbers estimated 
in Fig. 1.6. Large-scale fluidized-bed systems use anything from a few 
tonnes  to  several  hundred  tonnes  of  inventory  with  a  continuous 
particle  size  distribution,  ranging  from  submicron  particles  to 
millimeters  or  even  centimeters,  and  solid  densities  between 
1,000 kg/m3  and 5,000 kg/m3  (Geldart groups A, B, D, and some-
times  C). The limitations  can be  overcome thanks to  the  so-called 
coarse-grained  parcel  method,  the  continuous  development  of 
high-performance computing and the parallelization of multi-CPUs 
and/or  multi-GPUs.  In  the  coarse-grained  parcel  method,  many 
real-sized  particles  are  clumped  into  so-called  representative  nu-
merical  particles  or  parcels.  This  simplification  reduces  the  pro-
cessing  power  required,  which  allows  even  large-scale  gas-solid 
systems to be simulated in a comparable time frame to the two-fluid 
method [86]. In parallel computing, the data transfer among CPUs or 
GPUs within a single node and across nodes typically relies on the 
message  passing  interface  (MPI),  a  popular  parallel  programming 
software [87]. The parallelization depends on the optimal load bal-
ance between distributed nodes (i.e. evenly distributed particles on 
the CPUs or GPUs), which is often hard or even impossible to achieve 
in a real case scenario using the concept of static domain decompo-
sition.  Recently,  a  separate  dynamic  decomposition  concept  was 
therefore investigated by the group under Prof. Kuipers [88]. 

Based on the above measures, the number of tracked particles in 
the  discrete-particle  method  has  been  increased  sharply.  For 
example,  a  three-dimensional  turbulent  channel  flow  laden  with 
1.62 × 108 particles (particle diameter of 4 μm and mass loading of 
3.22 %) was simulated using the hard-sphere model [82,87]. Xu et al. 
[89] applied the CFD-DEM model to simulate a three-dimensional 
full-loop  CFB.  Using  a  heterogeneous  CPU-GPU  computing  unit, 
1.27 × 108  coarse-grained  particles,  representing  1.27 × 1011  real 
particles, were tracked at the speed of 1.5 × 107 particle updates per 
GPU per second on 135 NVIDIA K80 GPUs. This is the largest-scale 
and  highest-performance  simulation  of  a  3D  full-loop  CFB,  ach-
ieved  in  2019  in  terms  of  the  particles  used.  More  recently,  a 
super-DEM solver was developed for non-spherical particulate sys-
tems  by  Gao  et  al.  [90].  MPI  parallelization  of  the  solver  was 
implemented and 100 million particles were tracked on up to 6800 
cores. This may indicate that industrial-scale systems can be realized 
after  future  development.  Even  so,  the  amount  of  data  collected 
during the transient simulation (e.g. velocity and temperature of the 
particles) will be huge, creating a challenge in terms of data storing 
and post-processing. Therefore, the full-loop scale simulation of real 
fluidized-bed  systems  using  the  discrete-particle  method  with  the 
hard- or soft-sphere model is still far from being achieved.  

• In so-called hybrid methods such as the multiphase particle-in-cell 
method,  the  dense  discrete  phase  model,  and  the  sub-domain 
method, the two-fluid method and the discrete-particle method are 
coupled to combine the advantages of both models. The idea behind 
the sub-domain method is simple. Based on an equilibrium index, the 
computational domain is divided into continuum and free molecular 
domains [91]. For continuum sub-domains, the two-fluid method is 
used,  while  the  discrete-particle  method  in  combination  with  the 
stochastic or deterministic collision detection models is applied to 
free  molecular  sub-domains  including  walls.  The  multiphase 
particle-in-cell  (MP-PIC)  method  describes  the  gas-particle  in-
teractions  similarly  to  the  discrete-particle  method,  while  the 
particle-particle  interactions  are  modeled  as  a  gradient  on  the 
Eulerian grid  similarly to the two-fluid method. Here,  the particle 
properties  are  interpolated  to  and  from  the  Eulerian  grid  using 
interpolation  functions.  The  MP-PIC  method  was  originally  devel-
oped by Andrews and O’Rourke [92] and further improved by Snider 
[93].  This  method,  implemented  in  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual 
Reactor, is used frequently to simulate industrial fluidized-bed sys-
tems, showing reasonable results and computational times. A similar 

Fig. 1.6. Particle numbers under different inventories and various particle diameters, calculated at a constant solid density of 2,600 kg/m3 (marked area estimates 
the number of particles in industrial applications). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093010F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

approach,  known  as  the  dense  discrete  phase  model  (DDPM),  has 
been  implemented  in  ANSYS-FLUENT  by  combining  the  already 
available  discrete  phase  model  (DPM)  and  the  ANSYS-FLUENT 
two-fluid  method.  Apart  from  available  commercial  software, 
several  researchers  developed  their  open-source  CFD  codes  to 
implement the MP-PIC method, some of which will be presented in 
the Hybrid models section. 

Due to the features of the hybrid methods (e.g. the calculation of a 
cluster of particles (parcels), no need for explicit collision detection 
model, and the use of particle stress gradient on the grid to determine 
the collision forces), it is possible to simulate an industrial fluidized 
bed  system  with  billions  of  real  particles  by  a  single  workstation 
within several days. For example in 2019, Yang et al. [94] investi-
gated the effects of louver baffles in a two-dimensional fluidized bed 
of  Geldart  A  particles  using  1.03 × 106  parcels  that  represented 
1.33 × 1011 real particles. The simulations run on a workstation with 
Intel(R)  Xeon(R)  CPU  E5-1630  (1.1)  GHz)  and  32  GB  RAM.  The 
simulation time lasts for 30 s and took about 8 h and 57 h for the 
baffle-free  and  baffled  cases,  respectively.  A  high-performance 
DDPM  study,  in  terms  of  simulation  time,  was  carried  out  at  the 
University of Sherbrooke [95]. The 88 hours of real-time operation of 
a  3D  bubbling  fluidized  bed  system  were  simulated  using  a 
high-performance computing machine.  

• The  discrete-particle  method  uses  locally  averaged  equations  to 
describe  the  fluid  phase,  thus  closures  are  required to  express  the 
aerodynamic  forces  (gas-particle interactions). Although  the  simu-
lation of relatively large-scale systems is possible, the flows around 
the individual particles are not solved and the obtained results are 
only as good as the closure used. At the most detailed level of the gas- 
solid flow simulations (particle-resolved direct numerical simulation 
(PR-DNS)), by contrast, the flows around each particle are captured 
and  the  external  and  aerodynamic  forces  are  directly  determined 
from the resultant flow field. However, the challenge in developing a 
PR-DNS methodology is solving a flow at moving particle surfaces 
under  boundary  conditions.  To  overcome  this  challenge,  various 
methodologies  have  been  developed.  These  methodologies  can  be 
classified  into  methods  that  rely  on  a  body-fitted  mesh  to  impose 
boundary conditions at particle surfaces and methods that employ 
regular  Cartesian  grids  [96,97].  The  main  disadvantage  with  ap-
proaches  based  on  body-fitted  meshes  is  the  limited  numbers  of 
tracked  particles  since  complex  particle  geometries  and  moving 
boundaries require permanent domain re-meshing. For approaches 
that use regular Cartesian grids, this need is eliminated, resulting in 
computationally efficient methods for simulating moving particles. 
Because the grid does not fit the particle’s surfaces, special attention 
is required to generate an accurate solution by imposing boundary 
conditions on the particle’s surfaces (e.g. lattice Boltzmann method 
and immersed boundary method). In the case of the direct forcing 
immersed  boundary  method  (IBM)  for  instance,  the  Navier-Stokes 
equations  are  solved  at  all  grid  points  (including  those  inside  the 
particles), and an additional  force that is usually computed at the 
particle  surface  and  interpolated  to  the  neighboring  grid  points  is 
subjoined  to the  equations  to impose the  desired boundary  condi-
tions. As the particle surface is essentially represented as a stair step, 
the early implementations of the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) 
required calibration of the effective particle diameter. In recent de-
velopments in the LBM, the calibration procedure has been removed. 
Furthermore, methods have also been developed that combine the 
parallel efficiency of the LBM with the ability of the IBM to impose 
boundary conditions on particle surfaces that do not conform to the 
Cartesian mesh. Attention has to be paid to ensuring that the flow 
solution  in  the  gas  phase  is  not  contaminated  by  the  immersed 
boundary forcing [98]. All in all, the PR-DNS methods solve the flow 
around  the  particles,  allowing  gas-particle  interactions  (e.g.  drag 
force) to be identified numerically [99,100]. This information is used 
as an input for larger-scale models (e.g. the discrete-particle and the 

two-fluid models). Nowadays, a limited number of moving particles 
in  the  order  of  103  can  be  taken  into  consideration  in  direct  nu-
merical simulation studies, but this number is still sufficiently high to 
take into account the effects of particle clusters. Important contri-
butions to this field of research can be found, for example, in [98, 
101]. The PR-DNS methods are not the focus of this review paper. 

The simulation of a fluidized bed involves a vast range of different 
space and time scales that can be observed by modeling fluid dynamics, 
and gas and solids mixing. A scale-based classification of the numerical 
models listed above, with their application ranges, is shown in Fig. 1.7. It 
should be mentioned that the boundaries between the scales cannot be 
precisely defined and are drawn here for clarification purposes. 

1.4. Review structure 

This review paper aims at a detailed description of the mathematical 
background  of CFD models of gas-solid  flows. In the  first part of this 
review  (Section  2),  the  simulation  models  of  gas-solid  flows  are  pre-
sented, including the mixture model, the two-fluid model, the discrete- 
particle  model  (hard-sphere  and  soft-sphere  models),  and  the  hybrid 
model while the particle-resolved direct numerical simulation is not the 
focus of this manuscript. The second part of this review (Section 3) is 
dedicated to the body of literature, focusing on how these simulation 
models are applied to fluidized-bed systems used in chemical and energy 
process engineering. Fig. 1.8 shows that there have been a considerable 
number of papers published in this field of research over the last ten 
years.  However,  relevant  simulation  works  worldwide  that  include 
measurement  validation  are  analyzed  and  referenced  in  the  corre-
sponding  chapters,  complemented  by  an  overview  of  commonly  used 
simulation software. 

Section 3.1 gives an overview of publications regarding the two-fluid 
model. Due to the large number of studies found in this field, especially 
for non-reactive simulations, the review focuses on reactive simulations. 
On the topic of non-reactive simulations, reference is made to existing 
review papers. In the first part, a short description of the history of the 
model is given, followed by Table 3.1, which summarizes the papers on 
reactive two-fluid simulation. In the second section, Table 3.2 lists re-
view studies covering different aspects of non-reactive simulations (e.g. 
drag modeling, hydrodynamics, etc.). The third section provides a re-
view  of  reactive  simulations  sorted  by  area  of  application  (e.g.  com-
bustion,  CO2  capture  technologies,  etc.).  There  are  also  several 
individual applications of fluidized-bed simulations, which are reviewed 
in Table 3.4. 

Section 3.2 is dedicated to giving a state-of-the-art review of how the 
discrete-particle and hard-sphere models were developed and applied to 
chemical  engineering  processes,  especially  in  fluidized-bed  systems. 
Special attention is given to the state of knowledge on how the hard- 
sphere  approach  can  be  extended  to  incorporate  particle  agglomera-
tion and the breakup of agglomerates in four-way coupled CFD simu-
lations of turbulent particle-laden flows. A brief description is provided 
of the treatment of the resulting agglomerate, as well as the fragmen-
tation of agglomerates due to interaction with the turbulent flow field 
(breakup). Afterward, there is a summary of the most important studies 
on the deposition of particles on the surrounding walls in wall-bounded 
gas-particle  flows  and  binary  droplet  collision  outcomes,  including 
droplet  coalescence  (see  Table  3.5).  This  section  ends  with  a  brief 
overview of the studies that have used the hard-sphere model to simu-
late reactive gas-solid flows. All studies are listed in a table summarizing 
the reviewed papers at the beginning of this section. 

Section 3.3 will provide an overview of the existing literature for the 
discrete-particle and soft-sphere models, applied to chemical and energy 
processes  based  on  fluidized-bed  systems.  The  section  begins  with  a 
short  description  of  the  model  history  followed  by  the  status  of  de-
velopments,  the  main  findings,  and  the  limitations,  and  a  table  sum-
marizing  the  reviewed  papers  (see  Table  3.9).  The  data  from  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093011F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 1.7. Scale-based classification of numerical approaches for fluidized beds (the provided space and time scales cannot be exact; reproduced from reference [102], 
with permission of author). 

literature is sorted by field of application (with and without chemical 
reaction), taking into consideration the geometric discretization scheme 
studied (two dimensional (2D) or three dimensional (3D)). The focus is 
mainly on the CFD-DEM studies that include measurement validation, 
comparison  with other  numerical approaches,  and application to  real 
processes. 

Section  3.4  offers  an  overview  of  the  application  of  the  hybrid 
models to different chemical engineering processes using fluidized beds. 
In  the  first  part  of  the  section,  a  short  model  history  is  provided, 
describing the most important developments. Here, some reference pa-
pers containing a comparison of the hybrid model with other available 
numerical approaches will be introduced. The first section will conclude 
with  a  table  summarizing  the  relevant  reference  sub-models  (drag 
models and chemical reactions) used in the literature for the calcula-
tions,  along  with  simulated  process  applications  (e.g.  gasification, 
combustion,  CO2  capture  technologies)  employing  the  hybrid  models 
(see Table 3.10). The second part offers a comprehensive review of the 

literature on the hybrid models’ application in the numerical simulation 
of fluidized beds. This part is divided into sub-sections: non-reactive and 
reactive simulations. Each subsection is further divided into three sec-
tions,  namely  the  two  main  available  hybrid  models  (MP-PIC  and 
DDPM) and others. Under each sub-section, the data from the literature 
is sorted chronologically to show the model development, the expansion 
of the simulated reactor size, and application fields. 

Section 4 summarizes the results of the literature review and current 
developments.  Furthermore,  recommendations  are  given  for  further 
research  in  the  field  of  3D-CFD  simulations  of  fluidized  beds  (see 
Table 4.1). 

2. Mathematical modeling 

2.1. Overview 

Chemical  and  energy  systems  are  complex  processes,  including 

Fig. 1.8. Number of publications per year from 2010 to 2020, found in Scopus using the keyword “CFD simulation of fluidized beds”.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093012F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

several  phenomena  such  as  thermochemical  reactions  and  the  multi-
phase flow. The latter contains at least two phases that are characterized 
by different material properties and are separated by a sharp boundary 
known as the phase boundary. Diverse materials lead to different two- 
phase  flows.  In  practice,  there  are  gas-fluid,  fluid-solid,  and  gas-solid 
flows.  In  gas-fluid  flows,  one  of  the  phases  is  in  a  dispersible  form, 
while in the fluid-solid and gas-solid flows the solid always remains in 
the dispersed phase. Experimental measurements enable a fundamental 
understanding of the hydrodynamic behavior of reactive gas-solid flows, 
but detailed experimental data is hard to get hold of due to the harsh 
environment (high temperature, high pressure, and/or toxic gases), and 
the costs of measuring devices. Three-dimensional (3D) mathematical 
models,  known  as  computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD)  models,  can 
contribute to this field of research, offering a powerful and effective tool 
for  improving  existing  processes  and  developing  new  technologies. 
Unlike experimental data, CFD results can offer qualitative and in many 
cases quantitative information about real systems. Accurate simulation 
results can be very useful in the design as well as in understanding the 
dynamic operation of reactors, including detailed data for velocity and 
temperature  field,  flow  turbulence,  heat  and  mass  transfer  as  well  as 
homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions between solid phase and gas 
phase. CFD simulations are characterized by several advantages such as:  

• cost-effective  insight  into  the  hydrodynamic  behavior  of  energy 
systems, process engineering applications, and chemical processes  

• improved and optimized process efficiency  
• show how systems behave under different operating conditions  
• analyze the risk and troubleshooting of industrial plants  
• save time and money when creating new designs  
• studies can be scaled up 

In the following sections, the numerical methods applied to gas-solid 

flow simulations will be described in detail. 

2.2. Numerical models for gas-solid flows 

In gas-solid flows, the entire volume fraction of a phase q (q = f for 
fluid,  q = p  for  solid  particles)  refers  to  the  volume  occupied  by  this 
phase and can be identified using the following formula: 

εq =

V tot
q
V tot

=

V tot
q
V tot
f + V tot
p

,

(2.1)  

f  and Vtot

where Vtot
p  stand for the total volume of the fluid and particle 
phase, respectively. The sum of the volume fractions of the phases (here 
n = 2) has to be equal to unity for any volume considered: 
∑q=n

εq = 1.

(2.2) 

q=1

A common parameter also used to characterize the gas-solid flows is 
mass loading. According to Sommerfeld et al. [103], the mass loading is 
given as the ratio of the mass flow rate of the solid phase to that of the 
fluid phase: 

ηq =

˙mq
˙mf

=

1
ΔT

mtot
q
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

f

⃒
.
⃒
⃒
⃒dA

∫

A

ρf

(2.3) 

→
Here, the symbols  u

f  and ρf represent the velocity and the density of 
the fluid phase passing through the surface A during the time interval 
ΔT. Assuming that the particles are spherical, the mass loading of the 
phase q can be expressed as follows: 

εqρq

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
εf ρf uf

q

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

=

(cid:0)

εqρq

1 (cid:0) εq

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
q
⃒
⃒
)
⃒ u→
⃒
ρf

f

.

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(2.4) 

ηq =

For gas-solid flow simulations, the computational domain is divided 
into  sub-domains  known  as  control  volumes  or  grid  cells.  Here,  the 
control volume does not only consist of fluid; rather, both the fluid and 
solid  phases  share  the  same  control  volumes  in  the  computational 
domain,  requiring  a  parameter  to  be  introduced:  the  so-called  void 
fraction (for each grid cell, not only for the entire system). Several terms 
apply to represent the void fraction, such as the local void fraction, the 
chordal void fraction, the cross-section void fraction, and the volumetric 
void fraction. The cross-section void fraction is given by the following 
equation: 

εs
f =

Sf
SCV

=

Sf
Sf + Sp

= 1 (cid:0) εs
p.

(2.5)  

where SCV  refers to the total surface of the grid cell, Sf  and Sp  are the 
surface of the grid cell occupied by fluid and solid, respectively. For n 
surfaces  and  when  n → ∞,  the  summation  of  the  cross-section  void 
fractions results in the volumetric void fraction [104]: 

εs
f = lim
n→∞

1
n

∑n

i=1

f ,i = εV
εs
f .

(2.6) 

Here, Vf and Vp are the volumes of the grid cell occupied by fluid and 
f  consists of inner and 

solid, respectively. The volumetric void fraction εV
outer void fractions: 
f = εV,out
εV

(cid:0) εV,out
f

+ εV,in
f

εV,in
f

.

f

(2.7) 

The inner void fraction is formed by cavities in the disperse phase 
itself (see Fig. 2.1), while cavities between particles form the outer void 
fractions, also known as bulk porosity. 

The volumetric void fraction, which describes the ratio of the fluid 
volume to the entire control volume, can also be expressed for the solid 
phase. The volumetric solid fraction is then given as: 

εV
P =

Vp
V CV

=

Vp
Vp + Vf

= 1 (cid:0) εV
f .

(2.8) 

If the particles are packed randomly, an empirical parameter, the so- 
called random-close packing limit, is defined. The random-close packing 
limit  can  be  determined  experimentally  and  describes  the  maximum 
volumetric fraction of solid (see Table 2.1). For monodisperse systems 
(regular spheres with an identical composition) and non-cohesive par-
ticles,  the  maximum  volumetric  solid  fraction  is  independent  of  the 
grain  size.  For  monodisperse,  fine-grained,  cohesive  particles,  the 
maximum  volumetric  fraction  of  solid  depends  on  grain  size  and  is 
significantly  larger  than  the  maximum  volumetric  solid  fraction  of 
monodisperse, coarse-grained, non-cohesive particles of the same ma-
terial.  In  the  case  of  polydisperse  systems  (particle  composition  and 
shape differ), the maximum volumetric fraction of solid depends on the 
particle size distribution and the particle shape. 

The  hydrodynamic  behavior  of  reactive  gas-solid  flows  in  energy 
systems  and  process  engineering  applications  can  be  simulated  using 
several  numerical  models  with  different  levels  of  accuracy.  The  solid 
phase is calculated at two different levels of detail (a quasi-continuum or 
discrete  phase),  while  the  fluid  phase  is  presented  in  each  case  as  a 
continuum.  Fig.  2.2  presents  the  numerical  methods  applied  to  the 
simulation of gas-solid flows and their variants, including, sub-particle- 
scale  (particle-resolved  direct  numerical  simulation  (DNS)),  particle- 
scale  (discrete-particle  model  (DPM)),  CFD-scale  (two-fluid  model 
(TFM))  and  hybrid-scale  (hybrid  model  (HM))  [75].  This  review  ad-
dresses the simulation of gas-solid flows with high particle concentra-
in  which  direct 
tions  (generally  known  as  granular  flows), 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093013F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

particle-particle  and  particle-wall  interactions  play  a  relevant  role  in 
determining the flow properties. 

The mixture model represents the simplest approach for modeling 
gas-solid  flows.  Here,  the  physical  values  (e.g.  velocity,  temperature, 
and  pressure)  of  the  fluid  and  solid  phases  are  described  as  volume- 
averaged  values  by  solving  the  balance  equations  for  a  single-phase 
flow.  A  gas-solid  flow  can  be  considered  a  homogeneous  flow  if  the 
particles are evenly distributed in the fluid phase and the velocity dif-
ferences  between  the  two  phases  are  negligibly  small.  As  these  re-
quirements are not met in most real-life flows in chemical and energy 
processes, the mixture model is only applied to gas-solid flows with low 
solid content. Compared with the mixture model, the two-fluid model is 
more accurate and suits a wider range of applications. The gas-phase in 
gas-solid flows is modeled with the balance equations of a single-phase 
flow and conservation equations for mass, momentum, and energy are 
also  solved  for  the  disperse  phase.  The  interaction  between  the  solid 
phase and the fluid phase is taken into account using additional terms in 
the balance equations, which can be determined using the kinetic theory 
of granular flows (KTGF). In the discrete-particle model, each particle in 
the solid phase is tracked employing the Newtonian equations of motion, 
and the gas phase is described in the Eulerian framework as a contin-
uum. The particle-particle and particle-wall collisions can be detected 
using stochastic or deterministic collision models. The discrete-particle 
method  is  computationally  expensive  when  tracking  several  hundred 
thousand  particles.  The  computational  effort  can  be  reduced  signifi-
cantly  by  using  the  concept  of  parcels.  Here,  gas-solid  systems  with 

Fig. 2.1. Volumetric void fraction.  

Table 2.1 
Maximum volumetric fraction of solid for different systems.  

Systems 

Maximum volumetric fraction of solid [-] 

Dense regular packing (monodisperse) 
Different materials for fluidized bed 
Quartz sand packing 

0.26 
0.40-0.95 
0.40  

Fig. 2.2. Numerical models for gas-solid flows.  

Fluid cellParticleInnervoidfractionOuter voidfractionPoreProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093014F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

millions of particles can be represented by a few thousands of parcels. In 
the  last  group  of  numerical  models,  the  so-called  hybrid  model,  the 
concepts  of  the  two-fluid  model  and  the  discrete-particle  model  are 
merged. 

It  is  not  possible  to  state  which  approach  is  more  suitable  for 
describing the behavior of a gas-solid flow. This depends on the flow 
configurations, the solid content in the flow (whether the gas-solid flow 
is dense or dilute), the mechanical properties of particles (e.g. mono-
disperse  or  polydisperse  gas-solid  flows),  and  the  level  of  calculation 
accuracy. The two-fluid model can be applied to gas-solid flows if the 
continuum hypothesis is satisfied (i.e. the number of particles and fluid 
molecules in each control volume is sufficiently large). If this criterion is 
met, the physical values of each phase (gas or solid) can then be modeled 
in  every  control  volume  as  statistical  average  values.  The  continuum 
hypothesis can be verified using the Knudsen number Kn [80], given as 

the ratio of the mean free path of molecules l to a characteristic length of 
macroscopic inhomogeneities. The mean free path defines the average 
distance that can cover by a moving particle or gas molecular until the 
next collision occurs, modifying the particle’s physical properties such 
as  its  position,  velocity,  and  temperature.  For  gas-solid  flows,  the 
following relation applies to the Knudsen number: 

fraction is very low or there is no solid, the continuum hypothesis is not 
met due to the inadequate spatial resolution. The continuum hypothesis 
can be fulfilled by reducing the grid resolution, but this leads on the one 
hand to the inaccurate resolution of local inhomogeneities and on the 
other hand to imprecise numerical resolving for both phases. 

The  difference  between  dense  and  dilute  gas-solid  flows  follows 
different criteria in the literature. One distinguishing aspect is the mass 
flow ratio of solid to fluid. Gas-solid flows with values greater than 15 
[111], 20 [112] or 80 [2] are considered dense. Another approach is the 
volumetric void fraction, where dense gas-solid flows have fluid volu-
metric void fraction values less than 0.9 [76]. A further criterion is the 
influence of particle-particle and particle-wall collisions on the particle 
trajectories [11]. Similarly to Knudsen’s number, the Stokes number St is 
also commonly used to describe how a particle suspended in a fluid flow 
responds to the changes in this flow field. The Stokes number can be 
determined as the ratio of the particle relaxation time τp (particle kinetic 
response time) to the characteristic time of fluid flow τf: 

St =

τp
τf

,

with the relaxation time given as: 

Kn =

√
̅̅̅
6
2

dp
g0εslchar

,

(2.9)  

τp =

.

lstop
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

p

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(2.11)  

(2.12) 

with the particle diameter dp, the macroscopic characteristic length scale 
lchar, and the radial distribution function at contact g0 [10]: 

[

g0 =

1 (cid:0)

(

εp
εs,max

)1/3](cid:0) 1

.

(2.10) 

Here, the stopping distance lstop is computed under the assumption of 
→
p| is released in a 
laminar flow; when a particle with initial velocity | u
quiescent fluid and reaches a motionless state after a certain time τp. The 
characteristic time τf is derived by the expression: 

τf =

,

lchar
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
⃒
⃒

f

(2.13)  

using the characteristic length of the flow apparatus lchar and the mean 
→
fluid velocity | u
f |. For Stokes numbers smaller than unity (small particle 
sizes),  the particle motion  is substantially affected by small  turbulent 
eddies, and hence the particle perfectly follows the flow patterns of the 
continuous phase (see Fig. 2.4). For St ≈ 1, the dynamic motion of the 
particle is mostly affected by the turbulent eddies. For Stokes numbers 
greater than unity (large particle sizes), the particle does not respond to 
the  eddies  due  to  the  large  effect  of  its  inertia  and  hence  requires  a 
certain  time  to  adjust  itself  to  the  vortex  structure  of  the  continuous 
phase. 

The two-fluid model will most likely be applied to gas-solid flows 
with particles less than 1 mm in size. However, it is limited to mono-
disperse  gas-solid  flows,  although the  calculation  of  polydisperse  sys-
tems  is  possible.  The  so-called  multi-fluid  model  (MFM)  approach 

Here, εs,max is the solid concentration at the maximum packing state. 
In the literature, the macroscopic characteristic length scale is often set 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
equal  to  the  width  of  the  simulation  channel  (e.g.  lchar  =
VCV
) 
[105-107]; a choice has the advantage that the macroscopic character-
istic length scale is known before performing simulations. However, the 
characteristic macroscopic length scale should be selected based on the 
gradient  of  state  variables  because  this  is  consistent  with  the  kinetic 
theory of granular flows [108,109]. 

√

3

Studies have shown that the flow can be divided into four different 
flow regimes: continuum flow, slip flow, transient flow, and free mo-
lecular flow (see Fig. 2.3). Flow regimes with Knudsen numbers kn <
0.001 can be treated as a continuum and therefore can be described by 
the Navier-Stokes theory with no-slip wall boundary conditions. For the 
region of 0.001 ≤ kn ≤ 0.1, the Navier-Stokes theory with proper slip- 
wall  boundary  conditions  has  also  been  used.  However,  the  Navier- 
Stokes  theory  fails  for  flow  regimes  with  Knudsen  numbers  kn  > 0.1 
and a more fundamental description such as kinetic theory should be 
used  (higher-order  continuum  theories,  e.g.  the  Burnett-order  contin-
uum theory may still apply) [109]. The value of 0.1 as a threshold is 
widely accepted in the Navier-Stokes theory for gas-solid flows due to 
the use of a (partial) slip-wall boundary condition (Johnson & Jackson 
[110]).  Flows with higher Knudsen numbers kn > 0.1 are considered 
free molecular flows. 

Gas-solid  flows  with  a  high  solid  content  have  shorter  mean  free 
paths l, leading to Knudsen numbers less than 10-2. As a result, the two- 
fluid model can be applied to dense gas-solid flow simulations. However, 
in many gas-solid flow systems, e.g. stationary and circulating fluidized 
beds, the solid distribution in the gas phase exhibits a high degree of 
inhomogeneity.  For  strands  and  gas  bubbles,  where  the  solid  mass 

Fig. 2.3. Validity of the continuum hypothesis.  

Fig. 2.4. Effect of the Stokes number on the dynamic behavior of a particle of 
different sizes in a turbulent flow field. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093015F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

essentially applies the two-fluid model framework to several particulate 
phases  and  considers  additional  interaction  terms.  This  approach  has 
been widely used for three-phase gas-liquid-solid flows, bi-/tri-dispersed 
systems, and widely distributed particle systems. When considering the 
particle property evolution (e.g. due to chemical reaction), each particle 
size  class  or  each  particle  shape  should  be  represented  as  a  separate 
phase leading to increased computational costs. As an alternative, the 
population balance equation (PBE) can be coupled to the continuity and 
momentum  balance  equations  in  the  two-fluid  model,  where  not  the 
single particles but their respective particle properties and their evolu-
tion are modeled. However, in both the multi-fluid model and the TFM- 
PBE (taking into account several particle sizes), the computational cost 
may increase to a level at which the discrete-particle method offers a 
competitive approach. Currently, the discrete-particle model is compu-
tationally  too  expensive  to  track  several  million  particles  within  a 
reasonable  time.  For  instance,  a  bubbling  fluidized-bed  system  con-
taining 100 kg monodisperse sand particles with an average diameter of 
150  µm  involves  approximately  22  billion  particles.  Simulating  this 
system exceeds the technical feasibility of modern computers and even 
high-performance clusters. The limitations for the main memory and the 
central  processing  unit  (CPU)  communication  meant  that  in  the  year 
2004, it was only possible to examine up to 10,000 particles in real-time 
simulations [113]. It should be mentioned that since then, the processor 
clock has not significantly risen, but the transistor density has strongly 
increased  while  consuming  less  power  [114].  Nowadays,  particulate 
systems with a magnitude of amplitude O (106) can be modeled using 
CPUs  [85].  The  application  of  a  graphical  processing  unit  (GPU)  is 
significantly faster and can handle up to 108  particles. However, such 
particle  numbers  are  still  significantly  below  those  of  a  fluidized-bed 
application  even  at  a  lab-scale.  For  instance,  in  the  work  of  Jajcevic 
et al. [115], a simulation on a single desktop GPU involving 1.7 million 
particles lasted 24 hours for 2.97 s of process time. The simulation of 25 
million  particles  lasted  120  hours  for  one  second  of  process  time. 
Govender et al. [116] simulated a rotating mill with 16 million particles 
at 3 frames per second on a GTX 880 GPU laptop. The authors claimed 
that  their  code  could  handle  up  to  1  billion  particles  using  12  GB  of 
memory  on  an  NVIDIA  K40  GPU.  Recently  in  2019,  Xu  et  al.  [89] 
developed  a  heterogeneous  CPU-GPU  computing  unit  to  simulate 
three-dimensional  (3D)  full-loop  CFB.  The  1.27 × 1011  real  particles 
were represented with 1.27 × 108 coarse-grained particles at the speed 
of 1.5 × 107  particle updates per GPU per second on 135 NVIDIA K80 
GPUs. The particle updates per GPU per second (PUGS) is a definition of 
computing speed for DEM simulation on GPUs to evaluate the overall 
performance [8]. The authors claimed that this is the largest-scale and 
highest-performance  simulation  of  a  3D  full-loop  CFB  concerning  the 
computational particles used. 

Several  commercial  software  programs  have  been  developed  to 
simulate  gas-solid  flows  employing  the  mixture  model,  the  two-fluid 
model, the discrete-particle model, and the hybrid model, e.g. ANSYS- 
FLUENT,  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor,  and  COMSOL  Multiphysics. 
The performance of these CFD tools to study the fluidization behavior of 
Geldart A, B, and D particles have been evaluated by many researchers, 
showing  that  these  commercial  CFD  programs  are  certainly  adequate 
(among others: Stroh et al. [117], Klimanek et al. [118] and Venier et al. 
[119]). 

Most of the in-house developed codes and commercial CFD programs 
listed  in  Table  2.2  provide  a  graphical  user  interface  with  detailed 
models for flow, turbulence, thermodynamics, and heat transfer for gas- 
solid  flows.  As  the  function  and  development  of  these  programs  are 
ongoing, details of the application fields cannot be provided. The CFD 
programs listed here are the result of long-term development activities 
by  companies  and  universities  and  are  not  freely  accessible  in  most 
cases.  The  non-exhaustive  list  in  Table  2.2  shows  CFD  tools  that 
contribute to gas-solid flow simulations and is limited to widely known 
programs employed in industrial practice and  scientific research. The 
references in Table 2.2 are matched with the corresponding simulation 

tool and are selected from other references to give the reader an over-
view of the application areas of each CFD program. Note that where no 
references are given for a certain application or numerical model, this 
does not imply that the CFD code is unable to cover this application or 
extend its solver. 

Table  2.2  shows  that  the  numerical  simulations  of  gas-solid  flows 
found  in  engineering  applications  are  often  carried  out  using  well- 
established  CFD  tools  (e.g.  ANSYS-FLUENT,  OpenFOAM  and  BARRA-
CUDA  Virtual  Reactor,  etc.),  whereas  studies  on  basic  research  are 
typically performed using in-house codes (e.g. the codes developed by 
Prof.  Kuipers,  Professor  Horio,  Professor  Sommerfeld,  LESOCC,  DEM-
EST, etc.). Unfortunately, the name of the program or code used in the 
simulation  has  been  left  unmentioned  in  a  considerable  number  of 
publications found in the literature, which in turn makes it very chal-
lenging to compare and reproduce the results obtained by other authors. 

2.2.1. Mixture model 

The mixture model (MM) can be used for gas-solid flows under the 
assumption  of  homogeneity.  Here,  it  is  assumed  that  the  solids  are 
evenly  distributed  in  the  gas  and  there  is  no  difference  in  velocities 
between  the  two  phases.  In  this  case,  the  conservation  equations  for 
mass, momentum, and energy of a single-phase flow can be applied to 
model the mixture of physical values. 

The continuity equation for the mixture is expressed by: 

(

+ ∇⋅

)

ρm u→

m

= Sm.

∂ρm
∂t

The momentum equations for the mixture are: 

)

(
∂

m

ρm u→
∂t

+ ∇⋅

(
ρm u→

m u→

m

)

= ∇⋅(T) (cid:0) ∇p + ρm g→.

The specific enthalpy equation for the mixture is: 

(

+ ∇⋅

ρm u→

mhm

)

∂(ρmhm)
∂t

= (cid:0) ∇⋅

(μm
Pr

)

∇hm

+ Sh.

The transport equation of species i is given as: 

(cid:0)
∂

ρmcm,i
∂t

)

(

+ ∇⋅

)

ρm u→

mcm,i

= (cid:0) ∇⋅

(μm
Sc

)

∇cm,i

+ Sc,i.

(2.14) 

(2.15) 

(2.16) 

(2.17) 

Here, the symbol ρm refers to the mixture density, μm is the mixture 
→
dynamic viscosity,  u
m stands for the mixture velocity, hm and cm,i are the 
mixture specific enthalpy and the concentration of the species i in the 
mixture, respectively. The source term Sm describes the injection or the 
leakage  of  the  mixture,  while  Sh  and  Sc,i  represent  the  heat  and  con-
centration source terms due to chemical reactions. 

Although the mixture model is characterized by several advantages 
such  as  high  computing  stability  and  a  low  computational  time,  the 
numerical results obtained are associated with a low level of accuracy. 
The mixture model shows numerical instabilities when it is applied to 
dense gas-solid flows; it is simply not suitable for fluidized-bed systems. 

2.2.2. Two-fluid model 

In  the  two-fluid  model  (TFM),  the  solid  phase  is  considered  as  a 
second heavy gas phase and thus the fluid and solid phases are modeled 
with the balance equations of the single-phase flow. The continuity, the 
Navier-Stokes  equation,  and  the  energy  equation  of  both  phases  are 
modified  by  transport  values  of  the  dispersed  phase  such  as  granular 
pressure, granular viscosity, and granular stress. These transport values 
are  described  based  on  the  concept  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  granular 
flows (KTGF). The KTGF enables a given solid to own all physical gas 
properties  [10] and  is derived  from the  kinetic theory of  dense gases 
(KTDG) [80]. The KTGF assumes that the particles are in continuous and 
chaotic  motion  as  they  interact  within  the  fluid  phase  for  the  dilute 
system  and  with  the  particles  or  walls,  or  both,  for  dense  flows 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093016Table 2.2 
CFD simulations of fluidized beds for chemical and energy process engineering.  

Software 

Developer 

Numerical models for gas-solid flow 

ANSYS (FLUENT, CFX) 

ANSYS Inc. Commercial software https://www.ansys.com 

[120-133]a 

[33,82, 
134-306] 

[95, 
307-320] 

[118,188,299, 
321-333] 

[81,311,334-346] 

[86,347-363] 

[364,365]b 

[366-368]b 

Two-fluid model (TFM) 

Hybrid model (HM) 

Discrete-particle model (DPM) 

Non-reactive  Reactive 

Non-reactive  Reactive 

Non-reactive 

Reactive 

Non-reactive 

Reactive 

Soft-sphere model 

Hard-sphere model 

F
.

A
l
o
b
a
i
d

e
t

a
l
.

OpenFOAM 

OpenCFD Ltd, The OpenFOAM Foundation General Public 
License https://openfoam.org 

MFIX / K-FIX 

General Public License http://www.oecd-nea.org 
https://mfix.netl.doe.gov 

BARRACUDA Virtual 

Reactor 

LIGGGHTS, 
CFDEM

®

coupling 

CPFD software  
Commercial software 
https://cpfd-software.com 

®

project 
CFDEM
General Public License 
https://www.cfdem.com 

[129]a 
[345,369, 
370] 

[129,131, 
132]a 
[345,420, 
421] 

x 

x 

[371-375] 

[376-381] 

[382-392] 

[345,393-413] 

[383,398,399, 
414-419] 

x 

[422-448] 

[449-452] 

x 

[90,343,345,420, 
453-460] 

[452,461-465] 

x 

[273, 
466-522] 

[118,384, 
523-554] 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

[379,397,400,403-409, 
412,555-557] 

[398,418] 

[566-568]c 

x 

[573-579] 

[577] 

[557,580-586] 

[587] 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

[107,117,341,417,566, 
625-646] 

[50,647-655] 

[84,656-682] 

[83,663, 
683-685]  

COMSOL Multiphysicsb,c  COMSOL Inc. 

[558-562] 

[563-565] 

x 

Commercial software 
https://www.comsol.com 

STAR-CD STAR-CCM+

CD-adapco (acquired by Siemens PLM Software) 
Commercial software 
http://www.plm.automation.siemens.com 

EDEMd 

Altair Engineering 
Commercial software 
https://www.altair.com 

Other in-house codes and commercial CFD programse (e.g. PHOENICSf, FLOW-3Dg, XPS, 

FIDAP, YALES2, Rocky DEM, PyGran, Flotracs, SIMULOG, Kratos Multiphysics, 
YadeDEM, Estet-Astrid, the code developed by Prof. Kuipers (Eindhoven University of 
Technology), the code developed by Prof. Horio (Tokyo University), the code 
developed by Prof. Peters (XDEM, University of Luxembourg), the code developed by 
Prof. Sommerfeld (Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg), the code developed by 
Prof. Scherer (Ruhr-University Bochum), the code developed by Prof. Breuer 
(LESOCC, Helmut Schmidt University), the code of Southeast University of China, the 
code of Technical University of Darmstadt (DEMEST, PD Dr.-Ing. habil. Alobaid and 
Dr. G¨otz), the code of University of Toulouse (NEPTUNE_CFD)) 

[569-572] 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

[132,588]a 
[589-591] 

[592-624] 

x 

a Review papers. 
b The software was used to calculate the fluid phase. 
c The program is used in many theses, but only a few papers were found. 
d The program is an advanced DEM software package for bulk material simulation. 
e The software can be coupled with other programs e.g. ANSYS- FLUENT or OpenFOAM. The CFD codes generally allow multiphase simulation, but it is difficult to examine some of them since no concrete publications 

were found. 

f The code was developed and released from 1978 to 1981 by Prof. Spalding. It was considered as a prototype code for later CFD programs. For multiphase simulation, the so-called drift-flux method is used (i.e. mixture 

model with an equation for the volumetric void fraction). Further information can be found in (CHAM, http://www.cham.co.uk/phoenics.php). 

g No studies were found on multiphase modeling. However, many examples were shown on the website. Further information can be found in (FLOW-3D, https://www.flow3d.com/) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

(gas-particle  drag  and  non-ideal  particle-particle  collisions  are  taken 
into  consideration).  Furthermore,  the  particles  can  travel  freely  and 
collide  with  neighboring  particles.  For  a  granular  temperature  to  be 
defined,  the  particle  velocity  fluctuations  and  variations  in  time  and 
position  are  measured  throughout  the  computational  domain.  The 
granular temperature is modeled using an additional balance equation, 
similar to the energy equation of the fluid phase. 

The governing equations of the two-fluid model are briefly explained 
here based on the ANSYS-FLUENT software. The gas and solid phases are 
modeled  mathematically  as  interpenetrating  continua  by  introducing 
the  concepts  of  granular  viscosity,  granular  pressure,  and  granular 
stress. These are a function of granular temperature. The mass conser-
vation equation for the phase q is formulated as: 
(cid:0)

)

∂

εqρq
∂t

(

)

(

∑n

+ ∇⋅

εqρq u→

q

=

)
.

˙mpq (cid:0)

˙mqp

p=1

(2.18) 

The symbol εq denotes the phasic volumetric fraction that represents 
the space occupied by each phase, n refers to the number of phases, ρq 
→
q are the density and the velocity of the phase q. On the right-hand 
and  u
˙mpq  characterizes  the  interphase  mass 
side  of  Eq.  (2.18),  the  term 
transfer  from  phase  p  to  phase  q,  while  the  term  ˙mqp  describes  the 
interphase mass transfer from phase q to phase p. 

The momentum conservation equations for the phase q are written 

(cid:0)
∂

εqρqhq
∂t

)

(

+ ∇⋅

)

εqρq u→

qhq

= εq

∂p
∂t

+ ∇⋅

(εqμq
Pr

)

∇hq

+ Sh.

(2.22) 

For  each  chemical  component  i,  a  substance  transport  equation  is 

also solved: 
(cid:0)
∂

)

εqρqcq,i
∂t

+ ∇⋅

(

εqρq u→

qcq,i

)

= ∇⋅

(εqμq
Sc

)

∇cq,i

+ Si.

(2.23) 

Here, μq is the dynamic viscosity of the phase q, while prepresents the 
static  pressure.  In  both  specific  enthalpy  and  species  transport  equa-
tions, the dimensionless quantities Pr and Sc stand for the Prandtl and 
Schmidt numbers. The source term Si takes into account the formation/ 
reduction of the component i due to chemical reactions. The heat source 
term Sh takes into account the heat released by reactions, the radiation 
source  term  of  the  phase  q,  the  heat  transfer  between  two  phases  by 
convection, radiation, and mass transfer due to the phase transformation 
from phase p to phase q. 

A temperature is defined that is one-third of the mean square parti-
cles’ velocities as a measure of fluctuations [686]. This is known as the 
granular temperature Θs, given as: 

〈

〉
,

→2
C
s

Θs =

1
3

as:  

)

∂

(
εqρq u→
∂t

q

(

+ ∇⋅

εqρq u→

q u→

q

)

= (cid:0) εq∇p + ∇⋅

(

(cid:0)

)

Tq

+ εq

→
F

→
ext,q + F

→
lift,q + F

→
vm,q + F

Bas,q

(

∑n

)

+

p=1

→
R

pq + ˙mpq u→

pq (cid:0)

(2.24)  

(2.19)   

)

.

˙mqp u→

qp

→
The forces per volume  F

→
ext,q,  F

→
lift,q,  F

→
vm,q  and  F

Bas,q  stand for the 
external  body  force,  Saffman  force,  virtual  mass,  and  Basset  forces, 

→
respectively. The term  R

→
between phases, also known as the drag force, while  u

pq  identifies the interphase force per volume 
→
qp denote 
pq and  u
→
the interphase velocities, defined as  u
q  depending on the inter-
phase mass transfer. The stress-strain tensor Tq is determined for New-
tonian fluids using the following relationship: 
)

→
p  or  u

((

)(

)

(

)

(

)Tq

∇⋅ u→

q

Iq + εqμq

∇ u→

q

+

∇ u→

q

.

(2.20) 

Tq = εq

λq (cid:0)

2
μq
3

Here,  μq,  Iq  and  Tq  stand  for  the  fluid  dynamic  viscosity,  the  unit 
matrix, and the fluid temperature of phase q, respectively. The second or 
volume viscosity λq, also known as the bulk viscosity, may be neglected 
for an incompressible fluid. 

→
For the interphase forces per volume  R

qp, appropriate ex-
pressions must be applied to close the momentum conservation equa-
tions. Simple interaction terms are frequently used: 

→
pq  and  R

→
R

=

⎧
⎨

⎩

→
R

pq = Kpq

→
R

qp = Kqp

(
u→
(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

q

q (cid:0) u→

p

)

)

,

.

(2.21) 

Different drag models can be found in the literature for determining 
the  interphase  momentum  exchange  coefficient  Kpq = Kqp = β  (see  the 
Momentum transfer section). 

A transport equation for the specific enthalpy is solved in order to 
balance the energy of each phase. The temperature of the phase q is then 
calculated  from  the  specific  enthalpy  and  the  mean  specific  heat 
capacity: 

→
s  and the averaging operator 〈.〉. 
with the particle fluctuating velocity  C
For  the  granular  temperature,  the  following  conservation  equation  is 
solved: 

(

∂
∂t

3
2

(

(εsρsΘs) + ∇⋅

))

εsρsΘs u→

s

= ((cid:0) psI + Ts) : ∇ u→
s
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 1

+ ∇⋅(ΓΘs ∇Θs)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 2

(cid:0)

γΘs⏟⏞⏞⏟

Term 3

+ ϕls⏟⏞⏞⏟

.

Term 4

(2.25) 

Term (1) stands for the energy generation by the solid stress tensor, 
term 2 describes the diffusion of energy, term 3 denotes the rate of en-
ergy  dissipation within  the solid  phase  due to inelastic  collisions and 
term 4 represents the energy exchange between the lth  fluid phase and 
the sth  solid phase. The diffusion coefficient for granular energy ΓΘs  is 
computed by the expression derived by Gidaspow et al. [687]: 

ΓΘs =

(

√

150ρsds
384grad

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Θsπ
ss (1 + ess)

)2

6
grad
ss εs(1 + ess)
5

1 +

+ 2ρsdsgrad

ss

√

̅̅̅̅̅
Θs
π

ε2
s (1 + ess).

A similar expression can be found in the work of Syamlal, Rogers and 
O’Brien [688]. According to Lun et al. [689], the rate of energy dissi-
pation  within  the  solid  phase  γΘs  and  the  energy  exchange  between 
phases ϕls are defined using the following equations: 

(2.26) 

(cid:0)

12ρsgrad
ss

)

s Θ3/2
ε2

s

,

1 (cid:0) e2
ss
√
̅̅̅
π
ds

γΘs

=

ϕls = (cid:0) 3βΘs.

(2.27)  

(2.28) 

The symbols essand grad

ss  stand for the particle-particle restitution co-
efficient and the radial distribution function. The latter is a correction 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093018F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

factor modifying the probability of particle collisions for dense systems. 
Several expressions for the radial distribution function can be found in 
the literature, summarized in Table 2.3. A comparison of spouted bed 
experiments and numerical results using different expressions for radial 
distribution function can be found, for example, in Hosseini et al. [690]. 
Some expressions, listed in Table 2.3, include terms for multiple solid 
phases applied in the multi-fluid model as explained later. The symbol εs, 
max denotes the maximum solid volume fraction for a random packing (i. 
e.  maximum  volumetric fraction  of solid).  The solid pressure  with its 
kinetic term as well as the particle collisions term are expressed by Lun 
and Savage [695]: 

ps = εsρsΘs
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Kinetic

+ 2ρs(1 + ess)ε2

.
ss Θs
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Particle collisions

s grad

(2.29) 

Syamlal, Rogers, and O’Brien [688] only considered the collisional 

Syamlal,  Rogers,  and  O’Brien  [688]  also  suggested  an  alternative 
formula  to  calculate  the  kinetic  viscosity.  In  Eq.  (2.35),  the  angle  ϕ 
describes the internal friction angle and the symbol I2D  represents the 
second invariant of the deviatoric stress tensor. According to the theory 
of  plastic  flow  developed  by  Jenike  [700],  the  frictional  pressure  is 
expressed as: 

ps,fri = 1025

(cid:0)

εs,fri (cid:0) εs

)10.

(2.36) 

Here, the friction packing limit εs,fri is by definition smaller than the 
maximum  packing  limit  εs,max  (maximum  volumetric  solid  fraction). 
Johnson  and  Jackson  [110]  stated  an  alternative  expression  for  the 
frictional pressure: 
)n
(cid:0)
)p,

ps,fri = Fr

(cid:0)

(2.37)  

εs (cid:0) εs,fri
εs (cid:0) εs,max

term: 

ps = 2ρs(1 + ess)ε2

s grad

ss Θs,

(2.30)  

with Fr = 0.1εs, n = 2 and p = 5. 

The solid bulk viscosity is expressed as described by Lun et al. [689]: 

while Ahmadi and Ma [698] took the frictional viscosity into account: 

[
(cid:0)

ps = εsρsΘs

1 + 4εsgrad
ss

)

+

1
2

(cid:0)
[
(1 + ess)

1 (cid:0) ess + 2μfri
s

)]

]
.

(2.31) 

The shear and bulk viscosities (see Eq. (2.20)) should be defined in 
order to calculate the stress-strain tensor of the solid phase. The solid 
shear  viscosity  (granular  viscosity)  is  a  summation  of  three  elements 
(collisional, kinetic, and frictional): 

μs = μcol

s + μkin

s + μfri
s .

(2.32) 

The collisional and kinetic viscosities can be computed as described 
by  Gidaspow  [687],  while  the  frictional  viscosity  is  defined  using 
Schaeffer’s formula [699]: 
√
̅̅̅̅̅
Θs
π

4
ρsds(1 + ess)εsgrad
5

μcol
s =

(2.33)  

ss

,

μkin
s =

10ρsds

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Θsπ

(

96(1 + ess)εsgrad
ss

1 +

4
5

)2

grad
ss εs(1 + ess)

,

μfri
s =

ps,frisinφ
̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
.
I2D
2

(2.34)  

(2.35) 

Table 2.3 
Common expressions of the radial distribution function.  

Expression 

grad
ss =

1
(1 (cid:0) εs)

+

3εs
2(1 (cid:0) εs)2 +

ε2
s
2(1 (cid:0) εs)3.

Reference 

Carnahan and Starling  
[691]   

λs =

4
εsρsds(1 + ess)grad
3

ss

√

̅̅̅̅̅
Θs
π

.

(2.38) 

The  tangential  component  of  the  solid  velocity  and  the  granular 
temperature  should  be  defined  at  the  walls,  taking  into  account  the 
particle-wall restitution coefficient and the specularity coefficient. The 
latter  is  an  empirical  parameter  describing  the  friction  between  the 
particles  and  the  wall.  The  value  of  the  specularity  coefficient  varies 
between zero and unity. A value of unity implies diffuse collision (no- 
slip conditions), while a value of zero corresponds to a specular collision 
(free-slip conditions). The particle-wall coefficient describes the turbu-
lent  kinetic  energy  of  the  solids,  while  the  specularity  coefficient  is 
applied to quantify the nature of particle-wall collisions. 

The correlations that are given above for the particle phase stresses 
and the solid pressure come from an analysis of nearly homogeneous 
systems.  Nevertheless,  this  assumption  is  questionable  for  gas-solid 
flows in fluidized beds as these flows are not homogeneous and stable 
[68]. Zhang and Van der Heyden [701] proposed the idea of a filtered 
two-fluid model to overcome these two points as well as to address the 
overestimation of drag force, which results from the assumption of ho-
mogeneous  systems  (see  the  Momentum  transfer  section).  The  idea 
behind the filtered two-fluid model is to perform highly resolved sim-
ulations  using  the  equations  of  the  kinetic  theory-based  model.  The 
obtained results will then be filtered to find closure relations for the drag 
force, solid pressure, and solid-phase viscosity (similar to the concept of 
large eddy simulation in turbulence flows). Therefore, a filter function is 
defined and applied to the two-fluid model equations: 

∫

ϕs(x, t) =

G(x, y)ϕs(y, t)dy,

V∞

(2.39) 

Syamlal et al. [688]   

The  weight  function  G(x,  y)  depends  on  locations  x (cid:0) y,  and  V∞ 

grad
ss =

1
εf

[

grad
ss =

1 (cid:0)

+

3ds,avg
2ε2
f

(

εs
εs,max

∑M

εsk
dsk

.

k=1
)1/3](cid:0) 1

grad
ss =

1 (cid:0)

[
3
5

[

grad
ss =

1 (cid:0)

(

εs
εs,max

)1/3](cid:0) 1

.

](cid:0) 2.5εs,max

.

εs
εs,max

+

1
dsn
2

∑M

k=1

εsk
dsk

.

Savage [692] and Ogawa 
et al. [693]   

Ding and Gidaspow [694]   

Lun and Savage [695]   

+

1
2

dsn

∑M

k=1

εsk
dsk

.

Ma and Ahmadi [696] 

grad
ss =

1 + 2.5εs + 4.5904ε2

[

(

s + 4.515439ε3
s
)3]0.67802

εs
εs,max

[

grad
ss =

1 (cid:0)

1 (cid:0)

εs
εs,max

](cid:0) 1

+

3
dsn
2

∑M

k=1

εsk
dsk

.

Iddir and Arastoopour  
[697]  

represents the region, over which the gas-solid flow takes place. 

After  filtering,  the  continuum  equations  do  not  change,  while  an 
additional term appears in the momentum balances [701,702]. van der 
Hoef et al. [68] and Andrews et al. [703] showed that if the grid size is of 
the order of ten particle diameters, the two-fluid model then becomes 
independent of the grid size as the small scale structures are far from this 
order. Accordingly, a very fine grid is required for the highly resolved 
simulations  and  therefore  only  small  domains  can  be  calculated. 
Nevertheless, the results of the simulations on the small domains can 
then be used for the two-fluid simulations on coarser meshes employing 
the equations of the filtered two-fluid model. Many authors found that 
the closure relations depend mainly on the volumetric fraction of the 
particle and the filter size [702-705]. It was also shown that the results 
differ  from  the  standard  homogeneous  two-fluid  model  and  the  grid 
dependence of the filtered two-fluid model is much weaker. 

The application of the two-fluid model to the simulation of dense gas- 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093019F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

solid flows depends on the KTGF, which can only take into account a 
certain  range  of  solid  velocity  fluctuations  as  a  function  of  granular 
temperature. To determine whether the two-fluid model could be used 
to  simulate  dense  gas-solid  flows,  G¨otz  and  Kanther  [107]  and  [706] 
investigated the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of the particle veloc-
ity. Using an in-house CFD/DEM code, G¨otz performed a fluidized-bed 
simulation, in which the distribution of the particle velocity could be 
determined numerically. In large areas, the distributions obtained show 
considerable deviations from the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The 
maximum deviations are observed at the interface between gas bubbles 
and  fluidized  dispersed  particles.  At  these  boundary  layers,  bimodal 
distribution functions that are not summarized under the KTGF may be 
developed in the future. The question of how these distribution func-
tions influence the quality of numerical simulations for dense gas-solid 
flows remains unanswered: further examinations are required. 

Usually, the two-fluid model is applied to gas-solid flows, assuming 
that the solid phase consists of monodisperse particles. However, when 
multiple solid phases are present, e.g. an inert sand bed and biomass in 
fluidized-bed biomass gasifiers, the two-fluid model approach needs to 
be extended to account for a solid-solid interphase exchange. The so- 
called  multi-fluid  model  (MFM)  provides  closure  functions  for  multi-
ple  solid  phases,  which  will  be  stated  in  the  following  for  two  solid 
phases sn and sm. The conservation equations given in Eqs. (2.18), (2.19), 
(2.22),  and  (2.23)  are  similarly  stated  for  the  solid  phases  sn  and  sm. 
However,  additional  momentum  exchange  term  between  the  solid 
phases should be considered: 

→
R

nm = Knm

(
u→

sn (cid:0) u→

sm

)

.

(2.40) 

Syamlal et al. [688] proposed the following relation to calculate the 
solid-solid  drag  coefficient  (other  solid-solid  drag  coefficients  can  be 
found in the Momentum transfer section): 

βnm =

(

3(1 + enm)

π
2

+ Cfri,nm

εsnρsnεs,mρsm(dsn + dsm)2grad

nm

)

π2
8
ρsnd3

(cid:0)

2π

)

sn + ρsmd3

sm

(
u→

sn (cid:0) u→

sm

)

,

(2.41)  

where  Cfri,nm  is  the  friction  coefficient,  enm  represents  the  particle- 
particle  restitution  coefficient  between  the  solid  phases,  grad
nm  is  the 
radial distribution function for the contact of particles of different solid 
phases, εsn and εsm denote the volumetric solid fraction of solid phases sn 
and sm, respectively. 

For  the  radial  distribution  function  between  particles  of  different 
solid  phases,  the  existing  expressions  in  the  literature  need  to  be 
extended. For example, the expression by Iddir and Astratoopour [697] 
can be stated as: 

grad
nn =

(

1

) +

1 (cid:0)

εsn
εsn ,max

3
2

dsn

∑M

k=1

εsk
dsk

,

with: 

εs =

∑M

k=1

εsk,

εs,max =

∑M

k=1

εsk,max.

(2.42)  

(2.43) 

It should be noted, that the number of solid phases M is theoretically 
not limited but it is computationally too expensive to simulate granular 
flows  with  several  solid  phases.  Accordingly,  the  radial  distribution 
function for the contact of particles of different solid phases can be given 
as: 

grad
mm =

dsngrad

nn + dsmgrad
nn
dsn + dsm

.

(2.44) 

Similarly,  the  solid  pressure  of  the  nthsolid  phase  considers  the 

presence of other solid phases k: 

psn = εsnρsnΘsn +

∑M

k=1

2

(cid:0)

d3
s,avg
d3
sn

1 + es,avg

)
grad
nk εsnεskρsnΘsn,

with the average diameter: 

ds,avg =

1
M

∑M

k=1

dsk,

(2.45)  

(2.46)  

and the average value of the restitution coefficients es,avg. Note that the 
above  expression  reverts  to  the  single  solid  phase  form  by  Lun  et  al. 
[695] when M = 1 and k = n so es,avg = enn and grad
nk

= grad
ss

= grad
nn

. 

Finally, Eq. (2.25) can be applied for the granular temperature, while 
the energy exchange between phases (see Eq. (2.28)) is extended by the 
solid-solid drag coefficient βnm: 

ϕls = (cid:0) 3(βls + βnm)Θsn.

(2.47) 

The multi-fluid model can be used to cover a particle size distribution 
or  even  particle  morphology  change  due  to  chemical  reactions,  espe-
cially performant for bi- and tri-dispersed systems. In most engineering 
applications, the solid phase in the gas-solid flows is characterized by a 
wide range of particle size distribution (PSD). As a result, the compu-
tational demand significantly increases with the number of solid phases 
investigated. As a common alternative approach, the population balance 
equation (PBE) can be applied to the two-fluid model approach to model 
the particle size distribution and particle size development. In this case, 
the polydisperse solid phase, which consists of many discrete particles 
with specific properties, can be classified into internal (ϕ) and external 
→) coordinates. While the spatial coordinates are external, the particle 
( x
properties  such as  velocities, temperatures, sizes,  or compositions are 
referred  to  as  internal  coordinates.  Two  particles  are  identical  if  the 
values of their coordinates are identical. The distribution of these en-
→, ϕ, t) for  a 
tities  can  be  described  by  a  number  density  function  n( x
given  coordinate  number  ϕ ∈ Ωϕ, x
→.  The  average  number  of 
x
→, ϕ,
particles  in  a  control  volume  dVϕdV x
t)dVϕdV x
→.  At  the  time  t,  the  total  particle-number  concentration  per 
→
unit volume (number of particles per unit volume) at coordinate  x
defined by Marchisio and Fox [707] as: 
∫

→ is  then  given  by  n( x

→ ∈ Ω

is 

N( x→, t) = Mϕ(0) =

nϕ(ϕ)dVϕ,

Ωϕ

(2.48)  

which corresponds to the zeroth moment of the number density function 
(NDF). The NDF can be represented by the number of moments as fol-
lows: 
(

∫

→)
k

Mϕ

=

Ωϕ

ϕk1
1 ⋅⋅⋅ϕkN

N nϕ(ϕ)dVϕ.

(2.49) 

→
The vector  k

= (k1, ..., kN) expresses the order of the moments for 
coordinate φ. Several concepts for describing the NDF are common in 
→, t) that calculates 
the literature, for example, a length-based NDF nL(L, x
the total particle-number concentration as: 

∫ ∞

N = ML(0) =

nL(L)dL.

0

The kth moment is defined as: 

∫ ∞

ML(k) =

LknL(L)dL.

0

(2.50) 

(2.51) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093020F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Based  on  the  moment  definition,  the  mean  particle  size  can  be 
defined for any k as the ratio of ML(k + 1) /ML(k), e.g. the well-known 
Sauter mean diameter can be postulated for k = 2 using the following 
equation: 

The approximation is exact (RN = 0) when f(Li) is a polynomial of the 
order  of ≤ (2N + 1). Applying the moment definition, the quadrature 
approximation of the order of N can be solved by 2N moments of the 
NDF: 

L32 =

ML(3)
.
ML(2)

(2.52) 

ML(k) =

∑N

i=1

wiLk
i ,

(2.59)  

In the same framework, and in the same manner as the length-based 
NDF,  further  NDFs  based  on  the  volume,  area,  temperature,  or  even 
particle velocity can be treated similarly. The transport equation of the 
NDF, also called the population balance equation (PBE), can be said to 
take into account its evolution in space and time: 
(

)

)

(

+ ∇ϕ

˙ϕpnϕ

= hϕ.

(2.53) 

∂nϕ
∂t

+ ∇ x→

u→

pnϕ

Here, the terms ∇

p  is  the  particle  velocity  vector, 

→ and ∇ϕ represent the gradient vectors in three- 
x
dimensional  physical  space  and  N-dimensional  coordinate  space, 
→
˙ϕp  is  the 
respectively.  The  symbol  u
growth rate of the internal coordinate, and hϕ accounts for source terms 
caused by aggregation, breakage, and other mechanisms. If the particle 
length  is  considered  again  as  an  internal  coordinate,  the  PBE  can  be 
written as: 
(
u→

+ ∇

+

)

= hL,

pnL

(2.54)  

x→

∂(GLnL)
∂

∂nL
∂t

where GL is the change rate of the particle length. If Eq. (2.51) is inserted 
into Eq. (2.54), then the following moment transport equation can be 
obtained: 

∂ML(k)
∂t

(cid:0)

)

u→

pML(k)

+ ∇ x→

= kGL(k (cid:0) 1)ML(k (cid:0) 1) + hL(k).

(2.55) 

Here, the average particle growth rate GL(k) and the moment transfer 

where  N  weights  wi  and  N  abscissas  Li  need  to  be  defined.  Using  the 
product-difference algorithm, the weights and abscissas can be calcu-
lated based on the N eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix (consisting of 
the first 2N moments of the NDF). Marchisio et al. [710] showed that the 
higher the number of nodes of the quadrature approximation, the more 
accurate the source term approximation, and that three nodes (N = 3) 
are  sufficient  to  predict  the  PBE  for  most  relevant  engineering 
applications.  

• Direct quadrature method of moments (DQMOM) 

Using the quadrature approximation, the NDF can also be stated as a 

summation of N Dirac delta functions: 

nϕ(ϕ, t) =

∑N

i=1

wi(t)δ(ϕ (cid:0) ϕi(t)).

(2.60) 

The  equivalent  population  of  particles  with  the  number  densities 
equal to the weights wi  and characteristic values equal to the nodes φi 
must  represent  the  real  population.  In  contrast  to  the  QMOM,  the 
transport equations for weights and nodes can be solved directly, using 
the  so-called  direct  quadrature  method  of  moments  (DQMOM).  The 
population balance equation can be rewritten as: 

∑N

i=1

∂
∂t

(wiδ(ϕ (cid:0) ϕi)) = S(ϕ, t).

(2.61) 

hL are defined using the following formulae: 

GL(k) =

∫ ∞
0 GLLknL(L)dL
∫ ∞
0 LknL(L)dL

,

∫ ∞

hL(k) =

hLLkdL.

0

The symbol S refers to source terms due to events such as growth, 
aggregation, and breakage. Rearranging Eq. (2.61), the following rela-
tion can be obtained: 

∑N

i=1

∂
∂t

[δ(ϕ (cid:0) ϕi) + δ

′

(ϕ (cid:0) ϕi)ϕi]ai (cid:0)

∑N

i=1

′

δ

(ϕ (cid:0) ϕi)bi = S(ϕ),

(2.62)  

(2.56)  

(2.57) 

If the source terms are size-dependent, closures are required to solve 
the integrals in the PBE. Several numerical discretization schemes have 
been proposed to deal with the issue, namely the discrete method, the 
class  method,  the  multi-group  method,  the  least-squares  method,  the 
method of moments, the quadrature method of moments (QMOM), and 
the direct quadrature method of moments (DQMOM). For fluidized-bed 
applications, the method of moments has been applied more frequently 
in the recent literature (among others: Liu and Xiao [134,259], Liu et al. 
[135], Xue and Fox [423], Ghadirian et al. [136]). In the following, the 
QMOM  and  the  DQMOM  will  be  described  briefly.  Furthermore,  for 
simplification  purposes,  the  population  balance  equations  for  QMOM 
and  DQMOM  explained  here  are  based  on  spatially  homogeneous 
problems.  However,  the  PBEs  can  be  extended  to  spatially  heteroge-
neous and bi-variate problems. For more details, interested readers are 
referred to the literature (Jakobsen [708], Marchisio and Fox [707]).  

• Quadrature method of moments (QMOM) 

In the quadrature method of moments, proposed by McGraw [709], 
the  moment  transport  equation  is  closed  based  on  the  quadrature 
approximation. A set of orthogonal polynomials nL(L) is considered to 
approximate the integral as follows: 
∫ ∞

∫ ∞

GLLknL(L)dL =

f (L)nL(L)dL =

0

0

f (Li)wi + RN(f ).

(2.58) 

∑N

i=1

with  ai = dwi /dt  and  bi = d(wiϕi
following rules: 

) /dt.  For  the  Dirac  function,  the 

∫ ∞

0
∫ ∞

0

ϕkδ(ϕ (cid:0) ϕi)dϕi = ϕk
i ,

ϕkδ

′ (ϕ (cid:0) ϕi)dϕi = (cid:0) kϕk(cid:0) 1

i

,

(2.63)  

can  be  applied  to  the  moment  transport  of  the  PBE,  resulting  in  the 
following linear system: 

(1 (cid:0) k)

∑N

i=1

ϕk
i ai + k

∑N

i=1

ϕk(cid:0) 1
i

bi =

∫∞

0

S(ϕ)ϕkdϕ = S

(N)
k

.

(2.64) 

The moment transformation of the source term S

is evaluated with 
a  quadrature  approximation  of  the  order  of  N  for  the  weights  ai  and 
abscissas bi. If the moment transformation of the source terms is known, 
the evolution equations of 2N moments can be calculated by solving the 
following transport equations: 

(N)
k 

= a1, ...,

dwn
dt

= an,

dw1
dt
d(w1ϕ1)
dt

= b1, ...,

d(wnϕn)
dt

= bn.

(2.65) 

The source terms can be defined (k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 2N (cid:0) 2, 2N (cid:0) 1) by 

inserting Eq. (2.65) into Eq. (2.64), as follows: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093021F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

⋯

⋯

⋯

⋮

1

0
(cid:0) ϕ2
N
⋮

0

1
2ϕ1
⋮
(2n(cid:0) 1)ϕ2N(cid:0) 2

…

…

…

⋮

0

1
2ϕN
⋮

1 ⋯ (cid:0) 2(1(cid:0) n)ϕ2N(cid:0) 1

N

1 … (2n(cid:0) 1)ϕ2N(cid:0) 2

N

⎛

⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

1

0
(cid:0) ϕ2
1
⋮
(cid:0) 2(1(cid:0) n)ϕ2N(cid:0) 1
⎛
⎞

=

⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

S0
S1
S2
⋮
S2N(cid:0) 2
S2N(cid:0) 1

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
.
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞

⎛

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

a1
⋮
aN
b1
⋮
bN

(2.66) 

In the case of two identical nodes, the linear system is singular, which 
in turn leads to instabilities in DQMOM simulations. Marchisio and Fox 
[711]  employed  perturbation  of  the  nodes  in  order  to  overcome  the 
singularity issue. 

2.2.3. Discrete-particle model 

For  polydisperse  granular  flows,  the  formulation  of  the  two-fluid 
model  is  complicated,  as  separate  conservation  equations  must  be 
solved for each particle size or each particle shape. In contrast to the 
two-fluid model, the discrete-particle model is an efficient approach for 
modeling granular flows with a wide range of particle size distributions, 
although the computational cost of detecting collisions between parti-
cles and particles or walls is very high. 

The  gas  phase  in  the  discrete-particle  model  is  described  using 
modified  conservation  equations  for  single-phase  flow.  The  extended 
continuity equation of the gas phase is given as follows [44]: 
(cid:0)

)

(

)

= Sm

p→f .

(2.67) 

∂

εf ρf
∂tf

+ ∇⋅

εf ρf u→

f

The extended Navier-Stokes equations are expressed by the formula: 

)

∂

(
εf ρf u→
∂tf

f

(

+ ∇⋅

εf ρf u→

f u→

f

)

=

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

)

εf Tf

(cid:0)
∇⋅
p→f
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Model A

→u
(cid:0) εf ∇p + εf ρf g→ + S

)

εf Tf

(cid:0)
∇⋅
p→f
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Model B

→u
(cid:0) ∇p + εf ρf g→ + S

.

(2.68) 

p→f  and Su

→
Here, ρf stands for the gas density,  u
f  denotes the fluid velocity, p is 
→
the static pressure,  g
and tf represent the standard gravity and the fluid 
time step, respectively. On the right-hand side of both the continuity and 
momentum equations of the gas phase, the source terms Sm
p→f 
relate to mass and momentum transfers with the solid phase (i.e. the 
interaction between solid and fluid phases, see Momentum transfer and 
Mass transfer and chemical reactions sections). Gidaspow [10] proposed 
two variants for the Navier-Stokes equations (type-A model and type-B 
model), depending on the treatment of the pressure source term. If the 
pressure is shared by both gas and solid phases, it is referred to as model 
A. If the pressure is attributed to the gas phase alone, it is referred to as 
model  B.  For  conveying  and  fluidization  processes,  an  insignificant 
difference  between  the  models  was  shown  [712].  Most  researchers 
prefer  model  A,  as  reflected  by  the  fact  that  commercial  software 
packages such as ANSYS-FLUENT use this model. 

The extended transport equations for the specific enthalpy and each 

chemical component i are given as: 
(cid:0)

)

∂

)
εf ρf h
∂tf

(
εf ρf u→

+ ∇⋅

f hf

= εf

+ ∇⋅

∂pf
∂tf

(εf μf
Pr

)

∇hf

+ Shom,rac
f

+ Srad
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Sh
f

+ Sh

p→f ,

(2.69)  

(cid:0)
∂

εf ρf cf ,i
∂tf

)

(

+ ∇⋅

)

εf ρf u→

f cf ,i

= ∇⋅

(εf μf
Sc

)

∇cf ,i

+ Sc,i
f ,

with the Schmidt and Prandtl numbers: 

Sc =

μf
ρf D

,

Pr =

cp,f μf
λf

.

(2.70)  

(2.71)  

(2.72) 

Here, the symbol μf  stands for the fluid dynamic viscosity, D is the 
mass  diffusivity,  cp,f  is  the  specific  heat  capacity  of  the  fluid,  and  λf 
represents the thermal conductivity. For turbulent flows, the turbulent 
Schmidt and Prandtl numbers should be used. Here, the mass diffusivity 
D  is  replaced  with  the  eddy  diffusivity  K  and  the  dynamic  viscosity, 
while the thermal conductivity is replaced with the effective dynamic 
viscosity and effective thermal conductivity (consisting of molecular and 
turbulent parts). The turbulent parts can be obtained by including the 
turbulence modeling in the simulation (see the Turbulence section). 

The source term Sh

f  takes into account the heat released/consumption 
by homogeneous gas phase reactions as well as the heat transfer in the 
gas phase due to radiation. The heat transfer from the solid phase to the 
gas phase Sh
p→f  due to the temperature difference between the two phases 
is made up of two parts: the heat transfer through convection and the 
heat transfer due to phase transformation from the solid to the gas phase, 
see the Heat transfer section. The fluid temperature is computed from 
the specific enthalpy and the mean specific heat capacity. The source 
terms  Sc,i
ponents due to chemical reactions (see the Mass transfer and chemical 
reactions section). 

take  into  account  the  formation/reduction  of  gaseous  com-

f 

In  the  discrete-particle  method,  the  solid  phase  is  regarded  as  a 
dispersed phase. The simulation of the solid phase is divided into two 
sequential steps, namely the free-flight phase and the collision process 
phase [713]. In the free flight phase, the position, angular displacement, 
and temperature changes for all particles during a particle time step Δtp 
are  computed  simultaneously  (usually  based  on  the  explicit  Euler 
method): 

(cid:0)

x→

p

t + Δtp

(cid:0)

φ→

p

t + Δtp

)

)

= x→

p(t) +

= φ→

p(t) +

∫t+Δtp

t

∫t+Δtp

t

u→

p(t)dt,

ω→

p(t)dt,

(cid:0)

Tp

t + Δtp

)

= Tp(t) +

1
mpcp

∫t+Δtp

t

qp(t)dt.

(2.73)  

(2.74)  

(2.75) 

p  and  angular 
∑
p,k(t) and 

→
F

→
The  changes  in  the  particle  translational  velocity  u

velocity  ω→

p  are determined by summing up all the forces 

moments of force 

∑

→
M

p,k(t): 

k

= u→

p(t) +

= ω→

p(t) +

(cid:0)

u→

p

t + Δtp

(cid:0)

ω→

p

t + Δtp

)

)

∫t+Δtp

t

∫t+Δtp

t

→
b

p(t)dt,

a→

p(t)dt,

with translation and angular accelerations: 

k

(2.76)  

(2.77)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093022F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

→
b

p(t) =

1
mp

∑

→
F

p,k(t),

k

ap(t) =

1
Ip

∑

→
M

p,k(t).

k

(2.78)  

(2.79) 

Here, the symbol k stands for the number of forces or moments of 
force acting on the particle, cp  is the specific heat capacity of the ma-
terial, of which the particle is made, and mp and Ip are the particle mass 
and  the  moment  of  inertia,  respectively.  Detailed  information  can  be 
found in the Balance equations for solid phase section. 

The free-flight phase is followed by the collision process phase that 
consists of collision detection and collision treatment. In the discrete- 
particle model, the detection of particle-particle and particle-wall col-
lisions is crucially important in terms of both computational effort and 
simulation accuracy. Particle-particle and particle-wall collisions can be 
modeled  stochastically  or  detected  deterministically.  Two  approaches 
are widely applied for collisions, namely the soft-sphere model and the 
hard-sphere  model.  In  the  latter  model,  single  binary  collisions  are 
performed as instantaneous processes. The properties of particles after 
the collision are related to the properties of particles before the collision 
through  momentum  and  energy  balances.  In  the  so-called  soft-sphere 
model, also known as the discrete element method (DEM), the particles 
can overlap each other or penetrate the wall. Depending on the pene-
tration depth, a contact force is determined, changing the motions of 
particles.  For  deterministic  collision  detection  models,  the  collision 
treatment can be performed with both hard- and soft-sphere models. In 
the stochastic collision detection models, the collision treatment is only 
achieved with the hard-sphere model (see the Collision models section). 
Which  collision  treatment  model  is  more  suitable  to  describe 
particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  depends  on  the  average 
particle  velocity and the  solid content in the gas-solid  flow. At  lower 
particle velocities, which can be found in bubbling or circulating fluid-
ized  beds,  the  deterministic  collision  treatment  with  the  hard-sphere 
model  cannot  approximate  the  multiple  collisions  of  a  particle  with 
other collision partners, as the soft-sphere model can do. As a result, a 
very small adaptive particle time step is required to resolve all collisions, 

resulting  in  considerable  computational  effort.  At  higher  particle  ve-
locities, the use of the deterministic collision treatment with the soft- 
sphere model requires relatively smaller particle  time steps (avoiding 
unphysical  penetration),  and  thus  the  computational  time  increases 
sharply (see the Particle time step section). In summary, in dense gas- 
solid  flows  with  lower  particle  velocities,  where  the  number  of 
particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  is  extremely  high,  the 
deterministic collision treatment with a soft-sphere model is used. For 
dilute gas-solid flows with higher particle velocities, the deterministic 
collision treatment with the hard-sphere model is preferred. 

It  is  computationally  too  expensive  to  simulate  granular  flows 
including  millions  of  particles  using  the  discrete-particle  model.  For 
instance,  a  fluidized-bed  system  with  a  one-kilogram  inventory  of 
monodisperse  sand  particles  with  a  diameter  of  150  μm  contains 
approximately  0.22  billion  particles.  This  goes  beyond  the  technical 
feasibility  of  modern  high-performance  clusters,  despite  the  fact  that 
these particle numbers are still significantly below those of a fluidized- 
bed application even at a lab-scale. In order to enable the simulation of 
large-scale industrial systems such as fluidized-bed combustors or gas-
ifiers,  the  discrete-particle  model  requires  further  simplification.  The 
modeling  approach  used  in  practice,  which  is  relatively  new  in  the 
context of particulate systems, is to represent a number of particles using 
a  so-called  “parcel”  that  has  the  same  material  properties  as  the  real 
particle  (see  Fig.  2.5  (a)).  The  volume  ratio  of  a  parcel  to  a  particle, 
which identifies the number of particles per parcel, is expressed by the 
following formula: 
)3

(

= l3 ≥ 1,

(2.80)  

R =

Vpar
Vp

=

dpar
dp

where Vpar and Vp and are the volumes of the parcel and particle, dpar and 
dp are their diameters, and the scaling factor l is defined as the diameter 
ratio of a parcel to a real-size particle. In the discrete-particle model, the 
computational effort scales sharply with the number of tracked particles. 
Examining  Eq.  (2.80),  a  free  choice  of  particles  can  be  added  to  the 
representative parcel, which significantly reduces the total number of 
tracked parcels in the computational domain by the factor R ≥ 1: 

Fig. 2.5. Schematic representation of the parcel concept: (a) for monodisperse systems, and (b) for polydisperse systems.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093023F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Npar =

Np
R

.

(2.81) 

Due to the lower numbers of tracked parcels, the collision probability 
in the coarse-grained parcel model is lower than in the original system 
with  real  particles  (i.e.  less  energy  is  dissipated).  This  challenge  is 
considered a competitive drawback of the coarse-grained parcel model, 
but no precise solutions using other methods (e.g. the two-fluid model) 
are yet available to overcome this issue. 

The major feature of the parcel approach is that particles of the same 
diameter and density are lumped into parcels. However, in most appli-
cations, the solid phase is characterized by a particle size distribution 
and thus should be replaced with polydisperse parcels that represent the 
original particles in the computational domain. In the literature, there 
are  two  main  approaches  for  representing  the  polydisperse  particle 
systems with parcels, namely the same size parcel (SSP) method, and the 
same statistic weight (SSW) method (see Fig. 2.5 (b)) [714]. In the same 
size parcel method, it is assumed that all parcels are the same size. The 
same statistic weight method keeps the statistical particle properties (e. 
g. the particle number weight of the parcel system) equal to the original 
system by varying the parcel size. Which method is more appropriate to 
describe the polydisperse particle systems depends on the system under 
investigation. The same size parcel method is advantageous in particular 
for  simulating  bubbling  and  circulating  fluidized  beds  due  to  the 
improved computational efficiency and accuracy. For fixed-bed systems 
where  the  particle  may  segregate,  or  for  gas-solid  flows  where  the 
particle-particle  or  particle-wall  collisions  (short-range  force)  are 
dominant, the same statistic weight method is preferred [714]. 

For similarity theory considerations, the forces and moments of force 
acting on the parcel (see the Balance equations for solid phase section) 
must be scaled by the scaling factor l. Various scaling rules have been 
developed for this purpose, generally based on the Π theorem and the 
law of conservation of energy. The Π theorem, firstly proposed by Dr. Liu 
→
Z., assumes that the minimum fluidization velocity  u
mf , the Archimedes 
number  Ar,  and  the  particle  Reynolds  number  Rep  are  kept  constant 
[637,715]. In this approach, direct scaling for the forces and moments of 
force is not taken into account; instead, the following scaling values are 
used for the parcel diameter, the gas viscosity, and the parcel density: 

dpar = ldp,

μf ,par = lμf ,
ρf ,par = lρf ,

ρf ,par

ρpar =

)

(cid:0)

ρp (cid:0) ρf
lρf

+ ρf ,par.

(2.82) 

The energy conservation principle assumes that all particles within 
the parcel have the same translational and rotational velocities, result-
ing in the following approaches for scaling the forces and moments of 
force:  

• Scaling of short-range surface forces: To scale the short-range forces 
(see the Short-range surface forces section), e.g. the particle-particle 
and particle-wall contact force, four different methods can generally 
be used. The first method presumes that the total energy of a parcel 
→con
p 

should match its particles, suggesting a scaling form of  F
(among others: Hilton and Cleary [716], Sakai et al. [717], and Lu 

→con
par 

= l3 F

→con
par 

= l2 F

→con
p 

et al. [461]). In the second method, a scaling form  F
is 
suggested  [718].  This  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  collision 
contact  time,  the  energy  density,  and  its  temporal  evolution  are 
invariant. The third method scales the coefficient of restitution due 
to  the  particle’s  unvarying  kinetic  energy  and  energy  dissipation 
[719]: 

√

(

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)(cid:0)
)1/3
1 + l

1 (cid:0) εpar

p (cid:0) 1
e2

epar =

,

(2.83)  

with the volumetric void fraction within the parcel εpar  (i.e. the in-
ternal voidage of the parcel). The fourth method combines the first 
and  third  methods,  meaning that,  in  addition  to  the  coefficient  of 
restitution  scaling,  the  contact  force  is  scaled  according  to  this 

relation  F

→con
par

= l3 F

→con
p

.  

• Scaling of moment of force: In order to match the rotational energy of 
the parcel and its particles, the angular velocity of the parcel  ω→
par 
should be scaled. In the literature, a scaling form of ω→con
/l is 
generally  employed  to  determine  the  moments  of  force  [717],  as 
presented in the Moment of force balance section.  

= ω→con

par

p

• Scaling  of  volume  forces  and  aerodynamic  surface  forces:  For  the 
volume forces (see the Section 2.3.1.1), a scaling rule in the form of 
→vol
F
par

is  used  [719-721].  A  similar  approach  applies  to  all 

→vol
p 

= l3 F

aerodynamic  surface  forces  F
,  shown  in  the  Aero-
dynamic surface forces section. Here, it should be mentioned that for 
the  drag  force,  additional  scaling  rules  can  also  be  found  in  the 

→aero
par

= l3 F

→aero
p

literature.  For  example,  a  scaling  form  F
is  suggested 
[716], assuming that the surface on which the drag force acts should 

be  invariant.  A  scaling  form  F
Stokes flow regime (i.e. creeping flow Re ≤ 1) [718]. 

is  also  applied  to  the 

→dra
par

= l2 F

→dra
p 

→dra
par

= l F

→dra
p

As previously shown, several approaches are available in the litera-
ture for scaling the forces and moments of force acting on the parcel, 
summarized  in  a  recent  review  paper,  published  by  Di  Renzo  et  al. 
[722]. However, no general approach can be used and thus significant 
research  in  terms  of  numerical  and  experimental  investigations  is 
required to gain more information on how to scale the forces and mo-
ments  of  force  with  the  parcel,  not  only  for  monodisperse  and  poly-
disperse  systems  with  spherical  particles  but  also  for  particles  with 
complex geometries. 

Finally, it should be mentioned that the coarse-grained parcel model 
can  be  applied  to  hard-sphere  and  soft-sphere  models  in  RANS-based 
simulations.  In  the  context  of  large  eddy  simulations,  according  to 
Apte  et  al.  [723],  the  standard  approach  of  representing  a  group  of 
similar  particles  as  a  representative  parcel  is  inappropriate,  and  thus 
individual particles have to be tracked. In most simulation studies with 
the hard-sphere model, real particles were used with some exceptions, e. 
g. [724,725]. The reason is that the number of the tracked particles is 
relatively  low  (in  general,  the  hard-sphere  model  is  applied  to 
two-dimensional  or  quasi-2D  flows,  whereas  three-dimensional  simu-
lations at lab-scale have been the focus of recent advances in this field). 
The soft-sphere model, in contrast to the hard-sphere model, has largely 
benefitted from the improvements offered by the coarse-grained parcel 
model  (it  is  frequently  applied  to  simulate  fluidized  bed  systems  at 
semi-industrial-scale, e.g. [334,347,348]). 

2.2.4. Hybrid model 

stresses 

interaction 

inter-particle 

O’Rourke et al. [92,726] proposed a new approach, known as the 
multiphase particle-in-cell (MP-PIC) method, in which the particles are 
modeled simultaneously as a continuum and as a discrete phase. Here, 
particle-particle 
or 
(i.e. 
particle-particle stresses), which is difficult to take into account for each 
particle in dense granular flows, is modeled similarly to the two-fluid 
method  as  a  gradient  on  the  Eulerian  grid.  This  can  be  achieved  in 
three  steps.  First,  the  physical  values  (e.g.  velocity,  position)  of  the 
the 
particles  are 
particle-particle interactions are modeled. Third, the interaction values 
are interpolated back to the discrete particles. According to Snider [93], 
this calculation method significantly increases the computational effi-
ciency  when  determining  particle-particle  interactions,  without  any 
considerable increase in the numerical error. 

the  Eulerian  grid.  Second, 

interpolated 

to 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093024F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

The governing equations of the multiphase particle-in-cell method 
are  briefly  explained  here  based  on  the  CPFD  approach  used  in  the 
BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software and shwonin [93]. For the fluid 
phase, the continuity equation, the Navier-Stokes equation, the specific 
enthalpy equation, and the species transport equations (2.67), (2.68), 
(2.69), and (2.70) are applied. 

∫ ∫ ∫

u→

p =

(cid:0)

1
1 (cid:0) εf

)

ρp

ϕVpρp u→

pdVpdρpd u→
p,

∫ ∫ ∫

(cid:0)

ρp

)

=

1 (cid:0) εf

ϕVpρpdVpdρpd u→
p.

(2.90)  

(2.91) 

→
p, u

The particle phase motion is described based on the particle proba-
→
→
bility distribution function ϕ( x
p, ρp
, Vp, t), where  x
p  represents the 
→
p  stands for the particle velocity, ρp  and Vp  are the 
particle position,  u
particle  density  and  the  particle  volume,  respectively.  By  solving  a 
Liouville equation for the particle distribution function [727], its time 
evolution can be obtained as: 
)
→)
ϕ G

(
+ ∇up ⋅

ϕ u→

+ ∇⋅

= 0.

(2.84) 

(

p

∂ϕ
∂t

In contrast to the discrete-particle models (see the Collision models 
section), the hybrid models do not require a stochastic or deterministic 
collision  detection  mechanism  to  determine  the  collisions  between 
particles and/or particles and walls. In the literature, there is somehow a 
confusion statement that considers the hybrid models within the group 
of stochastic collision detection models. The collisions between particles 
(which is calculated at on Eulerian frame of reference) can be computed 
using an isotropic inter-particle stress tensor without taking into account 
its off-diagonal elements, according to Harris et al. [728]: 

→
G

→
G

Here, ∇uP  describes the divergence operator in terms of velocity, and 
is the discrete particle acceleration, expressed by: 

(

)

=

u→

f (cid:0) u→

β
ρp
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Acceleration due to aerodynamic drag force

p

(cid:0)

1
∇p
ρp
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Acceleration due to pressure gradient

+

g→
⏟⏞⏞⏟
Acceleration due to gravity

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

1
∇τp
1 (cid:0) εf
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Acceleration due to gradient of the inter(cid:0) particle stress

)
ρp

.

(cid:0)

Pp
εcpl
(cid:0)
p

τp =

)

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

),

(2.92)  

with  the  positive  constant  Pp  that  has  the  unit  of  pressure  and  the 
volumetric fraction of solid at the close-packing limit εcpl
p . Snider [93] 
introduced the constants γ and θ to Eq. (2.92) to avoid the singularity at 
the close-packing limit: 

τp =

[(cid:0)

max

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

Pp
εcpl
p

(2.85) 

)γ

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

].

))

; θεf

(2.93) 

The first term represents the acceleration due to the drag force with 
the interphase momentum transfer coefficient β (see Momentum transfer 
section). The second term denotes the acceleration due to the pressure 
gradient. The third and the fourth terms stand for the acceleration due to 
gravity  and  the  gradient  of  inter-particle  stresses,  respectively.  The 
volumetric void fraction can be calculated by integrating the probability 
→
p +
function over velocity and mass at  x

→
p  and t in the intervals ( u

→
p, u

p), (ρp,ρp + dρp), and (Vp,Vp + dVp) as: 

∫ ∫ ∫ (

)

→
d u

εf = 1 (cid:0)

p, u→

p, ρp, Vp, t

x→
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
ϕ

VpdVpdρpd u→
p.

The  momentum  transfer  per  volume  in  the  Eulerian  momentum 

equation is given by: 
∫ ∫ ∫

→u,p
S

p→f =

ϕVpρp

(

[

β
ρp

u→

f (cid:0) u→

p

)

(cid:0)

1
ρp

]
dVpdρpd u→
p.
∇p

(2.87) 

→
By multiplying Eq. (2.84) by ρpVp and ρpVp u

p, followed by an inte-
gration over the particle density, the volume, and the velocity coordi-
nate,  the  particle  continuity  and  particle  momentum  equations  (Eqs. 
(2.88) and (2.89)) can be obtained: 
(
ρp

1 (cid:0) εf

))

(

)

∂

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

+ ∇⋅

ρp

1 (cid:0) εf

u→

p

= 0,

∂t

(
∂

(cid:0)

ρp

)

1 (cid:0) εf

)

u→

p

∂t
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

(

(cid:0)

ρp

)

1 (cid:0) εf

+ ∇⋅

)

u→

p u→
p
∫ ∫ ∫

)
∇p + ρp

(cid:0)

)
g→ +

1 (cid:0) εf
[ ∫ ∫ ∫

ϕVpβ

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

p

ϕVpρp

= (cid:0) ∇τp (cid:0)
)

(cid:0) u→

p

)

(cid:0) u→

p

dVpdρpd u→

dVpdρpd u→

p (cid:0) ∇⋅
]
.

p

(2.88)  

(2.89) 

(

u→
)(

f

u→

p

→
Here,  u

p  and  ρp
average particle density, given as: 

(1 (cid:0) εf ) are  the  average  particle  velocity  and  the 

Generally,  the  constant  γ  has  a  value  between  2  and  5,  while  the 
constant  θ  is  of  the  order  of  10-7.  The  last  inter-particle  stress  tensor 
takes into account the concentration of particles but neglects the particle 
size  and  velocity.  When  it  is  necessary  to  satisfy  the  accuracy  re-
quirements, a more complex inter-particle stress model can be used that 
is based on the kinetic theory of dense gases: 

[
(cid:0)

τp =

1 (cid:0) εf

(cid:0)

)
ρp +

1 (cid:0) εf

)2(1 + ess)ρpgrad

ss

]
Θs.

(2.94)  

(2.86) 

where Θs  represents the granular temperature and ess  and grad
restitution coefficient and the radial distribution function. 

ss  are the 

In  parallel  to  the  MP-PIC  method,  in  2009,  ANSYS  introduced  a 
hybrid  model  based  on  the  dense  discrete  phase  model  (DDPM).  The 
ANSYS-FLUENT DDPM model (also known as DDPM-KTGF) is based on 
the formulation of Popoff and Braun [729] and the existing structure of 
the discrete phase model (DPM), the multi-fluid model, and the kinetic 
theory of granular flows (KTGF). 

In  addition  to  the  MP-PIC  and  DDPM  methods,  it  is  possible  to 
explicitly combine the two-fluid model and the discrete-particle model 
in the so-called sub-domain method or concurrent multiscale method. 
The idea behind the sub-domain method is simple: the computational 
domain is divided into a continuum and free molecular domains. The 
two-fluid  model  is  applied  to  the  sub-domains,  where  the  continuum 
hypothesis  is  fulfilled,  while  the  discrete-particle  model  is  used  in 
combination  with  the  stochastic  or  deterministic  collision  detection 
models for the free molecular sub-domains, including walls. Grüner [91] 
successfully applied the sub-domain method to the simulation of dilute 
gas-solid  flows.  In  his  work,  the  two-fluid  method  and  the 
discrete-particle  method  were  combined  with  a  stochastic  collision 
model, showing the advantages of both two-fluid and discrete-particle 
models.  Based  on  an  equilibrium  index  proposed  by  Kanther  [706], 
Grüner  developed  a  criterion  that  adaptively  divided  the  entire 
computational domain into continuum and free molecular sub-regions. 
Systematical  studies  on  the  sub-domains  method  were  also  presented 
by Chen and Wang [105,106,730,731]. The computational domain was 
decomposed into a discrete sub-domain, where individual particles were 
tracked  using  the  discrete  element  method,  and  a  continuum 
sub-domain, where the Navier-Stokes equations combined with the ki-
netic  theory  of  granular  flow  were  solved.  Here,  the  spatial  coupling 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093025F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

between  continuum  and  discrete  element  models  was  performed 
through an overlap region, in which both models’ variables were shared. 
The  authors  applied  the  sub-domain  method  to  simulate  a  granular 
channel  flow,  showing  nearly  similar  results  as  the  discrete  element 
model, with much less computational cost. For dense granular flows, the 
sub-domain method faces challenges due to the inhomogeneities in the 
solid  distribution  in  the  computational  domain.  This  is  why  the 
sub-domain  method  is  applied  less  frequently  than  the  MP-PIC  and 
DDPM methods in the literature. 

2.3. Balance equations for solid phase 

In the previous sections, the extended conservation equations of the 
gas phase are shown, complemented by the numerical models used to 
simulate gas-solid flows. In the following sections, the forces, moments 
of force, and energy balances for a single particle will be presented. 

2.3.1. Force balance 

→res

The force  F

i  acting on a single particle i is divided into two forces - 

the volume and surface forces: 

→res
F

i = F

→vol
i⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
Volume forces

+

→aero
F
i⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Aerodynamic forces

+

+ F

→con
ik⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
Contact forces

→adh
F
ik⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
Without physical contact
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Short(cid:0) range forces between the particles

→adh
F
ik⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
With physical contact

+

.

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Surface forces

(2.95) 

The  particle  volume  forces  include  the  gravitational,  buoyancy, 
electric, and magnetic forces. The surface forces fall into two groups: 
aerodynamic  surface  forces  and  short-range  surface  forces.  The  aero-
dynamic surface forces, which result from the interactions between the 
gas  and particles, are the drag  force, virtual mass force, Basset force, 
pressure force, Saffman force, radiometric force, and Magnus force. The 
short-range surface forces (inter-particle forces), which result from in-
teractions between the particles themselves and between the particles 
and the walls, consist of contact forces and adhesive forces. The latter 
are divided into adhesive forces either associated with physical contact 
(liquid bridge and sintering forces) or without physical contact (van der 
Waals and electrostatic forces). 

2.3.1.1. Volume forces. The volume forces, also known as body or field 
forces, are imposed by external fields outside the flow (gravity or electric 
field) and act throughout the volume of the object regardless of the flow 
configuration. 

→vol
F

→gra

→buo

→ele

i = F

i + F

i + F

i + F

→mag
i

.

(2.96)    

→gra
i 

• The gravitational force  F

is defined for a spherical particle from 
using 

→
the product of particle mass mp and acceleration of gravity  g
the following equation: 
→gra
p g→,
F

i = mp g→ =

ρpd3

(2.97)  

π
6

with the diameter dp and the density ρp of the particle i.  

• Based on Archimedes’s buoyancy principle, the static buoyancy force 
acting on a floating particle is related to the fluid weight mdis that is 
displaced by that object. This force takes place in liquids and gases 
and counteracts the gravitational force. For a spherical particle, it is 
given by: 

→bou
F

i = (cid:0) mdis g→ = (cid:0)

ρkd3

p g→.

π
6

(2.98)  

The subscript k identifies whether the fluid is g (gas) or liq (liquid). 
For the numerical simulation of gas-solid flows, the buoyant force 
and  the  pressure  gradient  force  are  combined  as  one  force  in  the 
model  formulation,  but  how  to  combine  them  depends  on  the  se-
lection of the so-called type-A model or type-B model (see Eq. (2.68)) 
[712].  

• When  an  electric  field  is  applied  to  charged  particles,  an  electric 
force is imposed. Particles with positive charges tend to move to the 
cathode, while negatively charged particles move to the anode. For 
statically charged particles, the electric force is also known as the 
Coulomb force. The electric force is determined by the product of the 

→
particle charge q and the electric field intensity  E

as follows: 

(2.99)   

→ele
F

→
.
i = q E

• If the particles are attracted to magnets, e.g. iron and nickel (ferro-
magnetic), a magnetic force is exerted once the particles are exposed 
to a magnetic field: 
→mag
F

→
i = nεrel B

vac.

(2.100)   

Here,  n  is  the  number  of  north  magnetic  poles,  εrel  represents  the 
vac  stands for the magnetic 

→
relative permeability of the material and  B
flux density in the vacuum. 

In an electromagnetic field, the charged particle is subjected to force 
due to the net charge, to force due to the electric dipole in an electric 
field, and to force due to the magnetic dipole in a magnetic field. The 
→
resulting Lorentz force in the direction of the particle velocity  u
P can be 
calculated  by  neglecting  the  effect  of  the  magnetic  dipole  using  the 
following mathematical formula: 

→Lor
F

i = q

(

→
E

)

+ u→

→
p × B

.

(2.101)  

2.3.1.2. Surface  forces. The  surface  forces,  in  contrast  to  the  volume 
forces,  are  exerted  on  the  surface  of  the  particle  and  consist  of  aero-
dynamic surface forces and short-range surface forces. 

2.3.1.2.1. Aerodynamic  surface  forces. The  aerodynamic  surface 
forces  are  imposed  due  to  gas-solid  interaction.  Due  to  the  complex 
nature of the gas-solid interaction, the analytical determination of the 
aerodynamic surface forces presents a major challenge. The most com-
mon way to deal with this issue is to perceive the particle movement as a 
superposition  of  four  simple  non-interactive  motions  of  a  sphere 
(Fig. 2.6). 

→aero
F

i = F

→dra
i⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
Motion 1

+ F

→vir
→Bas
i + F
i
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Motion 2

+ F

→Saf

→rado

i + F

→pre
→conc
i + F
i
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Motion 3

i + F

+ F

→Magn
i⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Motion 4

.

(2.102) 

Motion (1), particle movement in an isotropic flow field (uniform) 
with constant velocity: If a particle moves in an isotropic flow field and 
→
the  particle  velocity  u
f ,  the  relative 
velocity (slip velocity) leads to viscous stress and unbalanced pressure 
distribution on the particle surface, yielding to a force known as the drag 
force. The drag force acts opposite to the particle velocity direction and 
can be calculated using the following equation: 

→
p  differs  from the  gas  velocity  u

(

→dra
F

i =

1
2

CdraApρf

u→

f (cid:0) u→

p

)⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

f (cid:0) u→

p

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

(2.103)  

where Ap  is the cross-section area of the particle (the area exposed to 
incoming flow), ρf is the gas density, and Cdra represents the drag coef-
ficient, which is a function of the particle Reynolds number: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093026F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

ρf dpεf

Rep =

f (cid:0) u→

p

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
μf

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

,

(2.104)  

crucial when the relative acceleration or deceleration rate is high, 
the time change is much greater than the Stokes relaxation time, and 
the density difference between the fluid and solid phases is large. 

with the fluid dynamic viscosity μf. There are many experimental works 
and analytical studies on the drag coefficient at different particle Rey-
nolds numbers, summarized by [732]. 

Motion (2), particle accelerating or decelerating in an isotropic flow 
field: If a particle moves in an isotropic flow field and the particle ve-
locity changes, forces related to the particle acceleration or deceleration 
are imposed (see Table 2.4):  

1)  Virtual mass force: When a particle accelerates or decelerates, the 
boundary  layer  (surrounding  fluid)  accelerates  or  decelerates  too, 
due  to  the  adhesion  to  the  particle  surface.  Consequently,  a  wake 
vortex  is  formed,  whose  vorticity  relies  on  the  particle  Reynolds 
number. This additional form of resistance is known as the virtual 
mass force. The virtual mass force (carried mass or added mass force) 
is  directed  opposite  to  the  gradient  of  the  particle  velocity  and  is 
proportional  to  the  relative  acceleration  or  deceleration  and  the 
density ratio between the fluid and solid phases.  

2)  Basset force: If the particle accelerates or decelerates relative to the 
gas,  the shape and  volume of the  boundary layer are subjected  to 
continuous  changes.  The  Basset  force,  also  known  as  the  history 
force, describes the temporal delay in the boundary layer develop-
ment when the relative velocity changes. The Basset force is directed 
opposite to the gradient of the relative velocity and depends strongly 
firstly on the density ratio between the fluid and particle and sec-
ondly on the relative acceleration or deceleration. The Basset force is 

Motion  (3),  particle  movement  in  an  anisotropic  flow  field  (non- 
uniform) with constant  velocity: If a  particle  moves at a  constant ve-
locity in an anisotropic flow field with a velocity, pressure, or temper-
ature  gradient,  forces  correlated  to  these  gradients  are  induced  (see 
Table 2.5):  

1)  Pressure  gradient  force:  The  pressure  gradient  force  acts  on  the 
particle  surface  due  to  the  existence  of  a  pressure  gradient  in  the 
fluid. The pressure gradient force acts in the opposite direction to the 
pressure gradient (i.e. from the higher-pressure region to the lower- 
pressure region).  

2)  Saffman force: When a particle moves at a constant velocity in a flow 
field with a velocity gradient, the opposite sides of the particle un-
dergo different velocities. Due to the velocity distribution, a pressure 
gradient forms on the particle surface. A positive pressure arises on 
the side with a lower velocity, while a negative pressure generates on 
the faster side. The resultant lift force, known as the Saffman force, is 
perpendicular  to  the  relative  velocity  of  both  phases  and  in  the 
opposite direction to the pressure gradient. The Saffman force de-
pends on the particle diameter, the velocity gradient, and the relative 
velocity of both phases.  

3)  Radiometric force: A particle is subjected to a radiometric force in 
the region where a fluid temperature gradient exists. The radiometric 
force, also known as the thermal force or thermophoretic force, is 
directed toward the region of lower temperature (i.e. opposite to the 

Fig. 2.6. Description of gas-solid interaction as a superposition of four simple motions of a sphere (reproduced from reference [50], with permission of authors).  

Table 2.4 
Aerodynamic surface forces related to the particle acceleration or deceleration in an isotropic flow field.  

Forces 

Correlations 

Virtual mass 

force 

→ver
F

i = Cver

⎛
⎝D u→
dt

f

(cid:0)

⎞

⎠,

d u→
dt

p

ρf
ρp

mp

Cver = 1.05 (cid:0)

0.066
,
A2 + 0.12

Comments 

The correction factor Cver takes into account the disproportionate increase in the virtual mass force due 
to the generated wake vortex. This factor has a value of unity at lower particle Reynolds numbers but 
can change significantly at higher relative velocities [733]. 

A =

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

dp

Basset force 

f (cid:0) u→
| u→
(
d
u→
dt

p|2
f (cid:0) u→

p

.

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

→Bas
F

i = 9

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρf μf
π

mp
ρpdp

CBas

∫t

t0

CBas = 2.88 +

3.12
(1 + A)3.

/

(
D u→

f

)
(cid:0) (d u→

p

/

dt)

dt
√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
t (cid:0) τp

The time τp is the Stokes relaxation time, defined in Eq. (2.12), and the correction factor CBas identifies 
how the Basset force depends on the particle Reynolds number.  

dτp,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093027F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.5 
Aerodynamic surface forces related to particle movement in an anisotropic flow field with constant velocity.  

Forces 

Correlations 

Comments 

Pressure gradient force (known as 
the dynamic buoyancy force) 

→pre
F

i = (cid:0) Vp

dp
dx

= (cid:0)

(
1
6

πd3

p∇p +

π
6

)
p g→

..

ρf d3

Saffman force 

(

u→

f (cid:0) u→

p

)

(cid:0)

× ω→

f f

Rep, Resh

)
,

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Resh
2Rep

)

(
(cid:0)

exp

)

+

Rep
10

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρf μf
| ω→
f |
(

→Saf
F

i = 1.615d2

p

(cid:0)

f

Rep, Resh

)

=

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

1 (cid:0) 0.3314

√

0.3314

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Resh
2Rep

, case Rep ≤ 40,

√

0.0524

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Resh
2

, case Rep > 40,

ρf d2

p

⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→
⃒
μf

f

(cid:0) ω→

p

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
,

Resh =

ω→

f =

1
2

→rado
F

i = (cid:0)

∇ × u→
f .
(

9πdpη2
f
ρf Tf

)

∇T∞.

λf
2λf + λp

Radiometric force (known as the 

thermophoretic force) 

temperature  gradient).  Various  theories  have  been  proposed  to 
calculate  the  radiometric  force  acting  on  spherical  particles.  The 
most  commonly  applied  equation  in  the  literature  is  presented  in 
Table  2.5  according  to  [734].  In  this  equation,  dp  is  the  particle 
diameter, μf and ρf represent the dynamic viscosity and the density of 
the fluid, Tfis the fluid temperature and ∇T∞  denotes the uniform 
temperature gradient at a large distance from the particle. The ma-
terial properties λf  and λp  describe the thermal conductivity of the 
fluid  surrounding the particle  and the thermal conductivity of the 
particle. It has been found that the equation used for the radiometric 
force  (see  Table  2.5)  under-predicts  the  experiments;  therefore, 
several modifications have been made to this basic equation in the 
literature.  For  flows  with  a  lower  temperature  gradient,  the  radi-
ometer force should only be taken into consideration for particles of 
submicron  size.  At  higher  temperature  gradients,  the  radiometer 
force is relevant only for relatively larger particles.  

4)  Concentration gradient force: If the particle moves in a flow with a 
concentration  gradient,  a  force  is  imposed  in  the  direction  of  a 
negative  concentration  gradient.  Compared  to  other  aerodynamic 
surface  forces,  the  concentration  gradient  force  has  only  a  minor 
effect and is therefore neglected in most engineering applications. 

Motion (4), particle rotating in an isotropic flow field with constant 
angular velocity: If a particle rotates with a constant angular velocity in 
an isotropic flow field, a lift force related to this rotation, known as the 
Magnus  force,  can  appear.  The  particle  rotation  induces  an  irregular 
pressure distribution on the particle surface due to the relative velocity 
difference  between  the  particle  surface  and  the  incoming  flow.  The 
resultant lift force is called the Magnus force and can be defined in line 
with Crowe et al. and Sommerfeld et al. [738,739] as: 
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→
⃒

d2
pCMagsρf

→Mags
F
i

f (cid:0) ω→

f (cid:0) u→

f (cid:0) ω→

f (cid:0) u→

)]
,

ω→

u→

[(

π
8

=

×

)

(

p

p

p

p

(2.105)  

with the lift coefficient CMags [50,107]: 

{

CMags =

0.4G,
0.4,

if G ≤ 1
if G > 1

,

(2.106)  

and the parameter G: 

is evaluated from the fluid equation of motion [735,736].  

The relation is of general validity. All relevant contributions are considered when 
dp
dx 
The empirical correction factor f(Rep, Resh) ensures that the Saffman force depends 
on the particle Reynolds number, given with the aid of the threshold function 
according to [107,737] with the Reynolds number of the shear flow Resh  and the 
angular velocity vector of the fluid phase  ω→

f .  

Most commonly applied equation.  

⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

f (cid:0) ω→

p

f (cid:0) u→

p

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

.

(2.107) 

G =

dp
2

The Magnus force depends on the particle diameter and the relative 
translational velocities and angular velocities of both phases. The main 
reason for particle rotation is particle-wall collisions and/or if the par-
ticle is moving in a shear flow (see Fig. 2.12). Consequently, the Magnus 
force is crucial for gas-solid flows, when the wall has a significant effect 
on the particle movements (e.g. particle flow in a pipe). 

The solid-to-gas density ratio is commonly larger than 1000 in gas- 
solid fluidized-bed systems, and therefore it is well accepted that most 
of the aerodynamic surface forces mentioned above (e.g. virtual mass 
force, basset force, Saffman force) can be neglected. Further information 
on the aerodynamic surface forces can be found, for example, in [736] 
and [740]. 

2.3.1.2.2. Short-range surface forces. Short-range forces, also known 
as inter-particle forces, act in the case of particle-particle and particle- 
wall  collisions.  The  short-range  forces  can  be  divided  into  adhesive 
and contact forces. The adhesive forces consist of adhesive forces with or 
without physical contact and depend on the particle diameter, particle 
density,  and  mechanical  properties  of  the  colliding  particles.  The  ad-
hesive forces with physical contact form a physical bond between the 
collision  partners  such as  liquid  or  solid  bridges.  The adhesive  forces 
without physical contact do not involve a physical bond between the 
particles and/or particles and the wall. They include van der Waals and 
electrostatic forces. 

→short(cid:0) range
F

i

= F

→n,con
→t,con
i
i
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Contact forces

+ F

+ F

→van
→eles
i + F
i
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Without physical contact

→liq
→sol
i + F
i
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
With physical contact
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Adhesive forces

+ F

.

(2.108) 

Short-range forces are calculated in two consecutive steps: collision 
detection and collision treatment. The identification of collision partners 
can be performed using a collision detection method (see the Collision 
detection models section) with a specific criterion. One example is the 
criterion  of  contact  in  the  soft-sphere  model,  where  the  distance  be-
tween the center points of two collided objects must be smaller than the 
sum  of  both  radii.  Another  example  is  the  criterion  for  liquid  bridge 
formation when the distance between the center points of two collided 
objects is below the critical bridge length. When the collision partners 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093028F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

have been identified, the collision treatment can be carried out using the 
hard-sphere  or  soft-sphere  model  (see  Collision  treatment  models 
secction).  

theory  is  employed  for  macroscopic  bodies.  For  two  atoms  or 
molecules (i and j) separated by a distance s, the van der Waals 
force can be determined as follows: 

1)  Contact force: 

The contact force is of particular relevance in fluidization systems. 
Depending  on  the  selected  collision  detection  model  (stochastic  or 
deterministic), the contact force (collision treatment) can be computed 
with either the hard-sphere model or the soft-sphere model, as explained 
in detail in the Collision models section.  

2)  Adhesive Forces without Physical Contact: 

For the numerical simulation of gas-solid flows with relatively small 
particle diameters (below 0.1 mm), the adhesive forces without physical 
contact (i.e. without material contact), such as the van der Waals and 
electrostatic  forces  (see  Fig.  2.7),  can  influence  the  particle  motion 
considerably and thus should be taken into account in the simulation. 

a) Van der Waals force: In 1873, van der Waals identified an electro-
magnetic force between real gas molecules or atoms that results from 
dipole interaction. The van der Waals force refers to dipole-dipole 
interaction between atoms, molecules, and surfaces and takes place 
between  two  microscopic  molecules  or  between  two  macroscopic 
bodies (e.g. particle-particle or particle-wall interactions). According 
to  Fan  and  Zhu  [741],  the  van  der  Waals  force  involves  three 
attractive intermolecular forces:  
• Force due to the interactions between two permanent dipoles: This 
is  an  electrostatic  force  such  as  the  dipole-dipole  interaction  in 
hydrogen chloride HCl. Here, the polar molecule end with a pos-
itive charge attracts the negative end of other molecules.  

• Force  due  to  two  instantaneously  induced  dipoles:  This  force  is 
known as the London force and results from interacting molecules, 
where the movements of the electrons of both molecules influence 
each other.  

• Force caused by dipole-induced dipole: This force results from the 
fast-changing of the atomic dipole. These dipole fluctuations lead 
to an electric field that influences the polarizability of the neigh-
boring  atom.  Local  polarizability  is  a  measure  of  the  changing 
electron  cloud  distribution  of  molecules  caused  by  an  external 
electric field. The dipole induced in the neighboring atom tends to 
move  in  phase  with  the  original  state,  leading  to  an  attractive 
atomic force. 

Different  approaches  can  be  applied  to  calculate  the  van  der 
Waals force. Generally, the London and van der Waals theory is 
utilized for microscopic bodies, and Lifshitz and van der Waals 

→van
F

=

s→,

∂E
∂s

(2.109)  

→
with the unit vector  s
and the potential energy of interaction E 
that can be calculated by applying the London and van der Waals 
theory as: 

E = (cid:0)

.

λij
s6
ij

(2.110)   

The constant λij is known as the London constant and depends 

on the characteristics of interacting molecules or atoms. 

For the microscopic bodies i and j with a volume Vi and Vj, the 
potential energy of interaction between two objects is defined by 
integrating  all  potential  interaction  energies  of  molecules  that 
exist in the objects (the concept of additivity): 

λij
s6
ij

ninjdVidVj.

(2.111)  

∫

∫

E = (cid:0)

Vi

Vj

Here,  ni  and  nj  stand  for  the  atom  densities,  also  known  as  the 
number density (i.e. the number of atoms per unit of volume in the 
body). By inserting Eq. (2.111) into Eq. (2.109), the van der Waals 
force can be computed for two spherical bodies with radii of Ri and Rj 
as: 

→van
F

ij =

̂Rij
Hij
6s2
ij

s→
ij,

(2.112)  

→
̂
with the position vector  s
Rij  (defined in 
Eq. (2.190)). The Hamaker constant is calculated using the following 
relation: 

ij  and the reduced radius 

Hij = π2ninjλij.

(2.113)  

Similar procedures are used to determine the van der Waals force 

between a spherical particle and a wall: 

→van
F

iwal =

HijRi
12s2

iwal

s→

iwal =

π2ninjλRi
6s2

iwal

s→

iwal.

(2.114)  

For two different materials in air, the Hamaker constant is defined 

with the aid of Hamaker constants for each material as: 

Fig. 2.7. Adhesive forces without physical contact: (a) van der Waals force (particle-particle and particle-wall), (b) electrostatic force (particle-particle: insulator) 
and (c) electrostatic force (particle-particle: conductor) (reproduced from reference [50], with permission of authors). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093029F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
AiiAjj

Hij =

(2.115)  

When macroscopic rigid bodies and their atoms are closely packed, 
the  concept  of  additivity  is  insufficient  to  determine  the  van  der 
Waals force. In order to solve the additive problem, the macroscopic 
Lifshitz and van der Waals theory, which treats the solids as a con-
tinuum, must be applied. The van der Waals force can be calculated 
in terms of bulk properties, e.g. the dielectric constants, the refrac-
tive indices of the substances, and the modified Hamaker constant, 
defined by: 

H =

3
4π

hϖ.

(2.116)  

The constant hϖ is known as the Lifshitz-van der Waals constant 
and depends on substance properties, but not on material geometry. 
The  Lifshitz-van  der  Waals  constant  for  two  bodies  of  materials 
separated by a medium is given using the following expression: 

→elst
F

ij,insul =

π
ε0εrel

(

φiφj

̂R

2

ij

1 + sij
Ri +Rj

)2 s→
ij,

(2.119)  

and for two charged particles, both of them made of electrically con-
ducting materials, using the following formula: 

→elst
F

ij,cond =

π
2

ε0εrelU2
ij

̂Rij
sij

s→
ij.

(2.120) 

Here,  Ri  and  Rj  are  the  particle  radii,  εrel  represents  the  relative 
permittivity (equal to unity in a vacuum), φi  denotes the surface charge 
of the particle i, and Uij stands for the contact potential of two particles. 
For a charged particle with a radius of Ri  and a wall, both of them 
made of electrically insulating materials, the electrostatic force between 
them is defined as: 

→elst
F

iwal,insul =

2π
ε0εrel

φiφj

̂R

2

iwal s→

iwal,

(2.121)  

hϖ = h

)(

(

εrel,i (cid:0) εrel,k
εrel,i + εrel,k

∫∞

0

εrel,j (cid:0) εrel,k
εrel,j + εrel,k

)

dζ,

(2.117)  

while for a charged particle and a wall, both of them made of electrically 
conducting materials, it is calculated as: 

with the Planck constant h and the dielectric constant εrel,i  that de-
scribes the relative permittivity of the dielectric substance i along the 
imaginary frequency axis ζ. Solving Eq. (2.117) is extremely difficult, 
thus several approximations have been used to calculate the Lifshitz- 
van der Waals constant, summarized in Fan and Zhu [741].  

b)  Electrostatic force: The electrostatic force can be induced by various 

mechanisms:  
• Particle-particle and particle-wall collisions during the contact: the 
interaction  between  the  collision  partners  charges  the  particle 
surfaces.  

• Corona  charging  and  scattering:  when  a  current  flows  from  an 
electrode  with  a  high  potential  into  a  neutral  fluid,  the  fluid  is 
ionized, generating plasma areas around the electrode. The plasma 
field enables the charges to pass from the high potential electrode 
to a low potential region.  

• Thermionic emission in the high-temperature environment: This 

effect leads to the object surfaces becoming charged.  

• Other  charging  mechanisms  include  colloidal  propulsion  for 
dielectric substances in an intense electric field, also known as an 
image-charge effect [742]. 

Coulomb reports in 1785 that “the force of attraction or repulsion 
between two point charges is directly proportional to the product of the 
magnitude of each charge and indirectly proportional to the square of 
the distance between them”. Particles with opposite charges attract each 
other, while particles with identical polarity are repulsive. 

In  gas-solid  flows,  the  electrostatic  force  of  charged  particles  can 
affect the motions of the particles considerably. According to Coulomb’s 
law, the electrostatic force between two charged particles is expressed 
by: 

→elst
F

ij =

1
4πε0

qiqj
s2
ij

s→
ij,

(2.118)  

with the particle charge qi, the distance between centers of both particles 
sij , and the electric constant ε0, also known as the vacuum permittivity 
of the surrounding medium. 

The electrostatic force can be calculated using the following formula 
for two charged particles, both of them made of electrically insulating 
materials: 

→elst
F

iwal,cond = πε0εrelU2

iwal

̂Riwal
siwal

s→

iwal.

(2.122)    

3)  Adhesive forces with physical contact: 

Adhesive forces with physical contact (i.e. with material contact), in 
contrast to adhesive forces without physical contact, are characterized 
by a material connection between the particles themselves, and between 
the  particles  and  walls.  Depending  on  the  material  properties  of  the 
physical bond, one can distinguish between two types of bridges: solid 
bridges and liquid bridges, see Fig. 2.8.  

a)  Adhesive  liquid  bridge  force:  Adhesive  force  with  a  material 
connection  (e.g.  water)  forms  a  high-viscosity  binding  mechanism 
and/or capillary binding. When water is present in the gas-solid flow, 
the interface surfaces of the particles are wetted with a liquid film 
due to the adsorption process. If the distance between two particles 
falls below a critical distance, then a liquid bridge is built, resulting 
in both adhesive and cohesive forces. Adhesive force is the attractive 
force between two particles of different materials; cohesive force is 
the attractive force between two particles of the same substance. 

According to Schubert [743], gravity and buoyancy forces acting 
on the liquid bridge formed between two spherical particles with the 
same radius can be neglected for particles with diameters less than 1 
mm. The resultant adhesive force can be computed by summing up 
the  contributions  of  the  contact  and  capillary  forces.  The  contact 
force results from the surface tension effect of liquid at the contact 
line of three phases (intermolecular force between the gas, liquid, 
and  solid surfaces). The capillary force  is  induced by  the pressure 
difference between the surrounding fluid psur  and the phase bound-
ary between the liquid bridge and the particle pliq. Assuming that the 
liquid  bridge  is  biconcave  in  shape,  as  is  often  the  case  for  water 
bridges, capillary negative pressure pliq is generated inside the liquid 
of the bridge relative to the gas phase psur. The resultant adhesive 
force  between  two  spherical  particles  with  a  similar  radius  Rp, 
illustrated in Fig. 2.9 (a), can be determined using the mathematical 
formula proposed by Lian et al. [744]: 

⎛

⎞

→liq
F

ij =

⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

2πRpσsin(ξ)sin(θ + ξ)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
→con
F

ij

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

n→.

+ πR2

pΔpsin2(ξ)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
→cap
F

ij

(2.123) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093030F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.8. Adhesive forces with physical contact: (a) a solid bridge (particle-particle), (b) a liquid bridge (particle-particle), and (c) a solid bridge or liquid bridge 
(particle-wall) (reproduced from reference [50], with permission of authors). 

→
The symbol σ represents the surface tension of the liquid,  n

is the 
collision normal vector, ξ and θ refer to the fill and contact angles, 
and  l,  R1  and  R2  stand  for  the  length  and  the  radii  of  the  bridge, 
respectively. For the particle i, the adhesive liquid bridge force is in 
→
the direction of the collision normal vector  n
ij and is in the direction 

→
of  n
ji  for  the  particle  j.  To  determine  the  adhesive  liquid  bridge 
force, the liquid bridge geometry must be identified. Assuming that 
the liquid bridge geometry is toroidal in shape, the liquid bridge is 
considered to be axially symmetrical in the direction of the x coor-
dinate and rotationally symmetrical with regard to the x (cid:0) y plane. 
Lian et al. [744] reported a relative error of less than 10 % between 
the  analytical  solution  taking  into  account  the  exact  liquid  bridge 
geometry  and  the  toroidal  shape  approximation.  However,  the 
toroidal shape assumption results in a non-constant mean curvature 
of  the  liquid  bridge  surface,  leading  to  inconsistency  with  the 
Young-Laplace equation. The latter is a non-linear partial differential 
equation describing the relationship between the mean curvature of 

the  phase  boundary  (i.e.  liquid  bridge)  and  the  capillary  pressure 
difference.  An  alternative  approach  is  to  determine  the  capillary 
force  by 
the  Young-Laplace  equation  with  a 
reducing 
non-dimensional form. 

During  the  formation  of  a  liquid  bridge,  both  collision  partners 
contribute a similar amount of liquid. If the bridge is destroyed as the 
critical  length  is  exceeded,  the  liquid  is  redistributed  between  the 
two particles, based on three approaches. Mikami et al. [626] assume 
that the particles are wetted with a liquid film of constant thickness: 
if separation occurs, the total liquid from the bridge will be redis-
tributed evenly over both particles. Muguruma et al. [745] posit that 
the particles can be wetted with a liquid film of various thicknesses, 
which in turn means that each particle contributes different amounts 
of the liquid forming the bridge. If the bridge is broken, each particle 
receives  the  same  amount  of  liquid  that  it  contributed  to  the 
bridge-building. In the above two approaches, the liquid bridge ge-
ometry  is  assumed  to  be  symmetrical  (the  meridian  profile  of  the 
phase boundary between the liquid of the bridge and the surrounding 

Fig. 2.9. (a) adhesive liquid bridge force with the same contact and fill angles, and (b) adhesive liquid bridge force with various contact and fill angles (reproduced 
from references [50,626], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093031F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.10. Saturation level.  

fluid has a symmetrical geometry). This is the case when the particles 
are  spherical  in  shape,  uniform  in  diameter,  and  have  the  same 
material  properties  (i.e.  monodisperse  system  and  homogeneous 
material), resulting in both collision partners having the same con-
tact and fill angles (Fig. 2.9 (a)). Due to the symmetrical form of the 
liquid  bridge,  the separation  occurs exactly  in  the  middle  and the 
redistribution of the bridge liquid takes place equally to each particle 
without  any  liquid  transport  between  the  partners.  The  third 
approach takes into account the different contact and fill angles that 
arise between particles with various diameters or material properties 
(i.e.  monodisperse  particles  with  different  material  properties  or 
polydisperse  particles  with  identical  or  different  material  proper-
ties).  In  these  cases,  the  bridge  neck  is  not  halfway  between  the 
collision  partners;  it  is  closer  to  the  particle  with  a  larger  contact 
angle (see Fig. 2.9 (b)). During separation, more liquid is returned to 
the particle with a smaller contact angle, while the particle with a 
larger contact angle receives the remaining part. 

When  the  water  in  gas-solid flows  has  a  lower  volume fraction, 
isolated  stable  liquid  bridges  can  be  formed.  If  the  water  content 
increases,  transition  regions  filled  with  liquid  are  then  generated, 
where  the  particles  may  be  surrounded  with  water  and  thus  no 
movable, isolated liquid bridges are built (see Fig. 2.10). As a result, 
the  adhesive  liquid  bridge  force  cannot  be  determined  using  Eq. 
(2.123). A saturation level Sliq is introduced that describes the ratio of 
the water volume Vtra in transition regions to the cavity volume Vcav: 

Sliq =

Vtra
Vcav

.

(2.124)  

According to Schubert [743], the transition regions start forming 

from Sliq ≥ 0.2.  
b)  Adhesive  solid  bridge  force:  An  adhesive  force  with  a  solid 
connection results in a strong and permanent bond between the 
particles.  This  effect  can  take  place  because  of  sintering,  melt 
adhesion,  thermochemical  reaction,  or  crystallization.  In  many 
industrial applications, such as briquette or powder coating, this 
permanent bond is of high relevance. For most combustion sys-
tems, however, this effect has negative consequences on the heat 
transfer  between  the  flue  gas  and  water/steam  side  due  to  ash 
deposition on the boiler walls. 

At a sufficiently high temperature (60 % of the absolute melting 
temperature  of  the  collision  partner  material)  and  sufficient 
contact time, a stable solid bridge can be built. The formation of 
the solid bridge depends mainly on the pressure and interfacial 
energies of the collided particle. In the case of low pressure and 
particles with relatively small diameters (<10-3  mm), the inter-
facial tension is the main mechanism in forming the solid bridge. 
At higher pressure levels (more than 1 bar) and particle diameters 
greater than 10-3 mm, pressure sintering is the crucial mechanism 
[743]. 

Kuwagi et al. [746] carried out a reference study on the sin-
tering process for iron particles at atmospheric pressure. The neck 

growth of a solid bridge between two particles is based on Kuc-
zynski’s  sintering  model  [747].  The  Kuczynski  model  assumes 
that the surface diffusion (including the effect of surface rough-
ness) and the volume diffusion mechanisms influence the metal 
powder sintering. The neck growth, i.e. the neck radius xnec, is 
determined for surface diffusion as: 

xsur
nec =

(

56σa4
kBTp

)1

7

,

Dsur

cof R3

nectnec

and for the volume diffusion as: 

xvol
nec =

(

10σa3
kBTp

)1

5

.

Dvol

cof R2

nectnec

(2.125)  

(2.126)  

Here,  Rnec  refers  to the  neck  curvature radius,  kB  represents  the 
Boltzmann  constant,  Tp  denotes  the  particle  temperature,  σ  is  the 
surface tension, a stands for the lattice constant, and Dsur
cof  are 
the surface and volume diffusion coefficients. The neck growth time 
tnec corresponds to each neck and is reset to zero if the neck is broken 
during  collisions.  The  diffusion  coefficients  are  defined  using  the 
Arrhenius equation as follows: 

cof  and Dvol

Dk

cof = Ak

(cid:0)
0exp

(cid:0) Ek

/

)

,

RTp

(2.127)  

with  the  universal  gas  constant  R.  The  frequency  factor  Ak
0  (pre- 
exponential factor) and the activation energy Ek  can be determined 
by experiments. The subscript k stands for surface or volume. 

Which diffusion mechanism is selected depends on the tempera-
◦
ture of the particles. For a relatively lower temperature Tp<1050 
C, 
the  surface  diffusion  is  the  main  mechanism,  while  the  volume 
diffusion is the main mechanism for a higher temperature Tp ≥ 1050 
◦
C. The resultant adhesive solid bridge force is related to the neck 
radius and the surface or volume energy of the neck σk
nec, expressed 
for two spherical particles using the following threshold function: 

⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩

→sol
F

ij =

πx2

necσsur

nec n→ = πσsur

nec

πx2

necσvol

nec n→ = πσvol

nec

(

56σa4
kBTp

(

10σa3
kBTp

Dsur

cof R3

nectnec

Dvol

cof R2

nectnec

)2

7

)2

5

n→, case Tp < 1050∘C,

n→, case Tp ≥ 1050∘C.

(2.128)  

The adhesive solid bridge force for the particle i is in the direction of 
ij; for the particle j it is in the direction 

→
the collision normal vector  n
→
of  n

ji  (see Fig. 2.11 (a and b)). 

Surface  roughness,  which  leads  to  an  increase  in  the  solid  bond 
strength between the collided particles, is an important factor when 
estimating  the  neck  radius.  Kuwagi  et  al.  [746]  described  the 
roughness effect by introducing spherical sub-grains into the surface 
of the collision partners (see Fig. 2.11 (c)). Smooth surfaces have one 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093032F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.11. Adhesive solid bridge force: (a) particle-particle collision, (b) particle-wall collision, and (c) particle-particle collision with surface roughness (reproduced 
from reference [746], with permission of Elsevier). 

grain,  but  this  can  grow  to  multiple  sub-grains.  Taking  surface 
roughness into account, the resultant adhesive solid bridge force at a 
lower  temperature  Tp<1050 
C  between  two  spherical  particles  is 
calculated for smooth surfaces (one grain) as: 

◦

→sol
F

1 = πσsur

nec

(

56σa4
kBTp

)2

7

n→,

Dsur

cof R3

nectnec

for three sub-grains as: 

→sol
F

3 = 3πσsur

nec

(

0.056

σa4
kBTp

Dsur

cof R2

nectnec

and for nine sub-grains as: 
(

→sol
F

9 = 9πσsur

nec

0.056

Dsur

cof R3

nectnec

σa4
kBTp

(2.129)  

(2.130)  

(2.131)  

)2

7

n→,

)2

7

n→.

The neck continues growing (the neck radius and the neck growth 
time are accumulated) when the absolute value of the contact force 
in the normal or tangential direction is smaller than the sum of the 
neck cross-sectional areas at all micro-contact points An
nec. The neck is 
broken if the condition: 
⃒
→n
⃒
⃒ F

⃒
⃒
⃒ ≥ σsur
nec

An
nec,

∑n

(2.132)  

con

is  met.  Here,  the  index  n  represents  the  number  of  micro-contact 
points. 

Based  on  the  model  given  by  Kuwagi  (Kuwagi  et  al.  2000),  the 
adhesive solid bridge force can be computed for monodisperse sys-
tems with particles of the same materials. In real systems, e.g. flu-
idized  beds,  calculating  this  force  is  more  complicated  due  to  the 
wide  particle  size  distribution  and  the  inhomogeneity  in  material 
composition (i.e. diverse surface and volume diffusion coefficients). 
These particles may also react to each other or the surrounding gas, 
resulting in particles with a wide range of compositions. For poly-
disperse  systems  with  particles  of  different  materials,  additional 
theoretical and numerical works are needed to calculate the adhesive 
solid bridge force. 

2.3.2. Moment of force balance 

A particle can rotate when the particle moves in an anisotropic flow 
field with a velocity gradient (e.g. a shear flow) or collides with other 

i  acting on the particle i is 
partners. The resultant moment of force  T
illustrated  in  Fig.  2.12  and  can  be  expressed  using  the  following 
equation: 

→res

→res
T

i =

→
M
f →p,i
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Fluid(cid:0) Particle interaction

+

→t,con
→r,con
M
M
ij⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
ij⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Moment of tangential contact force
Moment of friction force
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Moment of short(cid:0) range forces

+

,

n=1

or: 
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

con

⃒
⃒
⃒ ≥ tacc
nec

∑n

n=1

An
nec,

with the angular velocity  ω→
time step tp. 

p, the moment of inertia Ip, and the particle 

(2.133)  

(2.134)  

Fig. 2.12. The resultant moment of force acting on the particle: (a) moment of force due to gas-particle interaction, and (b) moment of force due to short-range forces 
between particles (reproduced from reference [50], with permission of authors). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093033F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

2.3.2.1. Moment of force due to gas-particle interaction. The moment of 
force  due  to  gas-particle  interaction  depends  greatly  on  the  relative 
angular velocity between the two phases ω→
rel and is calculated using the 
formula proposed by Rubinow and Keller [748] for lower particle Rey-
nolds numbers: 
→
p ω→
M

f →p,i = πμf d3

case Rep ≤ 1,

(2.135)  

rel,

and for higher particle Reynolds numbers using the formula proposed by 
Sommerfeld [733] based on the results obtained by Dennis [749]: 

→
M

f →p,i =

1
64

ρCRd5
p

⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→

rel

⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→

rel,

case Rep > 1,

(2.136)  

friction, also known as the moment of force due to asymmetrical normal 
traction distribution.  

a)  Tangential moment of force 

The resultant tangential moment of force acting on the particle i is 
determined by multiplying the particle radius Ri with the tangential 
contact forces of all collision partners N (i.e. particles and walls) that 
are in contact with the particle i: 

→t,con
M

ik =

∑
k=N

k=1
k∕=i

→
Ri F
ik

t,con × n→

ik,

(2.139)    

with  the  rotation  coefficient  CR,  determined  with  the  following  step 
function: 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

+

,

16π
ReR
6.45
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
ReR
6.8
√ ,
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ReR
0.058
√ ,
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ReR
0.397
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√ ,
ReR

20

5

case 0 < ReR < 101,

32.1
ReR

,

case 101 ≤ ReR < 103,

case 103 ≤ ReR < 4⋅104,

(2.137)  

case 4⋅104 ≤ ReR < 4⋅105,

case 4⋅105 ≤ ReR < 107,

CR =

and the rotating Reynolds number: 

⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→

rel

⃒
⃒
⃒

ReR =

0.25ρf d2
p
μf

.

(2.138) 

According  to  Eq.  (2.137),  the  rotation  coefficient  increases  as  the 
rotating  Reynolds  number  decreases.  Therefore,  the  moment  of  force 
due  to  gas-particle  interaction  is  of  relevance  even  at  lower  relative 
angular velocities between the gas and solid phase. 

b)  Moment of force due to asymmetrical normal traction distribution 

The rolling resistance between two collision partners (particle and 
particle or particle and wall) induces what is known as the moment 
of force due to the asymmetrical normal traction distribution. If the 
collision partners are made of rigid material and the contact area is 
considered to be a point or has a relative small penetration depth, 
then the normal traction distribution is symmetrical and the moment 
of  force  due  to  asymmetrical  normal  traction  distribution  is  dis-
regarded.  For  inelastic  collision  partners,  the  normal  traction  dis-
tribution is asymmetrical, producing higher traction on the front half 
of the contact area than the rear half. This is the case, for example, 
during the formation of a shear band, heaping, and the movement of 
a  single  particle  on  a  plane  [736].  In  contrast  to  the  tangential 
moment of force, calculating the moment of force due to the asym-
metrical normal traction distribution still presents a major challenge 
and  remains  an  unsolved  research  issue  due  to  the  complexity  of 
defining the asymmetrical normal traction distribution. In the liter-
ature,  there  is  no  universal  model:  many  approaches  have  been 
suggested, as summarized below:  

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

→r,con
M

ik =

k=1
k∕=i

∑
k=N

k=1
k∕=i

∑
k=N

k=1
k∕=i

⃒
→n,con
⃒
⃒ F
ik

⃒
⃒
⃒ w→n
ik,

μr

∑
k=N

k=1
k∕=i

(

∑
k=N

(cid:0) kr φ→

ik,rel (cid:0) ηr

(Beer & Johnston, 1967),

)

,

d φ→
dtP

ik,rel

(Iwashita et al., 1998)/(Iwashita et al., 2000),

⃒
⃒
→n,con
⃒
⃒ F
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→n

ik

⃒
⃒
⃒ w→n
ik,

kR

(Brilliantov et al., 1998),

⎡

(cid:0) min

⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

⃒
→n,con
⃒
⃒ F
ik

⃒
⃒
⃒;

μr

⃒
→n,con
⃒
⃒ F
ik

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→n
⃒

ik

⃒
⃒
⃒

kR

⎤

⎥
⎥
w→n
ik,
⎥
⎦

(Zhou et al., 1999)/(Zhu et al., 2002),

(2.140)   

2.3.2.2. Moment of force due to short-range forces between particles. The 
moment of force due to the short-range forces between particles (i.e. the 
inter-particle moment of force) is made up of two elements, namely the 
tangential  moment  of  force  and  the  moment  of  force  due  to  rolling 

with the following material properties: the rolling friction coefficient 
μr, the rotational stiffness coefficient kR, the rolling stiffness constant 
kr, and the rolling damping constant ηr. The symbol  φ→
ik,rel  stands for 
ik  and | ω→n
the relative angular displacement, while  w→n
| represent the 

ik

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093034F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

unit  vector  of  the  component  of  relative  angular  velocity  in  the 
contact area and its absolute value, given as: 

⃒
⃒
⃒ ω→n

ik

⃒
⃒
⃒ =

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(
Ri ω→

i + Rk ω→

k

)

× n→

ik

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒.

(2.141)   

The significant difference between these approaches is related to the 
relative angular velocity. The model proposed by Beer and Johnston 
[750] does not take into account the relative angular velocity, while 
the models developed by Iwashita et al. [751,752] and Brilliantov 
et  al.  [753]  depend  on  the  relative  angular  velocity.  Employing  a 
minimum function, Zhou et al. and Zhu et al. [754,755] were able to 
combine the latter approaches to create a dynamic model. 

2.3.3. Energy balance 

The  change  in  the  temperature  of  the  particle  i  (Term  1)  can  be 
determined under the assumption of a spatially uniform particle tem-
perature using the following formula: 

=

dTp,i
mp,icp,i
dtp
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 1

∑k=N

qcond
ij
i=1
⏟̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 2 (conduction)

+

qconv
f →p,i
⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
Term 3 (convection)

+

qrad
f →p,i
⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
Term 4 (radiation)

+

qhet,rac
i⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Term 5 (heterogeneous reaction)

+ qp,i⏟⏞⏞⏟

.

Term 6

(2.142) 

Here, mp,i stands for the mass of the particle i, cp,i is the specific heat 
capacity of the solid material that the particle i is made of, and tp is the 
particle time step. In Eq. (2.142), Term 2 describes the rate of the heat 
flow due to conduction between the particle i and the adjacent collision 
partners N (the number of particles including walls that are in contact 
with the particle i), Term 3 represents the rate of the heat flow due to 
convection  between  the  particle  i  and  the  surrounding  fluid,  Term  4 
denotes the rate of the heat flow due to radiation, Term 5 stands for the 
released/consumed rate of the heat flow due to chemical reactions and 
Source Term 6 takes into account the rate of the heat flow due to other 
mechanisms (e.g. induction heating). 

The  temperature  distribution  inside  the  particle  (inner  thermal 
resistance) is not taken into consideration in Eq. (2.142), as is the case in 
many  applications.  This  assumption  can  be  verified  using  the  Biot 
number, defined as the ratio of the convective heat transfer coefficient to 
the thermal conductivity within a particle [756]: 

Bi =

(cid:0)

αf →p,i
/
dp,i
λp,i

).

(2.143) 

Here, λp,i  is the thermal conductivity of the solid material that the 
particle i is made of and αf → p,  i  stands for the heat transfer coefficient 
between  the  surface  of  the  particle  i  and  the  surrounding  fluid.  For 
smaller Biot numbers (Bi < 0.1), the redistribution of thermal energy 
within the particle takes place at a faster rate than the convective heat 
transfer  through  the  particle  surface.  Accordingly,  the  particle’s  tem-
perature is nearly-isothermal (i.e. the particle’s core and surface tem-
peratures are approximately the same). Higher Biot numbers indicate 
that  the  rate  of  heat  transfer  via  convection  occurs  faster  than  the 
redistribution of thermal energy inside the particle. Therefore, a tem-
perature  gradient  may  exist  within  the  particle  (i.e.  the  particle  may 
have  different  temperatures  at  its  core  and  surface).  In  this  case,  the 
temperature distribution inside the particle should be part of the heat 
transfer  calculation.  Alobaid  [50]  proposed  the  following  differential 
conservation equation to describe the temperature as a function of the 
particle radius Rp: 

∂Tp,i
mp,icp,i
∂tp
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 1

+ρf cp,f

(cid:0)

∂

)

(cid:0)

urTP,i
∂r

mp,i
ρp,i

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 2

4πRp,i
3

∂
∂r

(

λp,iR2
p,i

∂Tp,i
∂r

)

(cid:0)
∂

+ρp,icp,i

)

=

Tp,iVP,i
∂tp

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 3

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 4

∑k=N

qcond
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

i=1
r=Rp
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 5 (conduction)

⃒
⃒
+ qconv
⃒
f →p,i
r=Rp
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 6 (convection)

+ qrad

⃒
⃒
⃒
r=Rp
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 7 (radiation)

f →p,i

+

⃒
⃒
qhet,rac
i
r=Rp
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 8 (heterogeneous reaction)

+qp,i

⃒
⃒

.

r=Rp

(2.144) 

Here, Terms 1 to 4 describe the temperature change of the particle i, 
the convective heat transport inside the particle due to the gas diffusion 
with a velocity of ur, the heat transfer inside the particle due to heat 
conduction, and the temperature change of the due particle due to the 
change in the particle volume Vp,i, respectively. However, for simplifi-
cation purposes, Term 2 and Term 4 can be neglected. Terms 5 to 9 are 
similar, as shown in Eq. (2.142). More details regarding the calculation 
of these terms can be found in the Heat transfer section. 

2.4. Collision models 

To obtain accurate results for gas-solid flows with Stokes numbers 
greater than unity, it is crucial to take into account particle-particle and 
particle-wall interactions (i.e. short-range particle-particle and particle- 
wall  forces,  such  as  the  contact  and  adhesive  forces).  Calculating  the 
short-range forces requires a specific description of the collision process, 
which  is  divided  into  collision  detection  and  collision treatment.  The 
stochastic or deterministic collision model can only be applied in the 
context of the discrete-particle method (DPM) to detect particle-particle 
and particle-wall collisions (see Fig. 2.2), while the hard-sphere or soft- 
sphere  model  is  used  for  the  collision  treatment.  In  contrast  to  the 
discrete-particle models, there is no need for a stochastic or determin-
istic collision detection mechanism in the hybrid models (MP-PIC and 
DDPM). The collision forces in the hybrid models are calculated only 
based  on  the  Eulerian  solid  stress  tensor  of  the  cell,  where  the 
Lagrangian particle is located. 

2.4.1. Collision detection models 

2.4.1.1. Stochastic collision detection models. Stochastic collision models 
are often grouped under Monte Carlo methods. O’Rourke [757] carried 
out the earliest research in this field, developing a detection model for 
particle-particle and particle-wall collisions that is based on a stochastic 
method. In the model proposed by O’Rourke, the collision probability is 
computed for each pair of particles in the grid cell using a Poisson dis-
tribution. The computation cost of the O’Rourke model is proportional 
to the square of the particle number. A linear dependence between the 
computation cost and the particle number has been reached by Oesterl´e 
et al. [758]. The idea behind Oesterl´e’s model is that the trajectories of 
particles are sequentially determined. Here, “sequentially”  means that 
the  motion  of  each  particle  is  uninfluenced  by  the  presence  of  the 
remaining particles. However, information on other particles should be 
obtained to enable calculations to be made on the collision between the 
observed particle and its partners. For this purpose, mean values and 
standard deviations of certain variables - such as the particle velocity 
and  the  particle  position  -  are  calculated  in  each  grid  cell.  The  local 
statistical data serves as a basis for generating virtual collision partners, 
whose properties are determined by the local average values of particles 
neighboring the investigated particle. The probability of a collision be-
tween virtual particles and a real particle can now be measured using 
random  numbers.  When a  collision event  takes  place,  the  subsequent 
collision treatment is then performed using a hard-sphere model, where 
the  physical  properties  of  the  real  particle  after  the  collision  are 
computed based on the real and virtual particle properties before the 
collision (see the Hard-sphere model and Particle time step sections). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093035F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Finally, the virtual particle is eliminated and the obtained velocity of the 
investigated particle is stored in the memory. If the collision event does 
not occur, the velocity of the real particle remains unaltered. One major 
disadvantage of the Oesterl´e collision model was that the kinetic energy 
conservation could not be achieved even during completely elastic col-
lisions.  Sommerfeld  [733]  extended  the  Oesterl´e  model  to  take  into 
account the local velocity fluctuations of the neighboring particles using 
additional partial correlations. Despite this extension, the model weak-
ness cannot be eliminated, as described by Hußmann [759]. The modi-
fied  Babovsky-Nanbu  model  [760,761],  in  contrast  to  the  Oesterl´e 
model, ensures that kinetic energy is conserved and requires a compu-
tational effort that is linearly proportional to the number of particles. In 
the  literature,  there  is  little  research  into  how  the  discrete-particle 
method  can  be  applied  to  gas-solid  flows  with  a  stochastic  collision 
detection  model.  Therefore,  significant  research  is  still  required  to 
develop  a  computationally  inexpensive  stochastic  discrete-particle 
model that can be used for large-scale applications. 

2.4.1.2. Deterministic  collision  detection  models. Deterministic collision 
models  detect  every  single  particle  for  possible  collision  with  other 
particles  and  walls.  Unlike  stochastic  collision  models,  which  assume 
that the particle time step is constant, deterministic collision models can 
use constant or adaptive particle time steps (see Fig. 2.2). The particle 
time step in the adaptive deterministic collision model is varied during 
the  simulation.  No  collision  takes  place  in  the  period  between  t  and 
t + ΔtP, but at the time t + ΔtP, one particle only collides with another 
particle or a wall. The size of the particle time step is defined by iden-
tifying the intersection points between the particle trajectories and the 
wall,  as  explained  in  the  Particle  time  step  section.  This  model  was 
presented  first  by  Hoomans  [83]  as  an  event-oriented  method.  In 
event-oriented  methods,  collision  detection  involves  the  following 
mathematical  relationship.  If  the  collision  partners  move  away  from 
each other rather than colliding, then the scalar product of the relative 
→
→
ij  = r
velocity vector  u
i 
(cid:0)
j has a positive value (see Fig. 2.13). A collision occurs only when the 
collision partners move toward each other, i.e. the scalar product of the 
relative velocity vector and the relative position vector has a negative 
value  (see  Fig.  2.14).  The  particle  properties  after  the  collision  are 
determined with the hard-sphere model, as explained in the Hard-sphere 
model section. 

→
j  and the relative position vector  r

→
ij = u

→
i (cid:0) u

→
r

The computation effort of the deterministic collision detection model 
with a variable particle time step is quadratic to the number of particles. 
However, it can be efficiently applied to dilute fluid-solid flows, where 
the mean free path of particles is relatively large, resulting in coarser 

particle time steps. In dense fluid-solid flows, the advantage in terms of 
efficiency cannot be achieved because of the smaller mean free paths, 
resulting  in  relatively  smaller  particle  time  steps.  According  to  G¨otz 
[107], the parallel computing for the event-oriented method may result 
in a loss of efficiency due to the asynchronous parallel load between the 
computer  nodes.  In  the  context  of  the  event-oriented  method,  other 
short-range  forces  such  as  adhesive  forces  can  be  taken  into 
consideration. 

In the deterministic collision detection model with a constant par-
ticle time step, the particles can overlap each other or penetrate the wall 
(see Fig. 2.15). Depending on the penetration depth δ, the contact force 
is  modeled  using  a  spring-damper-slider  system.  This  model  was  first 
introduced by Cundall and Strack [762] and is often referred to in the 
literature as the discrete element method (DEM). Due to the penetration 
behavior of both collision partners (see Fig. 2.16 (a and b)), this model is 
also known as the soft-sphere model. Although the DEM model origi-
nally dates back to Cundall and Strack, Tsuji et al. [763,764] are often 
cited since they have successfully applied the DEM model to simulate the 
hydrodynamic  behavior  of  dense  gas-solid  flows  in  lab-scale  fluid-
ized-bed systems. The most important advantage of the DEM model is 
that multiple particle-particle and particle-wall collisions can be calcu-
lated simultaneously (see Fig. 2.16 c). In addition to contact forces, other 
short-range forces such as adhesive forces can be taken into consider-
ation in the context of the DEM model. To do so, it is first necessary to 
detect the particle-particle and particle-wall collisions using a specific 
criterion. For example, the contact criterion is that the distance between 
the center points of two particles or the distance between the particle 
center point and the wall surface should be smaller than the sum of both 
radii or smaller than the particle radius, respectively. Another example 
is the criterion of liquid bridge formation. Here, the distance between 
the  center  points  of  two  particles  has  to  be  smaller  than  the  critical 
distance for liquid bridge formation. 

A hybrid collision scheme that combines the benefits of hard-sphere 
and  soft-sphere  models  was  suggested  by  the  group  of  Prof.  Kuipers 
[765].  Larger  part  of  the  collisions  is  handled  binary,  while  the 
remainder of the collisions involving more than two particles is modeled 
with the soft-sphere model. 

In the discrete-particle method, collision detection is a crucial pro-
cess to calculate the short-range surface forces (e.g. contact force, van 
der Waals force, electrostatic force, solid and liquid bridge forces). In 
one-dimensional cases, the collision partner is on the left or the right of 
the tested particle and the neighboring particles are always the same. In 
two- or three-dimensional cases, all particles in the system are eligible 
collision  candidates  for  the  tested  particle.  The  literature  contains 

Fig. 2.13. Particle-particle collision is not possible in the event-oriented method with an adaptive particle time step.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093036F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.14. Particle-particle collision is possible in the event-oriented method with an adaptive particle time step.  

Fig. 2.15. Particle-particle collision in the deterministic collision detection model with a constant particle time step.  

different methods for detecting particle-particle and particle-wall colli-
sions, described below.  

I.  Standard method 

The standard method is based on a simple principle. Here, the tested 
particle is examined for possible collisions with all particles and walls 
regardless of their relative positions in the computational domain. Even 

if  their  collision  probability  is  zero,  particles  are  investigated  for 
possible  collision  with  the  tested  particle  (see  Fig.  2.17  (a)).  The 
computational cost of the standard method is approximately quadratic 
to  the  number  of  particles.  The  complexity  of  programming  and 
implementing this method is comparatively low, but the computational 
effort for detecting collisions is enormous even if there is a low solid 
content in the gas phase. 

Fig.  2.16. Collision  occurrence  in  the  DEM  model:  (a)  particle-particle  collision,  (b)  particle-wall  collision,  and  (c)  particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions 
(adapted from [50], with permission of authors). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093037F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.17. Collision detection process applying (a) the standard method, (b) the Verlet algorithm, and (c) the search-grid method.  

II.  Neighborhood methods 

Compared to the standard method, neighborhood methods signifi-
cantly  improve  the  efficiency  of  collision  detection.  Here,  collision 
detection consists of two consecutive steps: first searching for possible 
collision  partners,  then  precisely  detecting  any  collision  between  the 
tested particle and its potential candidates selected from the first step. 
The well-known neighborhood methods used in gas-solid flows are the 
Verlet algorithm [766] and the search-grid method [767].  

a)  Verlet algorithm: In this method, a collision region (circle in 2D cases 
and sphere in 3D cases) is generated for each particle (see Fig. 2.17 
(b)). The radius of the collision region Ri,max is selected based on the 
fluid  time  step,  the  maximum  particle  velocity,  and  the  particle 
radius of the tested particle and its adjacent particles, described by 
Deen et al. [12] as: 
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→max
⃒
p + 2

i = Ri + Rmax
Rmax

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒Δtf ,

(2.145)  

p

with: 

Rmax
p = max(Ri) ∀i ∈ A,

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→max
⃒

p

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ = max(| ui

→|) ∀i ∈ A.

(2.146)  

(2.147)  

i

The list A includes all the particles and walls in the computational 
domain.  The  distances  between  the  tested  particle  i  and  all  the 
collision partners are then calculated and finally compared with the 
radius Rmax
. Each particle or wall that is located within the collision 
region of the particle i is added to the particle neighbor list (Verlet 
list). After the neighbor lists of all particles including walls have been 
generated,  precise  collision  detection  is  carried  out.  Each  tested 
particle is only examined for a possible collision with the potential 
collision partners in the Verlet list. At first glance, the computational 
effort  of  the  Verlet  method  is  a  quadratic  function  of  the  particle 
number, resulting from the time required to generate the neighbor 
lists. In practice, the neighbor lists are not updated for each time step, 
but only when a particle leaves the collision region. The particle’s 
neighbor  list  i  is  updated  by  comparing  the  distance  between  the 
particle i and the particles in its neighbor list with the radius Rmax
. 
When one or more particles leave the Verlet list of the particle i, the 
list is then updated. For dilute gas-solid flows, the neighbor lists can 
be updated from time to time, while for dense gas-solid flows this no 
longer offers an advantage in terms of efficiency as the neighbor lists 
are frequently updated.  

i

b)  Search-grid  method:  The  search-grid  method,  in  contrast  to  the 
Verlet  method,  can  be  used  for  dilute  and  dense  gas-solid  flows 
without  any  loss  of  efficiency.  However,  it  requires  a  virtual 
orthogonal grid that is independent of the computational grid. The 
computational  domain  in  this  method  is  divided  into  finite  cells, 
including indexed particles. A particle can come into contact only 
with particles in its cell or with those in its directly neighboring cells. 
In Fig. 2.17 (c), the red particle in cell 12 may come in contact with 
the white and grey particles in cells 12, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 16, 17, and 18, 
but not with the black particles in the remaining cells. The compu-
tational  effort  of  the  search-grid  method  is  a  function  of  the  total 
number of particles N in the computational domain and the particle 
numbers in the search-grid cell Nsgc, expressed by: 
⎤

⎡

Ttot = N

⎢
⎣ Tloc⏟⏞⏞⏟

Part 1

⎥
⎦.

+ D⋅NsgcTcol
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Part 2

(2.148)  

The first part describes the computing time required for the allo-
cation  of  each  particle  in  the  search  cells,  while  the  second  part 
identifies the computing time required to detect collisions between 
the tested particle and its potential collision partners. The constant D 
stands for the dimension of the computational domain (for the 1D 
case, it has the value 3 and for 2D and 3D cases it has the values 9 and 
27).  According  to  G¨otz  2006  [107],  the  computing  time  Tloc  for 
allocating the particles in the orthogonal cells is much smaller than 
the time required to detect collisions Tcol. The proper selection of the 
search-grid cell size (Δxsg,Δysg) is of crucial importance to ensure that 
the method is efficient and accurate. In an ideal case, the computa-
tional effort can be almost proportional to the number of particles. 
This can take place for a monodisperse system with a uniform par-
ticle distribution, where the selected size of the search-grid cell is 
equal  to  the  particle  diameter.  Accordingly,  Eq.  (2.148)  can  be 
simplified to: 

⎛

Ttot = N

⎜
⎝ Tloc⏟⏞⏞⏟

+ D⋅Nsgc⏟⏞⏞⏟

Tcol

very small≈0

=1

⎞

⎟
⎠ ≈ N

⎛

⎞

⎠ ∼ N.

⎝D⋅Tcol
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Constant

(2.149)  

A  further  decrease  in  the  search-grid  size  below  the  particle 
diameter leads on the one hand to a reduction in the computing time 
but on the other hand to undetected contact between the particles. In 
Fig. 2.18 (a), one can see that the contact between the particle i and 
particle j is not detected. The centers of mass of particle i and particle 
j are located in the search-grid cells 7 and 5, respectively. According 
to the algorithm method, the particle i can only come into contact 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093038F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.18. Search-grid method: (a) undetected collisions between particles (search-grid size smaller than particle diameter), and (b) determination of the search-grid 
cell size in polydisperse systems. 

with particles, whose centers of mass are located in the search-grid 
cells  2,  3,  4,  6,  8,  10,  11,  and  12,  but  not  with  particles,  whose 
centers of mass are located in the search-grid cells 5, 1 and 13. The 
fact that efficiency and accuracy depend on the particle diameter is a 
major weakness of the search-grid method. For polydisperse systems 
with a broad range of particle size distributions, the selection of the 
search-grid size must be related to the largest particle in the system 
(see Fig. 2.18 (b)). As a result, the number of particles in each search 
cell increases, and the computational effort rises sharply.  

III.  Bounding-boxes method 

In this method, every particle is enclosed within a cuboid; its edges 
are aligned parallel to the coordinate axes [768,769]. A particle list is 
then  built  for  each  axis,  including  the  vertices  of  all  cuboids.  In  the 
bounding-boxes method, collision detection consists of two consecutive 
steps, as in the neighborhood method. A possible collision between two 
particles  takes  place  when  their  cuboid  vertices  overlap  in  x-,  y-  and 
z-directions. If this is the case, an exact detection must be performed to 
specify whether the surfaces of the colliding partners come into contact 
or not. In Fig. 2.19 (a), a collision is detected between cuboids 6 and 7, 
but in fact, there is no collision at the surface level. The efficiency of the 
bounding-boxes method is not related to the particle size distribution 
since each particle is enclosed within a suitable cuboid independent of 
its geometry or shape. Furthermore, the computational effort required to 
examine possible collisions between non-spherical particles is the same 
as for spherical particles, quadratic to the particle number. However, the 
computational effort can be reduced significantly using an incremental 
sort and update algorithm; a special sort and insertion method proposed 
by Schinner [770]. For each time step, the cuboid vertices are sorted in 
the  particle  lists  (x-,  y-  and  z-directions)  in  ascending  order.  The 
required time for the sorting processes is of the order of O(Nlog N) per 
coordinate list. Similarly to neighborhood methods and dilute gas-solid 
flows, the computational effort of the bounding-boxes algorithm with 
the sorting method exhibits an approximately linear dependence on the 
particle number. In dense granular flows and due to the small distances 
between the vertices, a significant increase in the computational effort 
may occur. In the worst-case scenario, the order of the vertices can be 
completely reversed between two time steps (see Fig. 2.19 (b)). Even 
with low particle velocities and smaller particle time steps, the sorted 
lists can be quite different within two successive time steps, resulting in 
fluctuations in the computational effort during the simulation. 

2.4.2. Collision treatment models 

Within  the  framework  of  the  discrete-particle  model,  the  detected 
collisions between  the  particles themselves  and  between  the particles 
and  walls  (e.g.  stochastic  or  deterministic  collision  detection  models) 
can  be  treated  using  either  the  hard-sphere  model  or  the  soft-sphere 

model (see Fig. 2.2). If the particle-particle and particle-wall collisions 
are  detected  stochastically,  with  a  constant  particle  time  step,  or 
deterministically, with an adaptive particle time step, the hard-sphere 
model  is  applied  to  model  the  collision  treatment.  The  soft-sphere 
model  is  used  when  particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  are 
detected  deterministically  with  a  constant  particle  time  step.  In  the 
following sections, both the hard- and soft-sphere models are explained 
in detail. 

2.4.2.1. Hard-sphere  model. Within the framework of  the hard-sphere 
model,  only  binary  instantaneous  collisions  are  modeled,  while  other 
forces acting on the colliding particles during the collision are not taken 
into  consideration.  The  collision  partners  are  assumed  to  be  rigid 
spheres  (or  ideal  spheres)  and  thus  the  deformation  of  the  particles 
during the impact is neglected [739]. As shown in Fig. 2.20, the contact 
between the collision partners occurs at a certain point. This assumption 
also implies that the distance between the centers of mass of the collision 
partners remains constant during the collision and is equal to the sum of 
the  radii  of  the  colliding  particles.  In  the  context  of  the  hard-sphere 
model, the physical properties  of particles after the collision (e.g. ve-
locity, position, and temperature) are computed using the properties of 
particles before the collision based on momentum and energy balances. 
Campbell et al. [771] developed the first hard-sphere model, which has 
since been successfully used to investigate a variety of complex granular 
systems.  In  the  following,  the  hard-sphere  model  employed  by  Som-
merfeld and Hoomans [83,733] will be briefly described. 

By applying Newton’s second and third laws, the conservation of the 
translational and angular momentum for two colliding particles can be 
respectively written as: 

)

)

)

(

u→

i (cid:0) u→(0)

i

mi

mj

(

u→
(
ω→

Ii
(

j (cid:0) u→(0)

j

i (cid:0) ω→(0)
)

i

Ij

ω→

j (cid:0) ω→(0)

j

ijdtp,

∫

→
F

ijdtp,

=

= (cid:0)

∫

∫

=

=

∫

Ri

Rj

→
F
(
n→
(
n→

→
ij × F
ij

→
ij × F
ij

)

dtp,

)

dtp.

(2.150) 

i, ω→

→
i, u

j) and ( ω→

→
Hereinafter, the variables ( u

j) represent the trans-
lational  and  the  angular  velocities  of  collision  partners  (i,  j)  and  the 
index (0) stands for the situation before the collision. The normal unit 
→
ij, which is directed from the center of the particle j to the center 
vector  n
of the particle i, is given by: 
r→
r→

(2.151) 

ij =

n→

j

r→
i (cid:0)
⃒
⃒
⃒ r→
⃒
i (cid:0)

⃒
.
⃒
⃒
⃒

j

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093039F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.19. Bounding-boxes method: (a) collision detection process in the bounding-boxes algorithm with the sorting method, and (b) order of sorted vertices between 
successive time steps (reproduced from reference [50], with permission of authors). 

on the properties of collision partners before the collision for the par-
ticles i and j as follows: 

The moments of inertia of the particles (Ii,Ij) are expressed as: 

Ii = 2
Ij = 2

5miRi
5mjRj

2,
2.

(2.152) 

→
In Eq. (2.150), the integral of the impulsive forces  F

ij  acting on the 

collision pair during the impact can be expressed as: 

→
F

ijdtp,

(2.153)  

/
/

∫

→
f

ij =

u→

i = u→(0)

i +

u→

j = u→(0)

j

(cid:0)

→
where  the  vector  f
ij  stands  for  the  total  repulsive  impulse  vector 
pushing the colliding particles apart from each other after the collision. 
When Eq. (2.153) is substituted into Eq. (2.150), the translational and 
angular velocities of particles after the collision can be determined based 

ω→

i = ω→(0)

i +

ω→

j = ω→(0)

j +

→
f
ij
mi
→
f
ji
mj

,

,

Ri n→

→
ij × f
ij
Ii

Rj n→

→
ij × f
ij
Ij

,

.

(2.154)  

(2.155) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093040F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.20. Hard-sphere model: (a) particle-particle, and (b) particle-wall collision (reproduced from references [83] [50], with permission of authors).  

At the contact point of the two colliding particles (see Fig. 2.20), the 
relative  velocity  can  be  defined  using  the  following  mathematical 
relationship: 

u→(0)

ij =

(
u→(0)

i

(cid:0) u→(0)

j

)

(

+

Ri ω→(0)

i + Rj ω→(0)

j

)

× n→
ij,

(2.156)  

→
with the position vectors ( r
mj) of the collision partners (i and j). 

→
i, r

→
The total impulse vector  f

divided into a normal  f

ij  and a tangential  f

ij  component, respectively, 

ij  appearing in Eqs. (2.154) and (2.155) is 

→n

→t

j), the radii (Ri, Rj), and the masses (mi, 

However,  in  Eq.  (2.159),  the  velocities  after  the  collision  are  still 
unknown. Therefore, the post-collision relative motion of the colliding 
particles  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  that  before  the  collision, 
employing the so-called normal restitution coefficient, denoted by en, as 
follows: 
u→
ij⋅ n→
ij ⋅ n→
u→(0)

0 ≤ en ≤ 1.

(2.161) 

en = (cid:0)

ij

ij

By  inserting  Eq.  (2.154)  and  Eq.  (2.161)  into  Eq.  (2.159),  the 
→n
ij⋅ 

magnitude of the normal component of the impulse vector f n,rep
→
n

ij  can be expressed as follows: 

= f

ij

(2.157)  

f n,rep
ij = (cid:0) (1 + en) ̂mij

[

u→(0)

ij ⋅ n→

ij

]

.

(2.162) 

as follows: 

→
f

→n

→t
ij + f

ij = f

ij = f n,rep

⋅ n→
ij
ij
⏟̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Normal component

+

→
f t
ij⋅ t
ij
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Tangential components

,

→
where  t
the relative velocity before the collision and the normal unit vector: 

ij  stands for the tangential unit vector and is defined based on 

→
t

ij =

ij

u→(0)
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→(0)
⃒

ij

(cid:0) n→

ij

(cid:0) n→

ij

(
u→(0)
(
u→(0)

ij ⋅ n→

ij

ij ⋅ n→

ij

)

.

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(2.158) 

ij 

ij 

from the cohesive impulse f n,coh

Note  that  the  second  index  rep  for  the  magnitude  of  the  normal 
component in relation (2.157) is used to distinguish the repulsive im-
pulse f n,rep
for particle agglomeration, as 
explained next. The determination of the total repulsive impulse vector 
→
f
ij requires an exact physical description of binary collisions. For a large 
number of collisions, as is the case in lab-scale fluidized-bed simulations, 
a  large  number  of  collisions  should  be  taken  into  account  (approxi-
mately  106  and  109  collisions  per  time  step  [772]),  which  currently 
exceeds the technical feasibility of high-performance clusters. However, 
as explained below, the physical description of binary collisions can be 
simplified using three constitutive parameters (restitution coefficient in 
the normal and tangential directions, as well as the dynamic coefficient 
of friction). 

Rearranging Eq. (2.154), the total impulse vector can be expressed as 

follows: 

→
f

ij = ̂mij

[(

u→

i (cid:0) u→

j

)

(

(cid:0)

u→(0)

i

(cid:0) u→(0)

j

)]
,

Taking the friction between the colliding particles into account, the 

→t

tangential component of the total impulse  f
ij  appearing in Eq. (2.157) 
can  be  calculated  based  on  the  collision  type,  namely  (a)  sticking 
collision, during which the collision partners stop sliding and (b) sliding 
collision,  during  which  the  colliding  particles  slide  throughout  the 
collision time [84]. A sticking collision can be identified by the no-slip 
condition based on Coulomb’s law of static friction: 
⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ f
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ≤ μst

⃒
⃒
→n
⃒
⃒ f
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

(2.163)  

where  μst  stands  for  the  coefficient  of  static  friction  for  the  particle- 
particle collisions. By analogy to the normal restitution coefficient, the 
restitution coefficient in the tangential direction is defined as: 

et = (cid:0)

→
u→
ij⋅ t
ij
→
u→(0)
ij ⋅ t
ij

0 ≤ et ≤ 1.

(2.164) 

By  combining  Eqs.  (2.164),  (2.163)  and  (2.156),  considering  the 

following mathematical relationship: 
(
→
× n→ = f
n→ × f

(
(cid:0) n→

)
⋅ n→

→)

→
f

,

(2.165)  

the tangential component of the total impulse for sticking collision can 
be expressed as: 

(2.159)  

→t
f

ij = (cid:0)

2
7

(1 + et) ̂mij

]

[
u→(0)

→
ij ⋅ t
ij

→
⋅ t

ij.

(2.166) 

where  ̂mij stands for the effective mass, also known as the reduced mass, 
which  allows  two  collided  particles  to  be  treated  as  one  using  the 
following formula: 
mimj
mi + mj

1/mi + 1

(2.160) 

)(cid:0) 1.

̂mij =

mj

=

/

(cid:0)

By substituting the above relation (2.166) into Eq. (2.163), the no- 

slip condition required to identify the collision type reads: 
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→(0)
⃒

→
ij ⋅ t
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ≤

.

7
2

μst
(1 + et)

f n,rep
ij
mij

(2.167) 

If  the  above  relation  is  not  satisfied,  a  sliding  particle-particle 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093041F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

collision  occurs.  Here,  the  tangential  component  of  the  total  impulse 
vector for a sliding collision has been found to rely on Coulomb’s law of 
dynamic friction: 

→t
f

ij = (cid:0) μdyn

⃒
⃒
→n
⃒
⃒ f
ij

⃒
⃒
→
⃒
⃒⋅ t

ij = (cid:0) μdynf n,rep

ij

→
⋅ t

ij,

(2.168)  

where μdyn stands for the coefficient of kinetic friction for inter-particle 
collisions. 

The translational and angular velocities of the collision partners for 
sticking or sliding collisions (see Table 2.6) are determined by inserting 
the  normal and  the tangential components of  the corresponding total 
impulse  vector  into  Eq.  (2.157)  and  the  resulting  relation  into  Eq. 
(2.154)  and  Eq.  (2.155).  The  new  position  and  the  new  angular 
displacement of collided particles are computed, applying Eqs. (2.73) 
and (2.74) as well as the predefined particle time step (see the Particle 
time step section). 

Taking  into  account  the  cohesive  forces  (e.g.  van  der  Waals  force 
)  during  a  particle-particle  collision  as  shown  schematically  in 

Fvan
ij
Fig.  2.21,  three  scenarios  arise  after  the  collision:  (i)  rebound,  (ii) 
agglomeration, or (iii) breakup after initial agglomeration. If a particle- 
particle  collision  occurs  (i.e.  the  first  prerequisite  is  satisfied),  the 
probability of the agglomeration of collision partners (second prereq-
uisite)  is  checked  relying  on  agglomeration  conditions  with  diverse 
levels  of  complexity  and  accuracy  (see  the  Agglomeration  models 
section). 

Broadly speaking, the three main techniques for modeling particle 
agglomeration within the framework of the hard-sphere model reported 
in  the  literature  are:  (i)  energy-based,  (ii)  force-based,  and  (iii) 
momentum-based agglomeration models (see the Agglomeration models 
section).  However,  the  momentum-based  agglomeration  model  is  the 
common  choice  for  consistency  with  the  impulse-based  hard-sphere 
model. The most advanced model of this kind, developed by Breuer and 
Almohammed [666], is briefly described here. A detailed description of 
the  derivation  of  the  momentum-based  agglomeration  models  can  be 
found in [84]. In this model, the normal component of the total impulse 

consists of two components: (i) the repulsive 

vector  f

impulse  f

→n
= f
ij
→n,rep
ij

→n,rep
ij

+ f
= f n,rep

→n,coh
ij 
→
⋅ n

ij

ij  due to the mechanical deformation given by 

Eq.  (2.162)  and  (ii)  the  cohesive  impulse  f
modeling of the magnitude of the cohesive impulse f n,coh
assumption of a constant van der Waals force Fvan
(see Fig. 2.21 (a and 
ij 
b)),  acting  throughout  the  collision  time  Δtcol  (compression  and 

is based on the 

ij.  The 

ij 

ij

→n,coh
ij

= f n,coh

→
⋅ n

Table 2.6 
The post-collision translational and angular velocities of the collision partners 
for sticking and sliding collisions.  

Collison Type 

Equations 

Sticking 

Sliding 

u→

i = u→(0)

i +

u→

j = u→(0)

j

ω→

i = ω→(0)

i

ω→

j = ω→(0)

j

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

u→

i = u→(0)

i +

u→

j = u→(0)

j

ω→

i = ω→(0)

i

ω→

j = ω→(0)

j

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

{

{

{

{

{

{

{

{

1
mi

1
mj

1
mi

1
mj

1
mi

1
mj

1
mi

1
mj

f n,rep
ij

⋅ n→

ij (cid:0)

f n,rep
ij

⋅ n→

ij (cid:0)

2
7

2
7

(1 + et) ̂mij

(1 + et) ̂mij

[

[

u→(0)

→
ij ⋅ t
ij

u→(0)

→
ij ⋅ t
ij

]

→
⋅ t
ij

]

→
⋅ t
ij

}
,

}
,

5
7Ri

5
7Rj

(1 + et) ̂mij

(1 + et) ̂mij

[

[

u→(0)

→
ij ⋅ t
ij

u→(0)

→
ij ⋅ t
ij

]
⋅

]
⋅

(
n→

→
ij × t
ij

)}

(
n→

→
ij × t
ij

)}

,

.

f n,rep
ij

f n,rep
ij

⋅ n→

ij (cid:0) μdynf n,rep

ij

⋅ n→

ij (cid:0) μdynf n,rep

ij

}
,

}
,

→
⋅ t
ij

→
⋅ t
ij

(
n→
⋅

→
ij × t
ij

)}

μdynf n,rep

ij

(
n→
⋅

→
ij × t
ij

)}

μdynf n,rep

ij

,

.

5
2Ri

5
2Rj

restitution phases). Accordingly, the magnitude of the cohesive impulse 
can  be  expressed  as  f n,coh
= Fvan
ij Δtcol.  The  no-slip  condition  used  to 
identify the collision type (i.e. sticking or sliding) is given as: 
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→(0)
⃒

→
ij ⋅ t
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ≤

(2.169) 

)

.

ij

(cid:0)

f n,rep
ij + f n,coh
mij

ij

7
2

μst
(1 + et)

Breuer and Almohammed [666] distinguished between the effect of 
the  cohesive  force  in  the  normal  direction  of  the  impact  (superscript 
asterisk) and that in the tangential direction. Therefore, the collision was 
split into a compression phase and a restitution phase. The magnitude of 
the cohesive impulse in the normal direction was modeled as follows: 

∫Δtcom

f n,coh*
ij

=

Fvan

ij dt

+

∫Δtcom+Δtres

(

)

(cid:0) Fvan
ij

dt

,

0
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Compression phase

Δtcom

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Restitution phase

(2.170)  

where Δtcom and Δtres stand for the time intervals of the compression and 
the  restitution  phases,  respectively.  Assuming  that  the  van  der  Waals 
force acts constantly during both impact phases, the above expression 
for the normal collision direction can be written as: 

f n,coh*
ij

= (cid:0)

(
1
6

)1/5
9
4

⎧
⎪⎨

⎪⎩

̂E

2

ij

[(

u→(0)

i

1/5

⎫
⎪⎬
]
⎪⎭

̂R

H
s2
ij

̂m2
ij
(cid:0) u→(0)

j

)
⋅ n→

ij

4/5

ij Δ̂t *

col,

(2.171)  

and that for the tangential collision direction is given by: 

f n,coh
ij

= (cid:0)

(
1
6

)1/5
9
4

⎧
⎪⎨

⎪⎩

̂E

2

ij

[(

u→(0)

i

1/5

⎫
⎪⎬
]
⎪⎭

H
s2
ij

̂m2
ij
(cid:0) u→(0)

j

)

⋅ n→

ij

̂R

4/5
ij Δ̂tcol,

(2.172)  

(cid:0)

*
col

→
)⋅ n

where the minimum distance between the particles during the collision 
(cid:0) 10 m. As depicted in Fig. 2.21 (a), the collision takes place 
is sij = 2 × 10
→(0)
→(0)
if [( u
ij] < 0, and thus the magnitude of the cohesive im-
u
j
i
pulse  is  always  positive.  The  dimensionless  time  intervals  Δ̂t
=
Δ̂t com (cid:0) Δ̂t res  (collision-normal  direction)  and  Δ̂t col = Δ̂t com + Δ̂t res 
(collision-tangential  direction)  are  depicted  in  Fig.  2.22.  Taking  the 
elastic  and  dissipative  forces  during  the  collision  into  account,  these 
time  intervals  were  determined  by  solving  the  ordinary  differential 
equation  of  the  dimensionless  overlap  of  the  collision partners  in  the 
normal  direction  ̂δn 
as  a  function  of  dimensionless  time ̂t,  e.g.  using 
MATLAB. In order to minimize the computational time, the values of 
dimensionless  time  intervals  Δ̂t com  and  Δ̂t res  were  pre-computed  and 
stored  in  a  look-up  table  as  a  function  of  the  restitution  coefficient. 
Assuming  a  fully  elastic  collision  (en = 1),  the  time  intervals  Δ̂t com =
Δ̂t res  (i.e. the symmetric distribution of overlap) and thus the cohesive 
impulse in the normal collision direction vanishes, which is not the case 
in the original model by Kosinski and Hoffmann [773]. Details on the 
agglomeration  conditions  for  sticking  and  sliding  collisions  and  the 
post-collision  treatment  without  agglomeration  can  be  found  in  the 
work of Almohammed [84]. 

Assuming  that  the  particle-particle  collision  leads  to  a  successful 
agglomeration  process,  the  size  and  the  kinetics  of  the  agglomerate 
formed (i.e. its position, translational and angular velocity) has to be 
calculated.  The  agglomerate  structure  is  modeled  based  on  the 
assumption  that  the  agglomerate  assembly  (denoted  hereafter  by  the 
subscript  ag)  is  made  up  of  np  spherical  primary  particles,  which  are 
interconnected, as depicted schematically in Fig. 2.23 (a). 

If the external force acting on the primary particles is not included in 
the agglomerate, the center of mass of the agglomerate cm moves with a 
→
constant  velocity  u
ag  and  rotates  about  its  center  of  mass  with  the 
angular  velocity  ω→
ag.  Thus,  the  position  of  the  center  of  mass  of  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093042F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.21. A schematic representation of the three possible scenarios after (a) a particle-particle collision including cohesive van der Waals force, (b) rebound, (c) 
agglomeration, and (d) breakup after initial agglomeration (reproduced from references [83] [50], with permission of authors). 

newly formed agglomerate is calculated as follows: 

r→

ag =

1
mag

∑np

i=1

mp,i r→

p,i

; mag =

∑np

i=1

mp,i,

u→

ag =

1
mag

∑np

i=1

mp,i u→(0)
p,i .

(2.173)  

(2.174) 

with the total mass of the agglomerate mag. The translational velocity of 
→
the  agglomerate  u
ag  is  determined  based  on  the  conservation  of  the 
translational momentum (fully plastic collision of primary particles) and 
is expressed as: 

The angular velocity of the agglomerate is determined based on the 
→
ag  by  solving  a  3 × 3  system  of 
conservation  of  angular  momentum  L
equations: 
→
ag = Iag ω→
L

ag,

(2.175)  

→
where  L
about the center of mass of the agglomerate: 

ag  is equal to the sum of the angular momenta of all particles 

→
L

ag =

∑np

i=1

→cm
L

p,i =

∑np

i=1

Ip,i ω→(0)

p,i +

∑np

i=1

mp,i

(
a→

p,i × u→(0)

p,i

)

.

(2.176) 

→
Here,  a

p,i  denotes  a  vector  between  the  center  of  the  ith  primary 
particle  and  the  mass  of  the  agglomerate  (see  Fig.  2.23  (a)),  and  Iag 
stands for the moment of inertia of the agglomerate that is a symmetric 
second-order tensor, and whose components have to be determined. 

Iag =

∑np

i=1

Icm
p,i =

⎛

⎝

Ixx
Iyx
Izx

Ixy
Iyy
Izy

⎞

⎠.

Ixz
Iyz
Izz

(2.177) 

It is worth noting that Eq. (2.175) is valid for the exact description of 
the  structure  of  the  fractal  agglomerate  including  spherical  particles. 
However, it is often assumed that the agglomerate formed is made up 
from only two spheres (i.e. two primary particles, a primary particle, and 
an  agglomerate  or  two  agglomerates)  sticking  together  without  any 
change in the shape (see the Agglomerate structure models section). This 
assumption is intuitively consistent with the assumption of binary col-
lisions in the hard-sphere model, leading to simple relations for the ki-
netics  of  the  agglomerate.  In  this  case,  the  total  angular  momentum 

Fig. 2.22. Effect of the normal restitution coefficient of inter-particle collisions 
on  the  dimensionless  intervals  of  the  impact  time  (adapted  from  reference 
[666], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093043F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.23. Agglomerate assembly: (a) positions of primary particles forming agglomerate including np=10 in relation to its center of mass cm, and (b) typical mi-
crostructures of native and agglomerated food particles (reproduced from references [656,774,1423], with permission of Elsevier). 

about  the  center  of  mass  of  the  agglomerate  (including  two  spheres 
depicted in Fig. 2.24) can be expressed as: 

→
L

ag = Ii ω→(0)

i + Ij ω→(0)

j +

di + dj

)
n→

ij ×

(cid:0)

̂mij
2

(
u→(0)

i

)

.

(cid:0) u→(0)

j

(2.178) 

As a result, the solution of the system of Eqs. (2.175) to calculate the 
ag  is reduced to the 

components of the agglomerate angular velocity  ω→
following form: 
→
L
ag
Iag

ag =

ω→

,

(2.179)  

where the moment of inertia of the spherical agglomerate Iag is given by: 

Iag =

1
10

magd2

ag =

π
60

ρagd5
ag.

(2.180) 

Based on the previous observations, the calculation of the angular 
velocity of the agglomerate requires the agglomerate diameter dag to be 
determined.  The  common  two-sphere  agglomerate  structure  models 
available in the literature will be reviewed in the Agglomerate structure 
models section. 

Note that due to particle-wall collisions, the contact force is treated 
analogously. However, this is based on the assumption that the wall has 
an  infinite  radius  and  is  stationary  (i.e.  the  translational  and  angular 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093044F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

n→

ij =

r→
i (cid:0)
⃒
⃒
⃒ r→
⃒
i (cid:0)

r→
r→

j

j

⃒
,
⃒
⃒
⃒

→
and the tangential unit vector  t

ij  is given by: 

→
t

ij =

ij

u→t
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→t
⃒

ij

.

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(2.183)  

(2.184) 

The contact area between two spherical particles or a particle and a 
wall can be represented by normal and tangential penetration depths. As 
depicted  in  Fig.  2.26,  the  penetration  depth  in  the  normal  direction, 
denoted byδn, is computed employing the following equation: 

δn = Ri + Rj (cid:0)

⃒
⃒
→ (cid:0)
⃒
⃒ ri

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒.

r→

j

(2.185) 

Fig.  2.24. Angular  momentum  based  on  two-sphere  agglomerate  about  its 
center of mass (reproduced from reference [666], with permission of Elsevier). 

velocities  of  the  wall  are  zero).  This  means  that  for  a  particle-wall 
collision,  the  mass  of  the  wall  (particle  j)  is  large  and  therefore  the 
reduced mass is equal to the mass of the particle i: 

⎛

⎞

(cid:0) 1

̂mij =

⎝1/mi + 1/mwall
⏟̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅⏟
≈0

⎠

= mi

(2.181) 

For  more  details  on  the  modeling  of  particle-wall  collision  in  the 
context of the hard-sphere model, interested readers are referred to the 
literature, for example [84,667]. 

Fig. 2.25 shows a flowchart of the four-way coupled CFD-DPM sim-
ulations  with  the  hard-sphere  model  for  turbulent  gas-solid  flows, 
including the particle agglomeration, particle breakup and particle-wall 
adhesion (deposition). 

2.4.2.2. Soft-sphere  model. The  soft-sphere  model,  also  known  as  the 
discrete element method (DEM), assumes that the particles can overlap 
each  other (particle-particle  collision)  or  penetrate the  wall (particle- 
wall collision) as shown in Fig. 2.26. The contact between two colliding 
particles in the soft-sphere model is represented as a line in 2D cases and 
as a surface in 3D cases, unlike a point in the hard-sphere model. In the 
context of the DEM model, the contact force is determined based on the 
penetration  depth.  The  following  provides  a  brief  explanation  of  the 
modeling of the resulting contact force due to particle-particle collision. 
It is worth mentioning that similar procedures apply to the contact force 
due to particle-wall collision, considering that the wall has an infinite 
radius and the translational and angular velocities of the wall are set to 
zero. 

normal  u

→n

→
At  the  contact  geometry,  the  relative  velocity  u
→t
ij  and tangential  u
[(
]
⋅ n→

ij  components, as follows: 

u→

ij =

)
⋅ n→
ij
(

i (cid:0) u→
j
)

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ n→
⃒ u→n
⃒
⃒
ij,
ij
)

u→

i (cid:0) u→

j

+

Ri ω→

i + Rj ω→

j

× n→

ij (cid:0) u→n

ij =

u→n

ij =

(

u→t

ij =

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→t
⃒

ij

⃒
⃒
→
⃒
⃒ t

ij,

The  penetration  depth  in  the  tangential  direction,  denoted  by  δt, 
cannot be explicitly determined from the particle positions. It is modeled 
through  the  integration  over  time  of  the  relative  velocity  in  the 
tangential direction at the contact area: 

δt =

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→t
⃒

ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒dtp.

∫t

t0

(2.186) 

The distribution of the force on the contact area should be known to 
compute the resultant contact force. Within the framework of the DEM 
model,  the  resulting  contact  force  is  determined  by  summing  up  all 
normal  and  tangential  contributions  that  act  simultaneously  between 
the particle i and other collision partners: 

→con
F

res =

k=N (
∑

k=1
k∕=i

→
→
t,con
n,con + F
F
ik
ik

)

.

(2.187) 

The index N identifies the number of contacts (particles and walls) 
for  the  particle  i.  Determining  the  distribution  of  the  force  over  the 
contact  area  requires  an  exact  physical  description  of  the  collision. 
However, this is a complex task as it depends on various geometrical and 
physical factors such as the mechanical properties and the state of mo-
tion  of  the  particles,  which  are  in  contact.  That  is  why  the  collision 
process  should be  simplified, employing a  mechanical  analog system. 
Here, the well-known viscoelastic Voigt-Kelvin model is applied. This 
describes the time-dependent behavior of the collision and the physical 
effects  of  particle  interaction.  The  Voigt-Kelvin  model  includes  a 
Hooke’s  spring  with  a  stiffness  k  and  a  Newtonian  damper  (dashpot) 
with  a  viscosity  η,  connected  in  parallel.  The  spring  identifies  purely 
elastic  collisions  (to  model  the  reversible  deformation),  while  the 
damper describes the time-dependent irreversible deformation. 

The normal component of the contact force appearing in Eq. (2.187) 

ij  is  divided  into 

consists of an elastic force  F

and a damping force  F

. Using the 

→n,ela
ij 

→n,dam
ij

differential equation of the spring-damper system, the normal contact 
force is modeled as follows: 
d u→n
dtp

ij = ̂mij

→n,con
F

(2.188)  

,

ij

= (cid:0) kn(δn)a n→
ij
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
→n,ela
F

ij

(cid:0) ηn u→n
ij
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
→n,dam
F

ij

→
with the translational velocities ( u
→
the position vectors ( r
→
the collision partners (i, j). Here, the normal unit vector  n

j), 
j), the radii (Ri,Rj) , and the masses (mi,mj) of 
ij is defined as: 

j), the angular velocities ( ω→

→
i, r

→
i, u

(2.182)  
i, ω→

with the normal stiffness constant kn, the normal coefficient of damping 
ηn, the effective mass  ̂mij  (reduced mass), and the displacement and the 
→n
relative velocity in the normal direction δn  and  u
ij, respectively. Note 
that the Voigt-Kelvin model describes the normal contact force, while a 
sliding element with a dynamic friction coefficient μdyn is introduced to 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093045F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.25. Flowchart of a four-way coupled CFD-DPM simulation with the hard-sphere model, including particle agglomeration or droplet coalescence, particle-wall 
adhesion, and breakup. 

determine the tangential contribution of the contact force. Based on the 
Voigt-Kelvin model, a collision can take place elastically or inelastically. 
In elastic collisions, the potential energy resulting from deformation is 
completely transformed into kinetic energy. The sum of the kinetic en-
ergies of the colliding particles before and after the collision is the same 
(i.e. neither damping nor friction forces are regarded). In inelastic col-
lisions,  part  of  the  potential  energy  resulting  from  deformation  dissi-
pates into other energy forms, such as internal energy. In Eq. (2.188), the 

variation  of  the  exponent  a  makes  it  possible  to  select  from  several 
spring contact models. Hooke proposed a linear approach with (a = 1) 
that is applied frequently in most applications, exhibiting satisfactory 
accuracy. The non-linear approaches proposed (a ∕= 1) by Hertz [775] 
and Maw et al. [776] take into account the changes in the geometrical 
and physical properties of the colliding particles. Compared to the linear 
approach, the non-linear approaches improve the accuracy of the force 
calculation, but the computational effort is much higher. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093046F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  2.26. Soft-sphere  model:  (a)  particle-particle  collision,  (b)  particle-wall  collision,  and  (c)  particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  (reproduced  from 
reference [50], with permission of authors). 

The stiffness coefficient in the normal direction kn appearing in Eq. 
(2.188) can be calculated using the properties of the collision partners: 

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→n
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→n

ij

ij

(0)

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
h
h(0)

.

⃒
⃒ =

(2.193) 

en =

(2.189)  

kn =

)1

2

(
4
3

̂Rij

̂E ij,

̂
With the effective radius 
Rij, also known as the reduced radius, being 
defined similarly to the reduced mass, allowing two bodies to be treated 
as one: 
(

)(cid:0) 1

,

(2.190)  

̂Rij =

1
Ri

+

1
Rj

=

RiRj
Ri + Rj

and the reduced Young’s modulus: 
(

)(cid:0) 1

̂E ij =

=

1

+

1(cid:0) v2
j
Ej

1(cid:0) v2
i
Ei

1 (cid:0) v2
i
Ei

+

1 (cid:0) v2
j
Ej

.

(2.191) 

Here, (vi,vj) and (Ei,Ej) are the Poisson’s ratios and Young’s moduli of 
the  collision  partners  i  and  j,  respectively.  The  Young’s  modulus  is 
related to the shear modulus G by the relation E = 2G(1 + ν). Note that 
the shear modulus describes the linear elastic deformation of a body due 
to the shear stress, and Poisson’s ratio makes it possible to calculate the 
transverse contraction of the body. Both the shear modulus and Pois-
son’s ratio are material properties and can be determined experimen-
tally. Table 2.7 presents the values of the shear modulus and Poisson’s 
ratio of common materials. 

The obtained stiffness coefficients are in the range of (104-109 N/m) 
and depend to a large extent on the material properties of the partners. 
The damping parameter in the normal direction, which describes the 
energy  dissipation  during  the  collision,  is  expressed  by  the  following 
relationship: 
⎧
√
⎪⎨

for en ∕= 0,

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
̂mijkn

(δn)b,

for en = 0,

(2.192)  

ηn =

⎪⎩

αn
dam
√

2

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
̂mijkn

(δn)b,

The  coefficient  of  restitution  can  be  experimentally  measured  by 
dropping a particle from the height h(0)  onto a large plate that has the 
same material properties as the contacting object and then measuring 
the height of the rebound. At lower relative velocities, the coefficient of 
restitution is considered to be constant (see Table 2.8), while at higher 
relative velocities part of the kinetic energy is irreversibly dissipated in 
the form of deformation energy, leading to a decrease in the coefficient 
of restitution. 

The empirical constant αn

dam appearing in Eq. (2.192) is related to the 
restitution  coefficient  in  the  normal  direction  en  by  the  following 
expression: 

αn
dam = (cid:0)

√

2lnen
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
π2 + ln2en

, for en ∕= 0.

(2.194) 

Varying  the  exponent  b  in  Eq.  (2.192)  adjusts  the  influence  of 
dissipation on the normal contact force. A completely linear model is 
obtained  by  combining  the  linear  spring  model  (a = 1)  with  a  linear 
visco-elastic damping element (b = 0). A partial non-linear visco-elastic 
contact  model combines  a non-linear  spring  approach (a ∕= 1)  with a 
linear visco-elastic damping element (b = 0). A fully non-linear visco- 
elastic  model  can  be  obtained  by  combining  a  non-linear  spring 
approach (a ∕= 1) with a non-linear visco-elastic damping element (b ∕=
0).  Detailed  comparisons  of  different  contact  force  models  have  been 
carried out by Di Renzo et al. [777], Kruggel-Emden et al. [778], and 
Zhu et al. [736]. 

The modeling of the tangential contact force is based on the spring- 
damper system with a sliding component. The tangential contact force 
appearing  in  Eq.  (2.187)  is  either  a  static  force  (modeled  using  the 
damping  parameter  ηt)  or  a  sliding  force  (modeled  using  the  friction 
coefficient μdyn), and is expressed by the following differential equation: 

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ≤

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

sticking

sliding

,

for

where en stands for the coefficient of restitution in the normal direction, 
also known as the collision coefficient, and describes the dissipation of 
the energy during an inelastic collision. It depends on several parame-
ters  such  as  the  material  pairing,  the  collision  velocity,  and/or  the 
particle  shape.  The  coefficient  of  restitution  can  be  calculated  as  the 
ratio of the normal relative velocity at the contact area after the contact 
to  the  normal  relative  velocity  at  the  contact  area  before  the  contact 
(index: (0)): 

→t,con
F

ij = ̂mij

d u→t
dtp

ij

=

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

→t
)a
(cid:0) kt( δ
⏟̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅⏟
→t,con
F

(cid:0) ηt u→t
ij
⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
→t,dam
F
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟

ij

ij

sticking

→t
F
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
→n,con
→
⃒
⃒
(cid:0) μdyn
,
⃒ F
⃒ t
ij
ij
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟

→t
F

sliding

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sticking

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ >

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sliding

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒.

for

(2.195) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093047F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.7 
Shear modulus and Poisson’s numbers of common materials.  

Material 

Shear modulus G [GPa] 

Poisson’s ratio ν [-]  

Aluminium 
Copper 
Glass 
Rubber 
Steel 

26 
45 
31 
0.0006 
80 

0.34 
0.33 
0.17 
0.5 
0.29  

→t,con
F

ij = ̂mij

d u→t
dtp

ij

=

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
⃒
→n,con
⃒
⃒ F
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→t
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
,
μdyn
u→
⃒
f
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
→t
F
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
→n,con
→
⃒
⃒
(cid:0) μdyn
,
⃒ F
⃒ t
ij
ij
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟

sticking

→t
F

sliding

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sticking

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ≤

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sliding

for

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sticking

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ >

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sliding

for

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒.

Here,  kt  is  the  tangential  stiffness  coefficient,  ηt  represents  the 
tangential damping parameter and μdyn stands for the dynamic friction 
coefficient.  The  tangential  stiffness  coefficient  is  defined  using  the 
normal  stiffness  coefficient  and  the  mechanical  properties  of  the 
colliding objects as follows: 

kt = kn

(1 (cid:0) νi)/Gi +
(1 (cid:0) 0.5νi)/Gi +

(cid:0)
(cid:0)

)/

1 (cid:0) νj
1 (cid:0) 0.5νj

Gj
)/

.

Gj

(2.196) 

Similarly  to the normal contact  force, the tangential  contact force 
can be calculated using linear or non-linear models, depending on the 
required  accuracy  of  the  contact  force  curve.  A  non-linear  model  of 
varying  complexity  has  been  published  and  tested  by  several  authors 
and is summarized in these review papers [736,777]. 

(2.201) 

The tangential damping parameter appearing in Eq. (2.195) is given 

2.5. Interphase coupling 

as: 

ηt = αt

dam

√
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2
̂mijkt
7

(δt)b,

where the empirical constant αt

dam  is defined as: 

⎧
⎪⎨

⎪⎩

αt
dam =

(cid:0)

√

2lnet
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
π2 + ln2et

,

for et ∕= 0,

2,

for et = 0.

(2.197)  

(2.198) 

The coefficient of restitution in the tangential direction et is obtained 

from the following relation: 

et =

,

⃒
⃒

(2.199)  

(0)

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→t
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→t

ij

ij

→t 
(0)
with  u
ij

→t
contact and  u

the  relative  velocity  in  the  tangential  direction  before  the 
ij  that after it. The dynamic friction coefficient μdyn can be 

determined from experiments. The tangential penetration depth  δ
defined with the aid of the following threshold function: 
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ≤

→t (0)
δ

ijdtp,

R +

u→t

sticking

sliding

∫τ

if

→t 

is 

τ0
⃒
⃒
→
⃒
⃒ t

⃒
⃒
→n,con
⃒
⃒ F
ij

ij,

μdyn
kt

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sticking

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ >

⃒
⃒
→t
⃒
⃒ F

sliding

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒.

if

(2.200) 

→t
δ

→
= δt t

ij =

⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

The  rotation  matrix  R  is  applied  to  perform  a  rotation  in  a  three- 
dimensional space of Euclidean geometry. To calculate the tangential 
penetration depth,  the relative tangential velocity at  the contact area 
must be integrated. It is thus very much a challenging task and therefore 
explicit approaches such as the equation proposed by Lungfiel [779] can 
be applied. The resultant tangential contact force is then given as: 

Table 2.8 
Restitution  coefficient  of  common  material  pairings  at  low  relative 
velocities.  

Material pairing 

Glass-Glass 
Iron-Iron 
Lead-Lead 
Rubber-Rubber 
Steel-Steel 
Wood-Wood 

Coefficient of restitution en [-] 

0.96 
0.67 
0.16 
0.75 
0.90 
0.48  

The  correct  determination  of  the  interphase  values  is  crucial  to 
accurately solve the extended balance equations of the gas phase (Eqs. 
(2.67), (2.68), (2.69), and (2.70)). The interphase values are calculated 
as  volume-averaged  values  in  each  control  volume.  These  average 
values are functions of the geometrical and physical properties (position, 
velocity, and temperature) of each particle located in the investigated 
control volume: 

ψ p→f = fun

(

∑

∀i∈CV

)

f CV
p,i Φp,i

.

(2.202) 

p→f ,Sh

The interphase values ψp → f  stand for the volumetric void fraction, 
the momentum or the heat transfer (εf,Su
p→f ) and the parameter Φp,i 
represents  the  particle  volume,  the  particle  velocity,  or  the  particle 
temperature.  The  spherical  section  f CV
identifies  the  fraction  of  the 
p,i 
particle volume, which is found in the control volume (see Fig. 2.27 (a)). 
An  exact  or  analytical  calculation  of  the  interphase  values  requires 
knowledge of the volumes of all the particles that are completely and/or 
partly located in a control volume, in addition to their velocities and 
their temperatures. Furthermore, information about the grid structure 
(e.g. cell faces that are in the immediate vicinity of particles) is required 
to use geometrical relations to calculate the interphase values analyti-
cally.  This  can  be  achieved  with  acceptable  computational  effort  in 
certain cases, where the number of grid cells and/or particles is rela-
tively  low  (less  than  106).  Increasing  the  number  of  particles  and/or 
improving the grid resolution sharply increases the number of particles 
that are allocated to different control volumes. To reduce the compu-
tational effort required to calculate the interphase values, while main-
taining  the  simulation  accuracy,  approximation  methods  should  be 
used.  The  particle  center  method  (PCM),  also  known  as  the  particle 
centroid method or particle-centered method, is an efficient approach, 
which  takes  less  effort  to  apply.  Here,  the  spherical  sections  of  the 
particles are not taken into consideration and the entire volume of the 
particle is allocated to the fluid cell, where the center of mass of this 
particle is found (see Fig. 2.27 (b)). The spherical section f CV
p,i  has a value 
of unity or zero. A value of unity means that the center of mass of the 
investigated particle is located in the control volume, while zero means 
that  its  center  of  mass  is  outside  the  control  volume.  The  efficiency 
gained  in  the  particle  center  method  may  be  characterised  by  uncer-
tainty concerning the calculation of the interphase values. By applying 
the so-called the offset-method [642], which results in several numbers 
of the spatial displacements of the grid cells the determination of the 
interphase values using the PCM method can be improved significantly. 
Some  of  the  commonly  used  and  recently  developed  approximation 
schemes in the literature include, besides the PCM with and without the 
offset-method,  the  divided  particle  volume  method  (DPVM),  and  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093048F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  2.27. Determination  of  interphase  values  using  the  exact  method  (a)  and  the  particle  center  method  (b),  particle  bigger  than  the  grid  cell  (c),  local  in-
homogeneities for the coarse grid (d), and dense grids (e and f). 

statistical kernel method. In the DPVM approach, the shape of the par-
ticle is approximated based on simple geometries, such as a cube. Por-
tions of particle volume are then assigned to several nearby cells. The 
statistical  kernel  method  calculates  the  solid  volume  fraction  by 
distributing the particle volume by a weighting function (Gaussian dis-
tribution is often used) that decays away from the particle center. Based 
on CFD/DEM simulations, these approximation schemes were evaluated 
by many authors (Sun and Xiao [780], Clarke et al. [781], and Kieck-
hefen et al. [25]), showing that the PCM method is only valid for large 
cell sizes (the recommendation of Peng et al. [782]). All other approx-
imation schemes were able to produce similar void fraction fields and 
velocity fields in similar computational time provided that the length 
scale, over which the void fraction is distributed, is approximately equal 
to particle diameter. Furthermore, the calculation accuracy of the PCM 
method  depends  greatly  on  the  particle  distribution  in  the  computa-
tional domain and the number of particles that share multiple control 
volumes (see Fig. 2.27 (d, e, f)). The use of coarse grids decreases the 
number  of  particles  that  belong  to  different  control  volumes,  which 
leads  on  the  one  hand  to  an  improvement  in  the  accuracy  of  the 
approximation  process,  but  on  the  other  hand  to  higher  local  in-
homogeneities of the particles. Furthermore, the physical values for the 
gas phase (pressure, velocity, and temperature) as well as the local flow 
effects can no longer be adequately resolved (e.g. underestimation of the 
calculated drag force). A grid refinement that goes beyond the particle 
diameter is a major issue for the approximation process since the control 
volume  is  completely  occupied  with  solid;  i.e.  the  volumetric  void 
fraction  in  the  investigated  control  volume  has  unphysical  negative 
values, see Fig. 2.27 (c). Therefore, the fluid phase is modeled under the 
assumption that the dimensions of the largest particle must be smaller 
than  the  smallest  fluid  grid  cell.  Polydisperse  systems  with  particle 
distributions  or  granular  systems  with  big  particles  result  in  a  rough 
fluid grid resolution and thus an inaccurate spatial resolution. Further-
more, the coarse-grained parcel model (see the Discrete-particle model 
section) directly leads to a coarsening of the computational grid. In the 
literature, this challenge (i.e. refining the fluid grid resolution beyond 
the  particle-scale)  is  well  known  and  can  be  solved  using  different 
coupling methods, such as the porous media concept, also known as the 
cube averaging method (CAM) (Kuipers group, among others: Link et al. 

[783], Deen et al. [12], Sutkar et al. [417]), the diffusion-based method 
(DBM) (Sun and Xiao [780]), the particle meshing method (Peng et al. 
[784]) and the two-grid method (TGM) (Farzaneh et al. [785], Alobaid 
[641,645] and Deb et al. [786]). In these approaches, the grid resolution 
can  be  further  refined  independently  of  the  particle  size,  and  local 
averaging  is  still  possible.  Recently,  Zhang  et  al.  [787]  evaluated  the 
accuracy and convergence of three coupling methods (cube averaging, 
two-grid,  and  diffusion-based)  when  applied  to  a  single  particle 
combustor.  The  results  obtained  were  compared  to  the  widely  used 
particle  centroid  method.  The  authors  confirmed  that  the  PCM  has  a 
strong dependence on the grid size, whereas the coupling methods are 
not  only  grid-independent  but  also  enhance  the  predictability  of  the 
simulations. 

In the following sections, the interphase values including the volu-
metric void fraction, the momentum transfer, and the heat transfer will 
be explained in detail. 

2.5.1. Volumetric void fraction 

The volumetric void fraction means the solid content in each grid cell 
(control  volume)  in  the  computational  domain.  The  volumetric  void 
fraction in each control volume εCV
is expressed by the following for-
f 
mula: 

f = 1 (cid:0) εCV
εCV

p = 1 (cid:0)

1
V CV

∑

∀i∈CV

f CV
p,i Vp,i,

(2.203)  

with the volume of the grid cell VCV, the volume of the particles Vp,i, and 
the spherical sections f CV
p,i . In the literature, the volumetric void fraction 
is generally determined using the particle center method (PCM), which 
offers  a  lower  processing  time  and  a  lower  implementation  effort 
compared to the analytical method. Peng et al. [782] reported in their 
study that a minimum critical cell size of 3.82 times the particle diam-
eter would provide the same numerical stability as an analytical method 
to  calculate  the  volumetric  void  fraction.  In  the  work  of  Strobl  et  al. 
[788],  an  analytical  calculation  of  the  volumetric  void  fraction  was 
introduced into a benchmarked CFD/DEM code. Simulations were car-
ried out for a typical lab-scale system containing 45,000 particles. The 
additional  time  per  runtime  required  for  the  exact  calculation  of  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093049F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

volumetric void fraction amounted to less than 0.3 seconds, which the 
authors considered reasonably efficient. Wu et al. [365] derived a set of 
equations to analytically solve the volumetric void fraction on both 2D 
and  3D unstructured meshes. The authors claimed that the  analytical 
solution  was  computationally  very  expensive  as  evaluations  of  trigo-
nometric functions require to be conducted at every time step. In the 
literature, various non-analytical approaches have also been proposed. 
For example, Lim et al. [789] calculated the volumetric void fraction for 
a  group  of  control  volumes  using  PCM.  The  value  obtained  was  then 
smoothed between the groups of fluid cells. Kuang et al. [790] intro-
duced numerical spheres of similar sizes as the computational grid cells. 
The number of particles within the numerical sphere was calculated and 
the total volumetric fraction of the solid was mapped on the fluid cell. 
The  approach  is  not  exact  and  results  in  spatial  inaccuracies  at  the 
corners  of  the  grid  cells.  Khawaya  et  al.  [791]  developed  a  cuboid 
method, enclosing the particle in a cuboid with the same edge length as 
the  diameter  of  the  particle.  The  volumetric  void  fraction  is  then 
calculated  by  knowing  the  cut  cuboid  volumes  that  are  assigned  to 
corresponding  control  volumes.  ANSYS-FLUENT  uses  a  node-based 
averaging scheme for the particle data (volume, velocity, and temper-
ature) that are distributed over the grid nodes, employing an averaging 
kernel. This reduces the grid’s dependency on the particle size since the 
source terms are distributed across a number of neighboring grid nodes. 
Farzaneh et al. [785], Alobaid [641,645], and Deb et al. [786] intro-
duced an additional grid, the so-called particle grid, allowing the fluid 
grid  resolution  to  be  refined  independently  of  the  particle  size.  The 
suggested procedure (two-grid concept) improves the calculation accu-
racy by using a fine fluid grid and by maintaining the averaging accu-
racy while determining the interaction values by selecting the optimal 
ratio between the particle grid size and the particle diameter. 

2.5.2. Momentum transfer 

In  the  discrete-particle  model,  the  force  transferred  from  the  gas 
phase to the solid phase is calculated separately for each particle, while 
the  effect  of  the  solid  phase  is  taken  into  consideration  by  adding  a 
source term to the momentum equations of the gas phase (i.e. two-way- 
coupling). The impact of the solid phase on the fluid phase is modeled 
based on the change in the velocity of particles (see Eq. (2.68)), which 
cross the control volume in the time interval between two consecutive 
fluid time steps: 
→
F
p→f
V CV

p→f =

→u
S

,

(2.204)  

with the assumption that the force exerted on the fluid phase by the solid 

→
phase  F
→
phase  F
third Newtonian axiom. 

p→f  is equal to the force exerted on the solid phase by the fluid 

f→p, but in the opposite direction to ensure compliance with the 

average  particle  velocity 
respectively. 

in 

the 

investigated  control  volume, 

In the second method, the force transferred from the solid phase to 

→
p→f  is calculated using the local arithmetic mean for-
the fluid phase  F
mula, similarly to the first method. The resultant force is then distrib-
uted over the particles that are located in the control volume - uniformly 
in  the  case  of  monodisperse  granular  flows  and  non-uniformly  in  the 
case of polydisperse granular flows: 

→
F

f →p,i =

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

→
F

p→f V CV
NCV
→
F

w(r)

p→f V CV
NCV

,

For monodisperse flows,

, For polydisperse flows.

(2.207) 

The weight function w(r) allows particles with larger diameters to 
have more influence than particles with smaller diameters. The second 
method, in contrast to the first method, guarantees the third Newtonian 
axiom. 

In the third method, the fluid force acting on an individual particle is 
modeled similarly to the first method (see Eq. (2.205)), while the force 
transferred from the solid phase to the fluid phase is calculated through 
the sum of all particle forces: 
(
u→

p,k (cid:0) u→

f →p,i = β

p→f =

V CV ,

∑k=N CV

)]

→
F

→
F

∑NCV

[

f

(2.208)  

i=1

i=1

→
with  the  fluid  velocity  in  the  control  volume  u

f ,  the  velocity  of  the 
→
particle  k  in  the  control  volume  u
p,k,  and  the  interphase  momentum 
transfer  coefficient  β.  The  stability  and  accuracy  problems  that  take 
place in the first and second methods, do not occur when using the third 
method, making it very popular [12,117,646,772]. 

The interphase momentum transfer coefficient β  is described using 

the following general formula: 

(cid:0)

)

1 (cid:0) εf
τp

β =

ρpDdra

,

(2.209)  

where ρp  is  the  solid density and τp  represents  the  particle  relaxation 
time, expressed by: 

τp =

ρpd2
p
18μf

.

(2.210) 

Here, dp  is the diameter of the particle  and μf  represents the fluid 
dynamic  viscosity.  The  drag  function  Ddra  can  be  calculated  using 
different drag models. The latter are either based on the uniform solid 
distribution in the control volume or can take into account the hetero-
geneity of solid structure formation in the control volume. 

According  to  Feng  and  Yu  [792],  the  momentum  transfer  can  be 
determined by applying three different approaches. In the first method, 
the force transferred from the fluid phase to the solid phase is calculated 
separately for each particle depending on the particle velocity: 

2.5.2.1. Homogeneous drag models. In the following, the homogeneous 
gas-solid drag models and the homogeneous solid-solid drag models will 
be explained in detailed.  

→
F

f →p,i = F

→vir

→Bas

i + F

i + F

→dra
→Magn
,
i + F
i
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
→aero
F

i + F

i + F

i + F

i + F

→conc

→rad

→pre

→Saf

i

while  the  force  transferred  from  the  solid  phase  to  the  fluid  phase  is 
calculated using the local arithmetic mean formula for all particles that 
are located in the control volume: 

(2.205)  

(

→
F

p→f = β

u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)

V CV = β

[(

1
NCV

∑k=NCV

i=1

)

]

u→

p,k

(cid:0) u→

f

V CV .

(2.206) 

→
The variables NCV  and  u

P  denote the number of particles and the 

• Homogeneous gas-solid drag models 

The homogeneous drag models assume that the solid distribution in 
each control volume of the computational domain is uniform. The most 
commonly applied homogeneous drag models in the literature are pre-
sented in Table 2.9. The interphase momentum transfer coefficient β was 
obtained  from  experimental  measurements  (e.g.  Wen  and  Yu  [793], 
Syamlal and O’Brien [794,795], and Di Felice [796]) or derived from 
direct  numerical  simulations  (e.g.  Koch  and  Hill  [797,798],  Tenneti 
et  al.  [97]  and  Kravets  et  al.  (2019)  [799]).  All  of  the  momentum 
transfer coefficients are a function of the particle Reynolds number Rep 
and the volumetric void fraction εf. For the multi-fluid model, Table 2.10 
shows widely used solid-solid drag coefficients. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093050F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.9 
Most commonly applied homogeneous gas-solid drag models (in order by year).  

Homogeneous gas-solid drag models 

Correlations 

Schiller and Neumann (1933) [800] 

βSchiller&Naumann =

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

3
4

ρf
dp

Cdra

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

Cdra =

[

24
Rep

1 + 0.15Re0.687

p

]

.

Wen and Yu (1966) [793] 

βWen&Yu =

(cid:0)

ρf

3
4

Cdra

1 (cid:0) εf
dp

)

ε(cid:0) 1.65
f

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

Garside (1977) [801] 

Foscolo et al. (1983) [802] 

Cdra =

⎧
⎪⎪⎨

⎪⎪⎩

(cid:0)

24
εf Rep

0.44,

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
1 + 0.15

)

εf Rep

)0.687)

,

case Rep < 1000,

case Rep ≥ 1000.

βGarside =

(

)

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf
Re2
t

3
4

μf
d2
p

0.63 + 4.8

√ )2
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
εf Rt
Ref

Rep,

[

Rt = 0.5

A (cid:0) 0.06

Rep
εf

+

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(

]

)2

+ 0.12

(2B (cid:0) A) + A2

,

0.06

Rep
εf

Rep
εf

A = ε4.14

,

f
⎧
⎪⎨

0.8ε1.28
f

,

case εf ≤ 0.85,

B =

⎪⎩

ε2.65
f

,

case εf > 0.85.

βFoscolo =

)

(cid:0)

μf
d2
p

Cdra

1 (cid:0) εf
ε2.8
f

Cdra =

(

17.3
Rep

)

+ 0.336

Rep, case εf > 0.4.

Gibilaro et al. (1985) [803] 

βGibilaro = ρf ε(cid:0) 1.8

f

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

s

(cid:0)

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

1 (cid:0) εf

⎛
)
⎝

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

ρf d2
p

f

18μf ε(cid:0) 1
(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

⎞

+

0.33
dp

⎠.

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

Syamlal and O’Brien (1987) [794,795]  

βSyamlal&O’Brien =

3
4

Cdra

ρf εf

dp

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf
)2
(

vter
p

(

)

ReP
vter
p

)⃒
(
⃒
u→
⃒
⃒

p (cid:0) u→

f

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

⎛

Cdra =

⎜
⎝0.63 +

√

⎞
2

⎟
⎠

,

4.8
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
/
vter
p

Rep

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

vter
p =

(

0.5

ε4.14
f

(cid:0) 0.06Rep +

√
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(
(cid:0)
+ ε8.28
0.06Rep
f

)2 + 0.12ReP

1.6ε1.28
f

(cid:0) ε4.14
f

)

)
,

⎛

⎜
⎜
⎝

0.5

ε4.14
f

(cid:0) 0.06Rep+

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(
(cid:0)
+ ε8.28
0.06Rep
f

)2 + 0.12ReP

(cid:0) ε4.14
f

2ε2.65
f

)

⎞

⎟
⎟
⎠,

case εf ≤ 0.85,

case εf > 0.85.

Ganser (1993) [805] 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

βGanser =

(cid:0)

ρf

)

1 (cid:0) εf
dpΨ

3
Cdra
4

ε(cid:0) 1.65
f

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

case εf ≥ 0.8,

μf

150

(cid:0)

)2
1 (cid:0) εf
pΨ2 + 1.75
εf d2

(cid:0)

ρf

1 (cid:0) εf

⃒
⃒
)
⃒
⃒

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

dpΨ

,

case εf < 0.8.

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
1 + 0.1118

RepK1K2

)0.6567)

+

Cdra =

⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

24
RepK1

0.44,

K1 =

)(cid:0) 1

(
1
3

+

2
Ψ(cid:0) 0.5
3

(cid:0) 2.25

dp
Dreactor

,

K2 = 101.8148((cid:0) logΨ)0.5743

.

0.4305K2
/(cid:0)

1 + 3305

RepK1K2

),

case Rep < 1000,

case Rep ≥ 1000,

Comments 

Schiller and Neumann 
proposed one of the first 
relations to determining the 
interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient. The drag 
Cdra coefficient depends on 
the particle Reynolds number 
Rep  (given in Eq. (2.104)).  

The drag Cdracoefficient 
depends on volumetric void 
fraction and particle Reynolds 
number Rep  (given in Eq. 
(2.104)).  

In contrast to the Foscolo 
model, the approach 
developed by Garside [801] 
can predict the interphase 
momentum transfer 
coefficient for all volumetric 
void fraction values, except 
the zone 0.75 < εf < 0.8. 

The drag Cdra coefficient 
depends on the particle 
Reynolds number Rep  (given 
in Eq. (2.104)).  

Gibilaro et al proposed this 
formula for the calculation of 
the interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient. 

The drag coefficient Cdra is 
determined according to 
Dalla Valle [804]. The 
terminal velocity correlation 
for the solid phase vter
expressed based on the 
particle Reynolds number Rep 
(given in Eq. (2.104)).  

p  is 

For non-spherical particles, 
Ganser introduced correction 
factors to the drag coefficient. 
The correction may be 
coupled with one of the drag 
models presented above and 
is shown here for the 
Gidaspow model as an 
example. The symbol Ψ 
represents the particle 
sphericity and Dreactor is the 
diameter of the reactor. 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093051F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.9 (continued ) 

Homogeneous gas-solid drag models 

Correlations 

Gidaspow (1994) [10,687] 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

βGidaspow =

(cid:0)

ρf

3
Cdra
4

1 (cid:0) εf
dp

)

ε(cid:0) 1.65
f

⃒
(
⃒
⃒
⃒

u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒,

case εf ≥ 0.8,

(cid:0)

ρf

1 (cid:0) εf

)

⃒
(
⃒
⃒
⃒

u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(cid:0)

μf

150

)2

1 (cid:0) εf
εf d2
p

+ 1.75

dp

,

case εf < 0.8.

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ε(cid:0) χ

,

Di Felice (1994) [796] 

Koch and Hill (2001) [797,798] 

u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

dp

βDi Felice =

3
4

Cdra

(

Cdra =

0.63 +

(cid:0)

ρf

1 (cid:0) εf

)

⃒
(
⃒
⃒
⃒

√

4.8
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Rep

)2

,

(

χDi Felice = 3.7 (cid:0) 0.65exp

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

1.5 (cid:0)

))2

(cid:0)

Rep

)
,

log10
2

)2

(

(cid:0)

A

μf
d2
p

1 (cid:0) εf
εf

(cid:0)

+ B

1 (cid:0) εf

)
Rep

)

, case Rep > 40.

180,

⎛

1 +

⎜
⎜
⎝

(cid:0)
3
̅̅̅
√
2

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0)
1 + 0.681

(cid:0)

18ε3
f
1 (cid:0) εf

)

1
)
2 +

1 (cid:0) εf

)

(cid:0)
ln

(cid:0)

135
64
)

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0)
(cid:0) 8.48

1 (cid:0) εf

)

(cid:0)
+ 16.14
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf
)2 + 8.16

1 (cid:0) εf

1 (cid:0) εf
)3

case εf < 0.6,

⎞

)

⎟
⎟
⎠,

case εf ≥ 0.6,

Benyahia et al. (2006) [807] 

18μf ε2

f

βBenyahia =

B = 0.6057

(cid:0)

)2 + 1.908

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

1 (cid:0) εf

)

f + 0.209ε(cid:0) 3
ε2

f

,

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p
)
,

)

F

,

case εf ≥ 0.99,

Rep
2

≤

F2 (cid:0) 1
3/8 (cid:0) F3

,

(

1 +

3
8

Rep
2

F0 + F1

)2

(

Rep
2

,

case εf < 0.99,

F3 +

Rep
2

≤

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
F2
3 (cid:0) 4F1(F0 (cid:0) F2)
,

2F1

F2 + F3

)
,

(

Rep
2

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

case εf ≥ 0.99,

Rep
2

≤

F2 (cid:0) 1
3/8 (cid:0) F3

,

case εf < 0.99,

√

F3 +

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
F2
3 (cid:0) 4F1(F0 (cid:0) F2)
,

2F1

Rep
2

≤

βKoch&Hill =
⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

A =

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

F =

Comments 

Gidaspow combines the 
model developed by Wen and 
Yu (applied for higher 
volumetric void fractions, 
dilute systems) with that 
proposed by Ergun (applied 
for lower volumetric void 
fractions, dense systems). The 
drag coefficient Cdra is 
determined using the 
equation of Wen and Yu. The 
Gidaspow drag correlations 
are not continuous but have 
an unphysical step change at 
εf = 0.8. For practical 
calculations, this does not 
cause a problem, but a 
mathematical solution for this 
discontinuity was given by 
Huilin and Gidaspow [806]. 

The interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient is 
determined based on the drag 
coefficient Cdra and the 
exponent χ. 

Koch and Hill carried out a 
simulation study using the 
lattice Boltzmann method, 
resulting in a relationship for 
the interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient. 

The drag coefficient 
correlation is an extension of 
the pioneering DNS works of 
Koch and Hill (2001) [797, 

798]. The interphase 

momentum transfer 
coefficient is calculated based 
on the volumetric void 
fractions and the particle 
Reynolds number Rep  (given 
in Eq. (2.104)).  

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093052F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.9 (continued ) 

Homogeneous gas-solid drag models 

Correlations 
⎧

[

1 + 3

)/

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
(cid:0)
1 (cid:0) εf
2
(cid:0)

1 + 0.681

(cid:0)

+ (135/64)
)

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0)
(cid:0) 8.48

1 (cid:0) εf

1 (cid:0) εf

(cid:0)
)
(cid:0)
)
+ 17.14
1 (cid:0) εf
ln
)3
)2 + 8.16
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

(1 (cid:0) ω)

)
]

1 (cid:0) εf

+

Comments  

F0 =

F1 =

F2 =

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

⎧
⎨

⎩

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

⎧
⎪⎨

case 0.6 < εf < 0.99,

case εf ≤ 0.6

case 0.9 ≤ εf < 0.99,
))
,

1 (cid:0) εf

case εf < 0.9,

(

ω

10

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

)/

ε3
f

)

,

((cid:0)

10

1 (cid:0) εf

)/

ε3
f

)

,

√ /
̅̅̅
2

40

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
(cid:0)
)
1 (cid:0) εf

,

(cid:0)
0.11 + 0.00051exp

[

(1 (cid:0) ω)

1 + 3

(cid:0)
11.6
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
(cid:0)
1 (cid:0) εf
2

)/

(cid:0)
1 + 0.681

(cid:0)

+ (135/64)

)

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

(cid:0) 11.03

1 (cid:0) εf

)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
)
+ 17.89
1 (cid:0) εf
ln
)2 + 15.41
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

1 (cid:0) εf
)3

)
]

+

(

ω

10

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

)/

ε3
f

)

,

case εf > 0.6

((cid:0)

10

1 (cid:0) εf

)/

ε3
f

)

,

(cid:0)
0.03667 + 0.9351

case εf ≤ 0.6,

)

,

case εf > 0.905,

1 (cid:0) εf
)

1 (cid:0) εf

+ 0.0232ε(cid:0) 5

f

,

case εf ≤ 0.905,

F3 =

⎪⎩

(cid:0)
0.0673 + 0.212

(

ω = e

(

(cid:0)

0.4 (cid:0)
(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf
)
1 (cid:0) εf
)2

(cid:0) 10
[

)
))

.

(cid:0)

A

1 (cid:0) εf
εf

μf
d2
p

Beetstra et al. (2007) [808] 

βBeetstra =

(cid:0)
+ B

)

1 (cid:0) εf

]

Rep

, case Rep < 1000,

A = 180 +

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

)

18ε4
f
1 (cid:0) εf

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
(cid:0)
1 (cid:0) εf

)
,

1 + 1.5

0.31

B =

(
ε(cid:0) 1
f + 3εf

(cid:0)

)

+ 8.4Re(cid:0) 0.343

p

1 (cid:0) εf
1 + 103(1(cid:0) εf )Re2εf (cid:0) 2.5

p

)

.

Tenneti et al. (2011) [97] 

βTenneti = 18

)(

(cid:0)

μf

1 (cid:0) εf

1 + 0.15Re0.687

p

)

εf d2
p

+ 104.58

(cid:0)

μf

)2

+

1 (cid:0) εf
εf d2
p

(cid:0)

μf

8.64

1 (cid:0) εf
f d2
ε2

p

)

4
3

(cid:0)

μf ε2

f

+ 18

(

)4

Rep

0.95 +

(cid:0)

0.61

)

)3

.

1 (cid:0) εf
ε2
f

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p

Rong et al. (2013) [810] 

(
3
4

0.63 +

βRong =

)2ρf εf

√

4.8
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Rep

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

)

⃒
(
⃒
u→
⃒
⃒

p (cid:0) u→

f

dp

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ε1(cid:0) χ

f

,

(cid:0)
χRong = 2.65

)

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf

(

5.3ε2

f (cid:0) 3.5ε3

f

(

(cid:0)

)

exp

(cid:0)

1.5 (cid:0)

))2

)

(cid:0)

Rep

.

log10
2

Zaidi et al. (2014) [811] 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

βZaidi =

(cid:0)

μf

180

)2

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
pεf

+ 18

(cid:0)

μf ε3

f

1 (cid:0) εf

)(cid:0)

1 + 1.5
d2
p

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
(cid:0)
1 (cid:0) εf

)

+0.612

(cid:0)

μf ε(cid:0) 1.7

f

)

Rep

,

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p

196.2

(cid:0)

μf ε(cid:0) 0.7

f

)1.4

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p

+ 0.432

(cid:0)

μf ε(cid:0) 1.86

f

)

Rep

,

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p

case Rep ≤ 200,

case Rep > 200.

Beetstra et al. developed a 
model based on the work of 
Koch and Hill to calculate the 
interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient. This drag 
model is known in the 
literature as BVK, taking the 
first letters of the authors’ 
names (Beetstra, Van der 
Hoef, Kuipers). 

The interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient, obtained 
from the direct numerical 
simulations, differs from all 
other DNS correlations and 
the custom of the fluidization 
community. Therefore, the 
original correlation of Tenneti 
et al. is multiplied by εf to 
make sure that all of the DNS 
data are interpreted in the 
same way [809]. 

The interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient is 
determined based on the drag 
coefficient Cdra and the 
exponent χ. 

The interphase momentum 
transfer coefficient (DNS- 
derived) is calculated based 
on the volumetric void 
fractions and the particle 
Reynolds number Rep  (given 
in Eq. (2.104)).  

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093053F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.9 (continued ) 

Homogeneous gas-solid drag models 

Correlations 

Tang et al. (2015) [812]. 

(cid:0)

μf

βTang = 180

1 (cid:0) εf
εf d2
p
)
Rep

)2

+ 18

(cid:0)

μf ε3

f

1 (cid:0) εf

)(cid:0)

1 + 1.5
d2
p

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
(cid:0)
1 (cid:0) εf

)

[

(cid:0)
0.11

1 (cid:0) εf

)(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

2 (cid:0) εf

0.00456
ε4
f

(

+

0.169εf +

)

]

Re(cid:0) 0.343
p

.

0.0644
ε4
f

(cid:0)

μf εf

+18

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p

Zhou and Fan (2015) [813] 

βZhou&Fan = 18F0

(cid:0)

μf εf

)

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p

(cid:0)
+ 0.75

(cid:0)
0.256 + 1.41

1 (cid:0) εf

)

(cid:0)
(cid:0) 5.61

1 (cid:0) εf

)2 + 6.04
(cid:0)

)3)

A,

1 (cid:0) εf

(cid:0)

μf

1 (cid:0) εf

)

Rep

A =

((cid:0)

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf
(

)(cid:0) 1 + 3εf
1 + 103(1(cid:0) εf )Re

)

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0) 0.5(cid:0) 2(1(cid:0) εf )
p

)

+ 8.4Re(cid:0) 3.343

p

)

,

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
1 + 3

+ ε3
f

1 (cid:0) εf

)0.6)

,

case εf > 0.45,

(cid:0)

9.9

εf d2
p
)

1 (cid:0) εf
ε2
f

5.87sin

(
π
2

((cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf
0.637
ε2
f

)
)1.75)

,

case 0.45 ≥ εf ≥ 0.363,

)

(cid:0)
5.87

1 (cid:0) εf
0.637ε2
f

, case εf < 0.363,

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

F0 =

Sheikh and Qiu (2018) [814] 

βSheikh&Qiu = 18

(cid:0)

μf ε(cid:0) 1.5

f

1 (cid:0) εf

)

d2
p

(cid:0)
(
31.25

)

1(cid:0) ε3
f

(

+ Rep

0.2Re0.5εf (cid:0) 1
p

(cid:0) 0.053εf + 0.073

.

))

Kravets et al. (2019) [799] 

(cid:0)

μf

βKravets = 180

)2

+ 18

(cid:0)

μf ε3

f

1 (cid:0) εf

)(cid:0)

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
(cid:0)
1 (cid:0) εf

)

+

1 + 1.5
d2
p

1 (cid:0) εf
εf d2
p
(

(cid:0)

μf εf

18

1 (cid:0) εf
d2
p

)
Rep

(cid:0)
0.1695

1 (cid:0) εf

)(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

2 (cid:0) εf

0.004321
ε4
f

(

+

0.0719εf +

)

)

Re(cid:0) 0.2017
p

.

0.02169
ε4
f

Comments 

Tang et al. [812] derived a 
new drag model from the 
numerical simulation of 
randomly placed spheres in 
the computational domain, 
applying the immersed 
boundary method. The grid 
resolution was very fine and 
significantly smaller than the 
diameter of the particles, 
meaning that the gas-particle 
interaction on each particle 
surface is sufficiently 
resolved. The particle 
Reynolds number was 
selected in a range between 
50 and 1000 and the 
volumetric void fraction was 
varied between 0.4 and 0.9. 

Direct numerical simulations 
with an immersed boundary- 
lattice Boltzmann method 
were used. 

An accurate equation for 
calculating the mean drag 
force over a wide range of 
Reynolds numbers and 
porosity was proposed based 
on the numerical results. 

Drag force and Nusselt 
number correlations were 
derived based on the direct 
numerical simulations of fluid 
flow and heat transfer at 
single-particle and in 
packings.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093054F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.10 
Most commonly applied solid-solid drag models (in order by year).  

Homogeneous 
solid-solid drag 
models 

Correlations 

Gidaspow (1986)  

[824] 

βGidaspow
nm

=

(cid:0)

)

ρsnd3

(1 + enm)εsnρsnεsmρsm(dsn + dsm)2grad
sn + ρsmd3
)1/3 + (εsn + εsm)1/3
)1/3 + (εsn + εsm)1/3].

εsn,max + εsm,max
εsn,max + εsm,max

nm

sm

grad
nm =

(cid:0)
3
[(cid:0)
4

(
| u→

sn (cid:0) u→

sm|

)
,

Syamlal (1987)  

[825] 

(

3(1 + enm)

π
2

βSyamlal
nm

=

+ Cfri,nm

εsnρsnεsmρsm(dsn + dsm)2grad

nm

(

)

π2
8
ρsnd3

(cid:0)

2π

)

sm

sn + ρsmd3
)
.

grad
nm =

1
εf

+

3dsndsm
ε2
f (dsn + dsm)

(

εsn
dsn

+

εsm
dsm

Comments 

The correlation was derived from the KTGF, 
while the particle fluctuations are neglected. 

)
,

The correlation considered the effect of particle 
sliding during the collision. 

| u→

sn (cid:0) u→

sm|

Bell (2000) [826] 

βBell
nm =

grad
nm =

(cid:0)

2(1 + enm)εsnρsnεsmρsm(dsn + dsm)2grad
sn + ρsmd3
)1/3

ρsnd3

nm

sm

)

(
3
1 +
4
(

εnm,max
εsn + εsm

εnm,max
εsn + εsm

)1/3

,

(
| u→

sn (cid:0) u→

sm|

)

,

Bell’s model is an extended version of the 
Gidaspow model applying different expressions 
for the radial distribution function. 

[(cid:0)

εnm,max =

εsn,max (cid:0) εsm,max

)

(cid:0)
+ (1 + a)

1 (cid:0) εsn,max

)

εsm,max

][

εsn,max +

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εsn,max

)

εsm,max

] Xnm
εsn,max

+εsm,max, Case Xnm ≤

εnm,max = (1 (cid:0) a)

[

(cid:0)

)

εsn,max
1 (cid:0) εsn,max
]

)

,

εsm,max

εsn,max +
(cid:0)

εsn,max

1 (cid:0) εsn,max

εsm,max

(1 (cid:0) Xnm)

+εsn,max, Case Xnm >

(cid:0)

εsn,max
1 (cid:0) εsn,max

)

,

εsm,max

εsn,max +

√

a =

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
dsm
dsn

, Case Xnm =

εsn
εsn + εsm

.

Lathouwers and 
Bellan (2000)  
[827] 

βLath&Bellan
nm

=

(1 + enm)εsnρsnεsmρsmd2

nmgrad

nm

m0

⎡

⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

4
3

π
3

√

̅̅̅̅̅
2π

(Θsn + Θsm)1/2

(
| u→

)

sn (cid:0) u→

sm|

+

dnm(Θsn + Θsm)∇ln

nsn
nsm

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

,

The correlation considered additional 
differences in particle properties than only 
particle velocities in binary particle coupling. 

grad
nm =

1
1 (cid:0) ν

+

(
3dsndsmξ
(dsn + dsm)(1 (cid:0) ν)2 + 4

dsndsm
dsn + dsm

)2(

ξ2
(1 (cid:0) ν)3

)
,

ν =

ξ =

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

π
6
π
6

nsnd3

sn + nsmd3

sm

nsnd2

sn + nsmd2

sm

)
,

)
.

Huilin et al. 

(2000) [806, 
828,829] 

⎡

⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

βHuilin
nm = pnm

√

m2

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
(cid:0)
(
snΘsn + m2
smΘsm
2
πm2
0ΘsnΘsm

3
dnm

)

| u→

sn (cid:0) u→

sm|

+∇ln

εsn
εsm

+ 3∇

ln(msmΘsm)
ln(msnΘsn)

+

ΘsnΘsm
Θsn + Θsm

)

(

∇Θsm
Θ2
sm

(cid:0)

∇Θsn
Θ2
sn

pnm =

π(1 + enm)εsnρsnεsmρsmd3
(cid:0)
snΘsn + m2
m2
3

nmgrad
)
smΘsm

nm m0ΘsnΘsm

(

(cid:0)

m2
snΘsn + m2

0ΘsnΘsm
)
smΘsm

m2

(Θsn + Θsm)

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

,

)3/2(cid:0)

The radial distribution function is calculated 
according to Lathouwers and Bellan [827]. 

1 (cid:0) 3Δ + 6Δ2 (cid:0) 10Δ3…

)
,

msnΘsn (cid:0) msmΘsm
(cid:0)
smΘ2
+ ΘsnΘsm

sm

)

)]1/2

,

m2

sn + m2

sm

Δ =

[(cid:0)

enm =

sn + m2

m2

snΘ2
esn + esm
2

,

dnm =

dsn + dsm
2

,

m0 = msn + msm.

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093055F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 2.10 (continued ) 

Homogeneous 
solid-solid drag 
models 

Correlations 

Iddir et al. (2005) 

[697,830] 

βIddir
nm =

d2
nmεsnρsnεsmρsm
4m0

(1 + enm)grad
nm

)1.5

(

1
ΘsnΘsm

Comments 

The radial distribution function is calculated 
according to Iddir and Astratoopour [697]. 

⎡

⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

(

√
̅̅̅
π
R2

| u→

sn (cid:0) u→

sm|

)

(

R0

∇ln

+

dnmπ
12

nsn
nsm

(cid:0)

3
2

∇ln

msnΘsn
msmΘsm

)

⎡

⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

+

dnmπ
16

(

∇Θsm
Θ2
sm

(cid:0)

∇Θsn
Θ2
sn

)

R10 +

5msnmsm
192m2
0

R3

(

msn∇Θsm
msm∇Θ2
sm

(cid:0)

msm∇Θsn
msn∇Θ2
sn

)

(

+

5msnmsm
96m0

BnmR4

∇Θsm
msm∇Θ2
sm

(cid:0)

∇Θsn
msn∇Θ2
sn

)

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

,

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

R0 =

1
sm D2.5
A1.5

sm

+

15B2
sm
sm D3.5

2A2.5

sm

+

175B4
sm
8A3.5

sm D4.5

sm

+ …,

R2 =

1
2A1.5
sm D2

sm

+

3B2
sm
2A2.5
sm D3

sm

+

15B4
sm
8A3.5
sm D4

sm

+ …,

R3 =

1
sm D3.5
2A1.5

sm

+

21B2
sm
sm D4.5

2A2.5

sm

+

315B4
sm
8A3.5

sm D5.5

sm

+ …,

R4 =

3
sm D3.5
A2.5

sm

+

35B2
sm
sm D4.5

2A3.5

sm

+

414B4
sm
8A4.5

sm D5.5

sm

+ …,

+ …,

unm (cid:0) 1.135u0.5
nm

(cid:0)

R10 =

1
sm D2.5
A2.5

sm

+

25B2
sm
sm D3.5

2A3.5

sm

+

1225B4
sm
24A4.5

sm D4.5

sm

Asm =

msnΘsm + msmΘsn
2ΘsnΘsm

,

Bsm =

msnmsm(Θsm (cid:0) Θsn)
2m0ΘsnΘsm

,

Dsm =

msnmsm(msmΘsm (cid:0) msnΘsn)
.
0ΘsnΘsm

2m2

Chao et al. (2011) 

[831,832] 

βChao
nm =

(1 + enm)εsnρsnεsmρsmd2

nmgrad
nm

m0

Duan et al. (2020)  

[833] 

(cid:0)

nm = βChao
βDuan

nm

1.952εf (cid:0) 0.04919

)

.

⎡

⎣

π
2

√

̅̅̅̅̅
2π

Θ0.25

sn +

+

√

Θ0.25

sm (cid:0) 0.8Θ0.125
sn + Θ0.25
√
̅̅̅̅̅
2π

sn Θ0.25

Θ0.25

Θ0.25
sm (cid:0)

sm

̅̅̅̅̅
2π

sn Θ0.125

sm

)

⎤

⎦.

Chao et al. introduced a correction coefficient 
based on the Syamlal model [825]. For the 
frictional term of the drag coefficient, the value 
kfri = 800 is selected to fit simulation results to 
the experimental work by Bell [826]. Note that 
→
unm = (| u
particle velocities.  

sm|) is the difference between 

→
sn (cid:0) u

Duan et al. derived a correction term for the 
relation of Chao et al. [831] using PR-DNS 
simulations of bi-dispersed beds. The relation 
better predicts the solid-solid drag than 
KTGF-based relations but is only valid for low 
particle-Reynolds numbers.  

The  drag  models  mentioned  above  assume  that  the  particles  are 
uniformly  distributed  in  the  control  volumes  of  the  computational 
domain, disregarding the different flow structures within each control 
volume.  These  drag  models  are  well  known  to  overestimate  the  mo-
mentum exchange between the gas and solid phases [815]. For example, 
the drag models proposed by Ergun, Wen and Yu, Foscolo, and Garside 
were evaluated by Goldschmidt et al. [684] focusing on their impact on 
the  hydrodynamic  behavior  of  a  gas-solid  fluidized-bed  system.  The 
authors  show  that  both  the  minimum  fluidization  velocity  and  the 
average bed height depend significantly on the drag model employed, 
and conclude that none of these drag models can be applied universally. 
In 2019, Bian et al. [809] carried out TFM and DPM simulations of a 
fluidized  bed  with  monodisperse  particles.  The  numerical  results  of 
fourteen drag correlations available in the literature were compared to 
experimental data of Tang et al. [816] and the direct numerical simu-
lation. It was found that the TFM and DPM can qualitatively reproduce 
the hydrodynamic features of gas-solid flows, except for some specific 
TFM cases where abnormal fluidization behavior and solid circulation 

pattern can be seen. The authors claimed that more accurate interphase 
drag coefficients are still required. In a further study, Bian et al. [817] 
evaluated  the  drag  coefficients  that  can  consider  fluctuations  of  state 
variables (e.g. granular temperature, solid volume fraction such as Wylie 
et al. [818] and Huang et al. [819]) using the experimental and DNS data 
of  Tang  et  al.  [816],  Müller  et  al.  [820]  and  Luo  et  al.  [821]  as  the 
benchmarks.  The  quantitative  comparison  of  the  energy  transfer  rate 
from gas to inertial particles obtained from DNS, DPM, and TFM simu-
lations  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  2.28,  showing  that  all  simulated  energy 
transfer rates by DPM or TFM are within the range of DNS (0.00216W), 
except for the TFM with Tang et al. [822]. 

Recently, new drag models have been proposed, such as the Tang 
drag model and the multi-zone model (e.g. three-zone model or four- 
zone  drag  model).  In  the  multi-zone  drag  model,  the  computational 
domain  is  divided  into  different  zones  and  a  suitable  drag  model  is 
applied for each zone to match the measurement data [823].  

• Homogeneous solid-solid drag models 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093056F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.28. Comparison of the time-averaged interphase energy transfer rate obtained by two-fluid model, discrete-particle model, and direct numerical simulation for 
different homogeneous gas-solid drag models (reproduced from reference [817], with permission of Elsevier). 

For polydisperse gas-solid systems, the effect of solid phases on the 
drag force needs to be considered when calculating the interphase mo-
mentum  transfer  coefficient.  Similar  to  homogeneous  gas-solid  drag 
models, a variety of correlations can be found in the literature for ho-
mogeneous solid-solid drag models (see Table 2.10). The solid-solid drag 
coefficient was mainly derived from the kinetic theory of granular flow 
(KTGF) by neglecting the effect of particle fluctuations (e.g. Gidaspow 
[824], Syamlal [825], Bell [826]) or by including the effect of particle 
fluctuations (e.g. Lathouwers and Bellan [827], Huilin et al. [806,828, 
829], Iddir et al. [697,830], Chao et al. [831,832]). Recently, Duan et al. 
[833] applied direct numerical simulation to determine a correlation for 
the solid-solid drag coefficient. 

The KTGF-based solid-solid drag models mentioned above have been 
widely applied to practical polydisperse gas-solid systems. Although the 
models mainly differ in their correction terms, different effects of solid- 
solid drag correlations have been reported in the literature. Chao et al. 
[832] compared seven solid-solid drag models (Gidaspow, Syamlal, Bell, 
Lathouwers and Bellan, Chao et al., Huilin et al., and Iddir et al.) with 
particle  segregation  experiments  by  Goldschmidt  et  al.  [834].  All 
investigated drag models under-predicted the particle-particle interac-
tion  as  the  experimental  segregation  rates  could  not  be  achieved. 
Therefore,  Chao  et  al.  [832]  introduced  a  frictional  correction  factor 
fitting the experimental results. Gan et al. [835] investigated the effect 
of solid-solid interaction on particle segregation in a bi-disperse fluid-
ized  bed  using  the  multi-fluid  model.  The  authors  compared  the 
solid-solid drag model by Syamlal and Bell, claiming that both models 
could  not  predict  experimental  particle  segregation.  Zhou  and  Wang 
[836] modeled the particle mixing and segregation in a CFB riser using 
the multi-fluid model. The authors applied an extended version of the 
EMMS gas-solid drag model by Wang et al. [837] and the solid-solid drag 
models by Symalal [825]and Chao et al. [831]. The simulation results 
were compared well with experimental data (e.g. the particle concen-
tration along with the reactor height). The authors stated that the dif-
ference between the solid-solid drag models was insignificant. However, 
the inclusion of solid-solid interaction had a considerable influence on 
axial and radial particle distribution. 

Recently,  Duan et al.  [833] extended the  method of  van der Hoef 
et al. [838] to determine a solid-solid drag model applying direct nu-
merical  simulation  of  bi-dispersed  gas-solid  systems.  The  authors 
introduced a correction term to the drag model of Chao et al. [831,832], 
which  predicted  the  momentum  exchange  from  PR-DNS  better  than 
common KTGF-based models. The correlation is only applicable for low 
particle-Reynolds numbers and a sufficient grid resolution of around six 

times  the  particle  size  (or  lower)  is  required.  However,  the  authors 
showed a promising method, which could lead to an improved predic-
tion of particle segregation in polydisperse systems. 

2.5.2.12. Structure-dependent drag models. Fluidized-bed systems pose a 
major challenge for numerical simulation due to the different gas-solid 
flow regimes and their non-linear and non-equilibrium behavior. Such 
flows are characterized by a clustering of particles with high fluctuations 
over  time and  space, which leads to  various fluid  pressure drops and 
various  drag  forces.  For  the  modeling,  the  arrangement  of  particles/ 
clusters in the control volume is of high relevance, as it can vary widely 
(see Fig. 2.29 (a)). Conventional drag models mentioned above do not 
take into account this aspect appropriately, leading to unrealistic pre-
dictions.  Improving  the  numerical  grid  resolution  will  decrease  the 
number of ways, in which the particles can be arranged in the grid cell. 
However, a highly resolved numerical simulation is still unfeasible due 
to  the  computational  limitations,  therefore  coarse  grids  are  generally 
applied. These inevitably neglect the unresolved small-scale structures, 
resulting in a considerable overestimation of the bed expansion, espe-
cially for fine particles. It is well known that the impact of these unre-
solved small-scale structures on the resolved meso-scales in the dense 
gas-particle flows is crucial for accurately describing fluidized particle 
systems (e.g. correctly predicting the bed expansion). As a result, the 
numerical simulation of fluidized beds shows a grid-dependent solution. 
To take into account how the unresolved small-scale structures affect the 
macro-scale momentum equations, several subgrid drag modifications 
have been suggested, such as the energy minimization multi-scale model 
(EMMS),  the  Kuipers  group’s  drag  model,  the  Princeton  group’s  drag 
model,  the  Simonin  group’s  drag  model,  and  the  CD-Lab  model. 
Schneiderbauer  et  al.  and  Wang  et  al.  [126,839]  presented  a  detail 
comparative  analysis  of  these  subgrid  drag  models,  applied  to  dense 
gas-solid  flows  in  fluidized  beds.  The  effective  filtered  drag  force  per 
volume is computed based on the following equation: 

(

β

u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)

= Hdβ

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)

,

(2.211)  

with  the  homogeneous  interphase  momentum  transfer  coefficient  β 
modeled from the filtered (resolved) variables and the drag correction 
factor (heterogeneity index) Hd  as a function accounting for the unre-
solved structure. According to Schneiderbauer et al. [839], the subgrid 
drag models differ significantly in terms of both quality and quantity: 
developing  a  universal  subgrid  model  continues  to  be  the  subject  of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093057F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  2.29. (a)  different  arrangements  of  the  particles  in  a  control  volume,  and  (b)  physical  resolution  of  gas-solid  interaction  structure  in  the  EMMS  model 
(reproduced from reference [840], with permission of ACS Publications). 

current  research.  The  EMMS  model  was  one  of  the  first  approaches 
dealing with the influence of heterogeneous structures of gas-solid flows 
on the drag force. It is frequently applied in the literature, and therefore 
will be explained briefly here. 

The physical basis of the EMMS model developed by Li [841] takes 
into  account  the  dynamical multi-scale  structures  caused by  the  clus-
tering of solid particles. The creation of those structures was found to be 
based on the particles’ tendency to minimize energy interexchange with 
the surrounding gas. The EMMS model takes into account three distin-
guishable sub-structures: a dense phase, a dilute phase, and an interface 
that  characterizes  the  boundary  between  the  dense  phase  and  dilute 
phase. In the dense phase and at the interface of the clusters, lower drag 
forces  are  induced  compared  to  a  single  particle  (dilute  phase). 
Furthermore, in the derivation of the EMMS equations, a mass exchange 
between  the  dense  phase  and  the  dilute  phase  via  the  connecting 
interface has to be taken into account. This type of flow structure os-
cillates sharply between different energy states, while the frequency and 
the amplitude of the power spectrum depend heavily on the particle’s 
Geldart  classification.  For  Geldart  B  particles,  the  power  spectra  are 
higher compared to those of type D [842]. This fluctuating nature leads 
to  strands  suddenly growing  quickly  or  collapsing  at  different energy 
states. The inherently unstable nature of cluster formation and collapse 
is related to the particle movement between the dilute phase and the 
dense  phase  at  the  interface  of  the  clusters.  Once  the  interface  of  a 
cluster is passed by either a gas or a particle, a change takes place in the 
gas or particle properties. This is taken into consideration by a pressure 
drop balance equation in the EMMS system. In a study on the chaotic 
behavior  of  gas-solid  flows,  Marzocchella  et  al.  [843]  describe  three 
regions that are very similar to the EMMS physical basis, namely the 
particle-controlled  region,  the  cluster-controlled  region,  and  the 
bottom-bed-controlled  region.  The  authors  related  the  existence  of  a 
region  to  the  Kolmogorov  entropy  in  order  to  characterize  the 

fluidization state and quantify the turbulence level. 

In the EMMS model, the dense phase and the interface phase can be 
described by a total of five variables: the superficial fluid velocity of the 
dense phase Uf,den, the superficial particle velocity of the dense phase 
Us,den, the volumetric void fraction of the dense phase εf,den, the cluster 
size dclu and the volume fraction of the dense phase f. In the dilute phase, 
three  variables  are  used,  namely  the  superficial  fluid  velocity  of  the 
dilute  phase  Uf,dil,  the  superficial particle  velocity  of the  dilute  phase 
Us,dil,  and  the  volumetric  void  fraction  of  the  dilute  phase  εf,dil.  Eight 
independent variables that either belong to the dense phase or the dilute 
gas phase are involved in the solution of the EMMS model. Recently, the 
inertial acceleration of the particles in the dilute and dense phase aden 
and adil have been inserted into the original EMMS model, meaning that 
10  independent  variables  must  be  solved  (see  Fig.  2.29  (b)).  The 
established equations for the 10 parameters in the extended versions of 
the EMMS model are given below as described by Wang et al. in 2008 
[844]: 

The force balance for the clusters in the unit volume of the suspen-

sion: 

(cid:0)

f

3
Cdra,den
4

1 (cid:0) εf ,den
dp
)(cid:0)

(cid:0)

= f

1 (cid:0) εf ,den

ρs (cid:0) ρf

)

(g + aden).

)

ρf U2

slip,den +

3
Cdra,clu
4

f
dclu

ρf U2

slip,int

(2.212) 

The  force  balance  for  the  dilute  phase  in  the  unit  volume  of  the 

suspension: 

(1 (cid:0)

3
Cdra,dil
4

(cid:0)
f )

1 (cid:0) εf ,dil
dp

)
ρf U2

slip,dil = (1 (cid:0)

(cid:0)
f )

1 (cid:0) εf ,dil

)(cid:0)

)

ρs (cid:0) ρf

(g + adil).

(2.213) 

The pressure drop balance between the dense phase and the dilute 

phase with the contribution of the cluster: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093058F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf ,dil
dp

)
ρf U2

slip,dil +

Cdra,dil

f
(1 (cid:0)

Cdra,int

f )

1
dclu

ρf U2

slip,int

= Cdra,den

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εf ,den
dp

)
ρf U2

slip,den

The mass balance of the fluid phase: 

Uf = (1 (cid:0)

f )Uf ,dil + fUf ,den.

The mass balance of the particle phase: 

Us = (1 (cid:0)

f )Us,den + fUs,dil.

The mean volumetric void fraction: 

εf = f εf ,den + (1 (cid:0)

f )εf ,dil.

minimizing the energy spent on suspending and transporting the parti-
cles per unit mass of particles Nst → min : 

(2.214) 

Nst =

(cid:0)

1
1 (cid:0) εf

)

ρs

[mdilFdilUdil + mdenFdenUden + mintFintUdil(1 (cid:0)

f )]→min,

(2.224)  

(2.215) 

(2.216) 

(2.217) 

with the variables summarized in Table 2.11. 

The cluster diameter can be determined using the empirical corre-

lation given by Li and Kwauk [846,847]: 

[

(

dclu = dp

Us
(1(cid:0) εmax) (cid:0)

Nst ρs
(ρs (cid:0) ρf )

(cid:0)

(

Umin,flu + εmin,fluUs
(1(cid:0) εmin,flu)

Umin,flu + εmin,flu Us
(1(cid:0) εmin,flu)

)]
g
,

)
g

(2.225)  

The added mass force according to Zhang and Vanderheyden [701]: 

Faddmass = Caddmass

(cid:0)

εf ,dil (cid:0) εf ,den

)
f ρdil(aden (cid:0) adil),

(2.218)  

approximated by De Wilde [845] as: 
)
ρs (cid:0) ρf
g
[
ρs(1 (cid:0) εdil) + ρf εdil

s〉
Caddmas(εdil (cid:0) εden)f

aden (cid:0) adil =

〈ε′

sε′

(cid:0)

with the added mass coefficient: 

Caddmas =

1
2

(1 + 2f )
,
f )
(1 (cid:0)

],

(2.219)  

(2.220)  

and the variance in the solids concentration fluctuation: 

〈

ε

′

′

sε
s

〉

=

(1 (cid:0) εs)4

1 + 4εs + 4ε2

s (cid:0) 4ε3

s + ε4
s

,

(2.221)  

considering that the sum of the volume fractions of the phases has to be 
equal to unity: 

εs + εf = 1,

and: 

εden = εf (cid:0) nσε,

(2.222)  

(2.223)  

where the symbol σε  represents the standard deviation of the solid vol-
ume fraction. 

In the last equations, Cdra,dil, Cdra,den and Cdra,int are the effective drag 
coefficient for a particle in the dilute phase and the dense phase, and the 
effective  drag  coefficient  in  the  interphase  (cluster);  Uslip,dil,  Uslip,den  , 
Uslip,int  represent the superficial slip velocity in the dilute phase, dense 
phase, and interphase, Uf and Us denote the superficial fluid velocity and 
the superficial particle velocity. In order to close this set of equations, a 
stability  condition  is  required.  For  a  given  problem  with  a  specified 
superficial  fluid  velocity  Uf,  a  superficial  particle  velocity  Us,  and  a 
volumetric  void  fraction  εf,  Li  and  Kwauk  [846,847]  proposed 

where εf,max  is the maximum voidage for particle aggregating, and its 
value can be determined from experiments. Besides the cluster corre-
lation  proposed  by  Li  [846],  other  expressions  can  be  found  in  the 
literature [848,849], e.g. the cluster empirical correlation as described 
by Harris et al. [850]: 
(cid:0)

)

dclu =

1 (cid:0) εf
(cid:0)
40.8 (cid:0) 94.5

).

1 (cid:0) εf

(2.226) 

Finally, the 10 variables in the EMMS model can be calculated by 
minimizing Nst (Eq. (2.224)) under the constraint of the eight non-linear 
equations  (Eqs.  (2.212)  to  (2.217),  Eq.  (2.219)  and  Eq.  (2.223)),  in 
addition to the empirical correlation of the cluster diameter (Eq. (2.225) 
or Eq. (2.226)). 

It should be noted that the original EMMS model with its indepen-
dent  variables  is  shown  here  as  described  by  the  group  of  Professor 
Jinghai  Li  [841,844,851]  and  originally  proposed  for  monodisperse 
gas-solid flows. In this connection, it is worth mentioning that similar 
EMMS models were proposed by other research groups. For example, the 
EMMS model of Professor Huilin Lu group formulated on the basis of 
type-A model. The following equivalent diameter of clusters for a CFB 
riser can be applied [852]: 

dclu =

(

dpU2
ck

Uck (cid:0) εf Uf (cid:0)

),

εf εsUs
(1(cid:0) εf )

(2.227)  

where Uck represents the choking velocity that can be estimated using an 
empirical correlation of e.g. Yates [853]. The EMMS model of Professor 
Hongzhong Li group [854,855] used seven local structural parameters to 
describe  the  internal  flow  structure  of  bubbling  fluidized  beds.  The 
seven local structural parameters have been solved based on momentum 
and mass conservations as well as empirical correlations. The effect of 
sub-grid  heterogeneity  can  be  considered,  even  so,  more  empirical 
correlations were applied in the model so that no stability condition is 
required. All in all, the development of EMMS models is ongoing and 
several modifications have been made to the listed equations above in 

Table 2.11 
Expressions for the EMMS model [840,844].  

Expressions 

Effective drag coefficient 

Standard drag coefficient 

Characteristic Reynolds number 

Superficial slip velocity 

Drag force acting on single particle or cluster 

Numbers of particles or clusters in unit volume 

mden =

Dense phase 

Dilute phase 

Interphase 

Cdra,den = Cdra,pε(cid:0) 4.65
den    
3.6
Re0.313
den    

24
Reden

Cdra,p =

+

Reden =

ρf dpUslip,den
μf    

Uslip,den = Uden (cid:0)

εdenUp,den
(1 (cid:0) εden)

Fden = Cdra,den

U2

slip,den    

πd2
pρf
8
f (1 (cid:0) εden)
/

πd3
p

6    

Cdra,dil = Cdra,pε(cid:0) 4.65
dil    
3.6
Re0.313
dil    

24
Redil

Cdra,p =

+

Redil =

ρf dpUslip,dil
μf    

Uslip,dil = Udil (cid:0)

εdenUp,dil
(1 (cid:0) εdil)

Fdil = Cdra,dil

πd2
pρf
8

U2

slip,dil    

mdil =

(1 (cid:0)

f )(1 (cid:0) εdil)

/

πd3
p

6    

Cdra,int = Cdra,p(1 (cid:0)

(cid:0) 4.65. 
f)

Cdra,p =

24
Reint

+

3.6
Re0.313
int    

Reint =

ρf dcluUslip,int
μf    

(

Uslip,int =

Udil (cid:0)

)

εdilUp,den
(1 (cid:0) εden)

(1 (cid:0)

f )

Fint = Cdra,int

πd2
cluρf
8

U2

slip,int    

mint =

f
πd3
clu

/

6     

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093059F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

recent years; they have also been extended to polydisperse flows with 
two or more types of particles (among others: Zhou and Wang [836], 
Ahmad et al. [856], Qin et al. [857], Stroh [86], Qin et al.[857], Jia et al. 
[858] and Lan et al. [859]). 

The set of EMMS equations must be solved for each control volume, 
meaning  that  directly  solving  this  non-linear  optimization  problem 
within  the  CFD  solver  requires  significant  computational  time.  For 
simplification, the set of EMMS equations for any combination of the 
input  parameters  is  pre-calculated  using  e.g.  FORTRAN  [81,189], 
MATLAB [86,334]; more recently, a machine deep learning approach 
has been applied (e.g. an artificial neural network) [370,860,861]. The 
obtained heterogeneity index values Hd  are then interpolated by poly-
nomials  and  included in sub-routines that can be hooked by the  CFD 
solver. 

Finally, it should be mentioned that there is an increasing number of 
researchers,  who  recommended  using  the  structure-dependent  drag 
models due to their accuracy. However, this assumption is not always 
correct. For example, Loha et al. [862] showed that the Gidaspow and 
Syamlal models predicted the core-annulus structure of the bed, but the 
EMMS  did  not.  In  the  work  of  Shah  et  al.  [863],  the  EMMS  model 
(without  corrections)  was  related  to  a  considerable  error  at  low  gas 
volume  fractions when  compared with lattice Boltzmann  simulations. 
Shah  et  al.  [864]  claimed  that  the  EMMS  model  resulted  in  a  false 
fluidization mode (BFB instead of CFB) when using the measured mean 
particle size of the circulating fluidized bed. 

2.5.3. Heat transfer 

Heat  transfer  takes  place  in  gas-solid  flows  within  the  gas  phase, 
within the solid phase, and between the gas and solid phases, as illus-
trated schematically in Fig. 2.30. 

Heat transfer within the solid phase and from gas to solid is based on 
different mechanisms (Terms 2 to 6 in the energy equation of the particle 
i, Eq. (2.142)). These include the rates of the heat flow due to conduction 
between the particle i and the adjacent collision partners, due to con-
vection  between  the  particle  i  and  the  surrounding  gas phase,  due  to 
radiation between the particle i and the surrounding gas phase, and due 
to  heterogeneous  chemical  reaction  in  the  solid  phase,  as  explained 
below:  

• Heat transfer due to conduction: Depending on the relative position 
of the collision partners, the conductive heat transfer between the 
collision partners takes into account the particle-gas-particle and/or 
the particle-gas-wall conduction (collision partners are not in con-
tact) as well as the particle-particle and/or particle-wall conduction 
(collision partners are in contact), as can be seen in Fig. 2.30 In the 
following,  the  conductive  particle-particle  heat  transfer  will  be 
shown. Similar approaches apply to the conductive particle-wall heat 
transfer, assuming that the wall has an infinite radius and mass. The 
heat transfer due to conduction between two particles is given as: 
ij = qp(cid:0) f (cid:0) p
qcond

+ qp(cid:0) p
ij

.

ij

(2.228)  

The rate of heat flow from a particle to a gas and back to a particle (i, 
f, j) with the same diameter R is given as described by Zhou et al. 
[865] as: 

qp(cid:0) f (cid:0) p
ij

=

(cid:0)

Tj (cid:0) Ti

∫rpf

)

rpij

(

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
R2 (cid:0) r2

(cid:0)

2πrdr

)(

r(R+H)
rij

1
λp,i

+ 1
λp,j

)

(cid:0)

+ 2

)

,

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
R2(cid:0) r2

(R+H)(cid:0)
λf

with  the  distance  between  the  particle  surface  i  and  the  particle 
surface j: 

(2.229)  

H =

dij (cid:0) 2R
,
2

and the geometric variables, illustrated in : 

rpf =

√

Rrij

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
.
ij + (R + H)2
r2

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
3Vij
πdij

,

rij =

(2.230)  

(2.231)  

(2.232)  

In the last equations, rpij  is the radius of the contact circle between 
particles i and j, dij describes the distance between the center points 
of  two  particles,  Vij  represents  the  volume  of  the  Voronoi  domain 

Fig. 2.30. Heat transfer mechanisms in gas-solid flows.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093060F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

(polyhedron)  between  two  particles,  and  λp,i,  λp,j  and  λf  are  the 
thermal conductivity of the particles and fluid, respectively. Deter-
mining the volumes of Voronoi polyhedra for a transient simulation 
with  a  relatively  large  number  of  particles  is  a  time-consuming 
process. Based on the study by Yang et al. [866], Zhou et al. [865] 
stated that the face area Aij of Voronoi polyhedra between two par-
ticles is sufficient for the heat transfer model, written as: 

Aij = πrij = 0.985R2

(cid:0)

)(cid:0) 2
3,

1 (cid:0) εp

simplifying Eq. (2.232) to produce: 
)(cid:0) 1
3,

rij = 0.56R

1 (cid:0) εp

(cid:0)

(2.233)  

(2.234)  

with the volumetric fraction corresponding to the particle i, which 
can be obtained from the local volumetric void fraction of the fluid 
cell, where the particle is located. 

The conductive heat transfer due to particle-particle contact qp(cid:0) p
includes  two  mechanisms,  namely  heat  transfer  through  a  static 
contact area qstatic
(when the relative velocity between the particles is 
zero, e.g. fixed bed) and heat transfer due to the collision qcol
ij . The 
following relations are frequently applied in the literature [867,868]: 

ij 

ij 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

qp(cid:0) p
ij =

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

C0

)
πr2
Tj (cid:0) Ti
)(cid:0) 1/2
)(cid:0) 1/2 +
(cid:0)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
qcol
ij

cont(cid:0) 1/2
con
ρp,jcp,jλp,j

ρp,icp,iλp,i

, Zhouet al. (2008),

(cid:0)

4rcon
(
1
λp,i

)
Tj (cid:0) Ti
)
1
λp,i

,

+
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
qstatic
ij

Batchelor&O’Brien (1977).

(2.235)  

The  particle-particle  contact  radius  rcon  and  the  particle-particle 
contact duration tcon can be written as follows: 

5 ̂mij

⎛

⎝

(⃒
⃒
⃒ u→n
⃒

ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

̂R

2

ij

4Eij

)2

1/5

⎞

⎠

,

rcon =

tcon = 2.94

⎛

⎜
⎝

4Eij

̂R

2/5

⎞

⎟
⎠

,

⃒
)2
⃒
⃒
⃒

5 ̂mij
(⃒
⃒
⃒ u→n
⃒

ij

2

ij

(2.236)  

(2.237)  

→n

ij  is  the  normal  relative  velocity  of  the  particles  i  and  j 

where  u
̂
(defined in Eq. (2.182)), and  ̂mij, 
Rij  and Eij  stand for the reduced 
mass, the reduced radius, and the reduced Young’s modulus, allowing 
two bodies to be treated as one (see Eqs. (2.160), (2.190) and (2.191)). 
The variable C0 mainly depends on the Fourier number, the density, 
and specific heat capacity of the collision partners i and j. 

• Heat transfer due to convection: Due to the large contact area be-
tween  the  gas  and  solid  phases  in  fluidized-bed  systems,  the 
convective  heat  transfer  represents  the  dominant  heat  transfer 
mechanism. The rate of heat flow due to convection between the gas 
and solid phases can be determined for the particle i according to the 
following well-known relation: 
(cid:0)

qconv
f →p,i = αf →p,iAp,i

Tf (cid:0) Tp,i

)
,

(2.238)  

where  the  particle  surfaceAp,i  and  the  heat transfer  coefficient  be-
tween  the gas and  the particle αf → p,  i  can be calculated using the 
Nusselt number Nu. Here, the correlation given by Ranz and Marshall 
is mostly applied [869]: 

Nu = 2 + 0.6Re1/2Pr1/3,

case 0 ≤ Re < 200, 0 ≤ Pr < 250,

(2.239)  

Further correlations can be found, for example, in [65,870-873], 

as summarized in a recent review paper (Golshan et al. [22]).  
• Heat transfer due to radiation: In the literature, for simplification, 
a similar approach applies to radiative heat transfer modeling, as 
used for convective heat transfer. Here, the average temperature of 
particles and gas in the case of a volume fraction in an enclosed 
spherical domain Ω is examined instead of the gas temperatures in 
all grid cells in the computational domain: 

(

qrad
f →p,i = σεp,iAp,i

loc (cid:0) T 4
T 4
p,i

)

,

(2.240)   

with the particle emissivity εp,i, the Stefan-Boltzmann constant σ, and 
the following equation to calculate Tf,loc [865]: 

Tloc = εf Tf ,Ω
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Term 1

+

(cid:0)

∑k=NΩ

) 1
NΩ

.
1 (cid:0) εf
Tk(k ∕= i)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Term 2

k

(2.241)  

Here,  term  1  describes  the  average  fluid  temperature  in  the 
enclosed  spherical  domain  Ω,  and  term  2  represents  the  average 
temperature of the particles NΩ  that are located in the domain Ω. In 
the literature, a domain diameter (dΩ = 3dp) is suggested for mono-
disperse systems, while the largest particle size should be used for 
polydisperse systems dΩ = 3dmax
.  
• Heat transfer due to heterogeneous chemical reaction: The released/ 
consumed rate of heat flow due to heterogeneous chemical reactions 
is defined based either on the particle surface or the particle volume. 
The rate of heat flow based on the particle surface, for example, can 
be calculated using the following equation: 

p

qhet,rea
i

= mp,iAp,ikrea

p,i Δhrea,0

p,i

.

(2.242)  

Here, mp,i is the mass of the particle i, while krea

p,i  are the 
reaction  rate  constant  and  the  standard  enthalpy  of  reaction, 
respectively. 

p,i  and Δhrea,0

f  and Sh

The heat transfer within the gas phase and from the solid phase to the 
gas phase includes two contributions Sh
p→f  as shown in the energy 
equation of the gas phase, Eq. (2.69). The first source term Sh
f  takes into 
account  the  heat  released/consumed  by  homogeneous  gas  phase  re-
actions as well as the heat transfer in the fluid phase due to radiation 
(the transport equation of radiation (see Eq. (2.247)) considers the ra-
diation intensity as a function of the position and the direction for gas 
and solid phases). The second source term Sh
p→f  takes into account the 
heat transfer from the solid phase to the gas phase due to the tempera-
ture difference between the two phases. It includes two parts, namely 
the heat transfer due to convection and the heat transfer due to phase 
transformation from the solid to the gas phase: 

Sh
p→f =

Sconv
p→f
⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
Heat transfer due to convection

+

Shet,rea
p→f
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Heat transfer due to heterogeneous reaction

.

(2.243) 

The convective rate of heat flow per unit volume from particles to the 
gas phase can be defined by considering the temperature change of all 
the  particles  located  in  the  control  volume  between  two  consecutive 
time steps: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093061F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Sconv
p→f =

1
V CV
f

∑k=NCV

(cid:0)

αp,kAp,k

Tp,k (cid:0) Tf

)
.

i=1

Here, αp,k stands for the heat transfer coefficient of the particle k, Ap,k 
denotes  the  particle  surface,  Tp,k  represents  the  temperature  of  the 
particle k, Tf  is the gas temperature, and NCVidentifies the number of 
particles including walls that are located in the control volume CV. The 

(2.244) 

absorption and the emitting of radiation by the gas, scattering due to the 
high particle loading in the fluidized bed is important [874]. 

The transport of radiation is described by the radiation intensity I, 
→
which is a function of the position  r
. A transfer 
equation can be derived for the radiative intensity, which describes the 
change in intensity in the direction of the radiation propagation [875]:  

→
and the direction  s

∂I( r→, s→)
1
∂t
c
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Temporal change of radiation intensity

+

∂I( r→, s→)
∂s
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Radiation intensity change along the path

+

(arad + σsca)I( r→, s→)
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Intensity reduction by absorption and out(cid:0) scattering

σT 4
= aradn2
rad
π
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Increase by emission

)

(

∫4π

(
r→, s→

+

I

σsca
4π
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Intensity increaseby in(cid:0) scattering

s→⋅ s→

dΩsca

Φ

sca

sca

0

.

)

heat transfer due to phase transformation from the solid phase to the gas 
phase takes place due to the heterogeneous chemical reactions and can 
be determined as follows: 

Shet,rea
p→f = (cid:0)

1
V CV
f

∑k=N CV

i=1

mp,kAp,kkrea

p,k Δhrea,0

p,k

.

(2.245) 

Another approach assumes that the heat of the heterogeneous reac-

tion is completely absorbed by the solid phase and therefore Shet,rea
p→f 
equal to zero. 

is set 

In contrast to the heat transfer due to convection and heterogeneous 
reactions, the calculation of the heat transfer through radiation is related 
to higher numerical effort. Therefore, the following simplified equation 
can be applied [50]: 

Srad
p→f = (cid:0)

1
V CV
f

∑k=NCV

i=1

(

σεp,kAp,ik

p,k (cid:0) T 4
T 4

f

)
.

(2.246) 

The  above  Equation  only  takes  into  account  the  particles  that  are 
located  in  the  investigated  control  volume.  As  can  be  seen  from  Eqs. 
(2.240)  and  (2.246),  applied  to  determine  the  radiative  heat  transfer 
from the gas to the solid and vice versa, the contributions of other grid 
cells,  particles,  or  walls  are  not  taken  into  consideration.  A  detailed 
literature review shows that the  modeling of the  heat transfer  due to 
radiation in gas-solid flows is usually disregarded because of the high 
complexity of the problem. The radiative heat transfer of the solid phase 
has both receiving and emitting elements. If a radiant heat flux strikes a 
particle  surface,  the  incident  radiation  is  partly  absorbed,  while  the 
remaining part is scattered out of the surface. The reflection, refraction, 
diffraction, and transmission depend strongly on the optical properties of 
the particle and the particle size relative to the wavelength of the incident 
radiation [741]. Great efforts in terms of meaningful experimental and 
numerical  investigations must  therefore  be made to  gain  a  better un-
derstanding of radiative heat transfer between the gas and solid phases. 
Heat transfer due to radiation within the fluid phase (see Eq. (2.69)) 
is  of  high  relevance  but  is  often  neglected  in  many  applications. 
Nevertheless, in CFD simulations dealing with pyrolysis, combustion, or 
gasification, the gas phase consists mainly of steam, carbon dioxide, and 
carbon  dioxide,  which  are  great  absorbers  and  emitters  of  radiation. 
Taking into account the high temperatures in these processes, the effect 
of radiative heat transfer can be much higher than or of the same order 
of  magnitude  as  convective  heat  transport.  For  example,  in  the  com-
bustion chamber of boilers, the heat transfer from the flue gas to the 
surrounding  walls  mainly  takes  place  through  radiation.  Besides  the 

(2.247)   

→, s

The first term, describing the temporal change in the radiation in-
tensity, is neglected for engineering applications since this change arises 
→) responds almost 
with 1/c, where c is the speed of light and thus I( r
instantaneously to temperature changes. The second term is the change 
in radiation intensity along the path. The radiation intensity can change 
along the path by absorption, out-scattering, emission, and in-scattering. 
A reduction in intensity due to absorption and out-scattering is described 
by  defining  an  absorption  coefficient  arad  and  a  scattering  coefficient 
σsca. The increase in emission is described by the absorption coefficient 
arad, the refractive index ηrad, the Stefan-Boltzmann constant σ, and the 
→
temperature T. The phase function Φ( s
sca) is a probability density 
function  that  describes  how  much  radiant  energy  in  the  direction  of 
→
radiation  s
is  in-scattered.  The  integral  of  the  phase  function  is 
normalized to unity: 

→
⋅ s

∫4π

(
s→⋅ s→

sca

Φ

)

dΩsca = 1.

1
4π

0

(2.248) 

The analytical solution of the radiative transfer equation is achieved 
for simple geometries and with simplifications for the properties of the 
radiation-active medium, such as the radiation behavior of a medium 
when the grey body is between two parallel, infinitely large, and flat 
plates. Here, the spectral intensity of the radiation emission of the me-
dium is proportional to Planck’s law of black body radiation. For com-
plex geometries, numerical methods are applied to solve the radiative 
transport equation. There are two main types of radiation modeling:  

• Models  based  on  radiation  tracing,  e.g.  Monte  Carlo  and  discrete 

transfer model.  

• Models  based  on  the  difference  method,  e.g.  Rosseland  and  P1 

model. 

Most  of  these  numerical  methods  are  already  built  into  the  well- 
known  CFD  software  packages,  e.g.  ANSYS-FLUENT  or  OpenFOAM. 
Further information can be found, for example, in [76,876]. 

2.5.4. Mass transfer and chemical reactions 

The  chemical  reactions  involved  depend  on  the  process  under 
investigation (e.g. combustion or gasification of solid fuels, CO2 capture 
technologies, or metallurgical processes). Examples worth mentioning 
include the chemical reaction mechanisms for a conventional combus-
tion process, a chemical-looping combustion process, and a gasification 
process. Other chemical reaction mechanisms are described in the State- 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093062F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

of-the-art studies section.  

a)  Solid  fuel  combustion:  The  combustion  process  of  solid  fuels  (e.g. 
coal,  biomass,  municipal  solid  waste,  refuse-derived  fuel,  or  solid 
recovered fuel) mainly includes four main steps: drying, pyrolysis, 
and  the  combustion  of  volatile  matter  and  char  particles  (see 
Fig. 2.31 (a)). For modeling solid fuel combustion, a global five-step 
reaction  mechanism  is  generally  used.  This  consists  of  the  drying 
process  (R0),  the  pyrolysis  (R1),  the  heterogeneous  chemical  re-
actions  including  char  oxidation  (R2),  the  Boudouard  gasification 
reaction (R3), and the homogeneous chemical reactions for volatile 
matter combustion including hydrocarbon oxidation (R4) and car-
bon monoxide oxidation (R5): 

R0 : Raw solid fuel→SF + H2O
R1 : SF⇒C + CxHy + CO + ... + H2O + N2
R2 : C + 1/2O2→CO
R3 : C + CO2→2CO
R4 : CH4 + 3/2O2→CO + 2H2O
R5 : CO + 1/2O2→CO2

(2.249)  

◦

The drying process takes place when the temperature of the solid fuel 
is  higher  than  100 
C.  The  pyrolysis  process  is  complex,  with  the 
thermal degradation of organic substances occurring in the absence 
of  oxygen.  During  the  pyrolysis  process,  the  solid  fuel  (SF)  de-
composes  into  char,  tar,  gases  (such  as  carbon  monoxide,  carbon 
dioxide, and nitrogen), and volatile organic compounds, which are 
released in different proportions depending on the solid fuel prop-
erties, the heating rate and the residence time. The tar consists of 
various species including heavy hydrocarbons, organic acids, alde-
hydes, alcohols, and phenols. In a subsequent reaction, the tar splits 
into char, volatile components, and gases. The char is considered as 
carbon only in many simplified combustion studies, but those failed 
to  simulate  the  formation  of  emissions.  For  many  solid  fuels,  e.g. 
coal, the sulfur is divided almost evenly between volatiles and char. 
Furthermore, a higher share of nitrogen is often found in the char 
compared with the volatiles. The ash, which is the end product of the 
combustion  process,  is  mainly  composed  of  minerals  and  small 
amounts  of  other  non-combustible  organic  substances  or  other 
oxidant  residues.  In  the  reaction  mechanism  (2.249),  the  species 

(CxHy) denotes a general hydrocarbon; however, methane is gener-
ally  meant.  The  pyrolysis  reaction  rate  can  be  calculated  using 
different kinetic mechanisms such as the single-step global model, 
the  single-step  multi-reaction  model,  and  the  secondary  kinetic 
mechanism for tar-cracking [877] from the surrounding flow to form 
CO and CO2 (char oxidation). Other heterogeneous reactions such as 
Boudouard  gasification  reaction,  steam  gasification,  and  hydroge-
nating gasification may be taken into consideration. These lead to the 
production of H2, CO, and CH4. The combustion rates of char parti-
cles depend on the temperature, the size of the particles, the molar 
concentration of oxidant, and its diffusion rate to the particle surface. 
Several kinetic approaches have already been developed and applied 
to different solid fuels (e.g. coal [878] and biomass [879]). Among 
others, Kaushal et al. [880] presented a comprehensive model for the 
char combustion of biomass in a circulating fluidized bed. The model 
is based on the particle-shrinkage theory and assumes that the char 
particle diameter decreases at a constant density. 

The gases and volatile compounds that are set free by the pyrolysis 
process react with each other and with the available oxidant. The 
heat generated by the exothermic reactions plays an important role 
in  releasing  further  volatile  components  and  the  ignition  of  char 
particles.  The  reaction  rates  of  the  gas-phase  combustion  can  be 
modeled  using  different  approaches,  explained  below;  further  in-
formation can be found, for example, in [44,881,882]:  
1)  Laminar  finite  rate:  The  model  is  based  fully  on  the  Arrhenius 
formulation,  which  assumes  that  reactions  happen  only  in 
laminar  flow  (i.e.  the  turbulence  effect  on  the  reaction  is  dis-
regarded).  This  formulation  is  the  same  as  the  theoretical 
Arrhenius rate. The chemical reaction takes place given sufficient 
activation energy and if all the reactants are present. The equi-
librium  constant  is  then  calculated  using  the  enthalpy  and  en-
tropy of the species involved. The backward reaction rate can be 
taken into consideration if necessary.  

2)  Eddy  dissipation  rate:  The  formulation  of  an  eddy  dissipation 
model (EDM) is proposed by Magnussen and Hjertager [883]. The 
model  suggests  that  in  turbulent  flows,  the  reaction  rate  is  a 
function of the turbulent kinetic energy, the dissipation rate of the 
kinetic energy, and the species concentration. The combustion is 
a relatively fast and complex chemical process that may include 

Fig. 2.31. (a) multi-step combustion model for a particle, and (b) multi-step reaction mechanism for the chemical-looping combustion (reproduced from reference 
[190], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093063F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

side reactions and/or radical reactions. However, the rate of the 
turbulent  combustion  flame  is  limited  by  the  turbulent  mixing 
rate. Different reactants first need to mix properly at a molecular 
scale  so  that  they  react  quickly  in  the  diffusion  flame.  In  the 
premixed flame, the mixture of cold reactants needs to be trans-
ported to the region where there is enough thermal energy to start 
a  chemical  reaction.  The  chemical  reactions  in  both  cases 
(diffusion flame and pre-mixed flame) are much faster than the 
mixing or the transport of species, providing a chance to describe 
the  reaction  rate  with  the  turbulent  properties.  According  to 
Magnussen and Hjertager [883], the reactants are mixed at the 
molecular level in the fine structures of the turbulent flow, which 
is also in the range of the smallest Kolmogorov scales. Therefore, 
the  turbulent mixing rate based  on turbulent properties  can be 
proposed, since the limiting rate is usually the mixing rate. The 
advantage of EDM is that a pair of constants is enough for almost 
all  the  reactions  in  the  turbulent  flow  (no  need  for  a  detailed 
chemical reaction rate calculation). 

3) Finite rate/eddy dissipation rate: This formulation takes into ac-
count how turbulence and chemical kinetics affect the calculation 
of the reaction rate. The model selects, whichever is the slowest 
rate: the turbulent mixing rate or the chemical kinetics rate. The 
chemical kinetics rate is much faster than the turbulent mixing 
rate in most cases. Therefore, the chemical kinetics rate in this 
approach serves as a filter, since only the control volumes with 
enough thermal energy are allowed to start the reaction and the 
reaction rate depends on how fast the reactants can be mixed.  
4)  Eddy dissipation concept: The formulation of the eddy dissipation 
concept (EDC) is an extension of the eddy dissipation model to 
include  a  detailed  chemical  mechanism  in  turbulent  reacting 
flows (i.e. considering the fine structures in the turbulent flow). 
This model is more efficient than the EDM for a large variety of 
premixed  and  diffusion  controlled  combustion  problems,  with 
any need to fine-tune the constants. This includes cases where the 
chemical  kinetics  rate  is  faster  than  the  overall  fine-structure 
mixing  and  when  the  chemical  kinetics  rate  has  a  dominating 
influence. 

In  the  literature,  simplified  homogeneous  reactions  with  low 
numbers of gaseous species such as CH4, H2, CO, H2O, and CO2 
are  used  for  gas-solid  flows.  Most  studies  use  the  turbulent- 
chemistry  eddy dissipation  model  (EDM)  proposed  by  Magnus-
sen  and  Hjertager  [883]  to  calculate  the  combustion  rates  of 
gas-phase reactions. Furthermore, chemical reaction mechanisms 
can be found that include detailed hydrocarbon, nitrogen, sulfur, 
and chlorine chemistries. In this case, the turbulence-chemistry 
interaction is modeled with the eddy dissipation concept (EDC). 
However, the computational cost increases considerably due to 
the high number of species and the gas-phase chemical reactions. 
From  the  numerical  point  of  view,  it  is  possible  to  take  into 
consideration  a more sophisticated  and detailed chemical reac-
tion mechanism for the gas species, in which the reaction rates are 
determined using the chemical kinetics rate. The temporal change 
in  the  molar  concentration  of  a  chemical  component  i  due  to 
homogeneous gas reactions is then defined as: 

dci
dt

=

∑k
(cid:0)

k=1

v′′

i,k (cid:0) v

′

i,k

)
rhom
k

(i = 1, ...., N).

(2.250)  

Here,  k  is  the  number  of  the  homogeneous  gas  reactions,  N 

denotes the total number of chemical components,v
i,k 
represent  the  stoichiometric  coefficient  of  the  species  i  as  the 
reactant  and  product,  respectively.  The  reaction  rate  rhom  of  a 
homogeneous gas reaction k is determined from the reaction rate 
for,k  and backward khom
constant of forward khom

bac,k  reactions: 

i,k  and v

′

′′

k = rhom
rhom

for,k (cid:0) rhom

bac,k = khom
for,k

∏N

i=1

′

cv
i

i,k

(cid:0) khom
bac,k

∏N

i=1

cv′′

i

i,k

.

(2.251)  

The  reaction  rate  constants  are  defined  using  the  Arrhenius 
equation, including a pre-exponential factor A and the activation 
energy E: 

kkin = A exp

)

.

(

(cid:0) E
RT

(2.252)    

b)  Solid  fuel  gasification:  The  gasification  of  solid  fuels  is  a  high- 
temperature  partial  oxidation  process  for  converting  solid  fuels 
into gaseous fuel, also known as producer gas or product gas, which 
mainly  consists  of  CO,  H2,  CH4,  and  CO2.  The  composition  of  the 
producer gas depends strongly on the gasification technology and the 
process  conditions  (e.g.  gasifying  agent  and  operating  parameters 
such as temperature and pressure). Air or a mixture of steam, carbon 
dioxide, and air is popular as a gasifying agent but results in producer 
gas  with  a  lower  heating  value.  The  latter  can  be  significantly 
improved by adding oxygen to the mixture of the gasifying agent. In 
this case, an air separation unit is required for the provision of pure 
oxygen; this is an energy-intensive process. Syngas or synthesis gas is 
a gas for chemical synthesis and it mainly consists of CO and H2. The 
conversion of producer gas to syngas involves e.g. catalytic cracking 
of tars, reforming of hydrocarbons, filtration, and possible modifi-
cation  of  the  CO/H2-ratio  by  shift  conversion.  Unfortunately,  the 
terms  “producer  gas”  and  “syngas”  are  getting  mixed  and  many 
recently published articles refer to the producer gas as syngas. 

For  solid  fuel  gasification,  the  following  global  reaction  mecha-

nism can be applied: 

R0 : Raw solid fuel→SF + H2O
R1 : SF⇒C + CxHy + CO + ... + H2O + N2
R2 : C + 1/2O2→CO
R3 : C + CO2→2CO
R4 : C + H2O→CO + H2
R5 : H2 + 1/2O2→H2O
R6 : CO + 1/2O2→CO2
R7 : CO + H2O⇄CO2 + H2
R8 : CH4 + H2O→CO + 3H2

(2.253)  

In principle, the reaction rate models of the combustion process 
(drying, pyrolysis, and homogeneous gas reactions) can be applied to 
the gasification process with minor modifications. For the water-gas 
shift  reaction  (R7),  a  non-catalyzed  reaction  should  generally  be 
considered for the gasifier. In some cases, the feedstock, especially 
ash, can have a catalytic effect on the kinetics of this reaction (e.g. 
Fe₃O₄ is a known catalyst). The number of suitable publications in the 
relevant temperature and pressure range is quite limited [884-886]. 
For the steam methane reforming reaction (R8) within the gasifier, 
similar considerations as for the water-gas shift reaction hold true. 
Fluidized-bed  gasifiers  do  not  include  special  catalysts  for  steam 
methane  reforming,  although the  char  can potentially  support  the 
reaction. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are no publi-
cations  on  non-catalyzed  steam  methane  reforming  kinetics.  Most 
published  works  dealing  with  the  simulation  of  the  gasification 
process either omit the steam reforming reaction altogether or are 
based on a thermochemical equilibrium. 

Unlike  the  char  combustion  reaction,  the  char  gasification  re-
actions in fluidized-bed reactors (where the operating temperature is 
◦
below 1000 
C) are governed by the reaction kinetics and not limited 
by  diffusion.  The  heterogeneous  reaction  mechanism  between  the 
char and carbon dioxide (R3), and between the char and steam (R4), 
is  well  described  by  Ergun  [887]  and  Molina  et  al.  [888].  The 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093064F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

influence of the carbon conversion of the particles has to be taken 
into account in the reaction models. Unfortunately, no general ki-
netic parameters can be formulated for heterogeneous gasification 
reactions as they depend on the fuel composition, particle size, and 
pre-treatment process. User-defined parameters for the kinetics are 
therefore  required  to  implement  these  reactions  in  the  simulation 
software. Furthermore, it should be possible to choose between the 
Arrhenius model, the Langmuir-Hinshlwood kinetic model, and the 
volumetric and random-pore reaction model [15]. Additional reac-
tion models would probably be appreciated. For lignite, for example, 
the Johnson model is most suitable [889].  

c)  Solid  fuel  chemical-looping  combustion:  The  combustion  of  solid 
fuels employing the chemical-looping process (new oxy-fuel method) 
enables a CO2 capture with low energy input. Here, air and fuel are 
kept separate and the oxygen is transferred from the air to the fuel 
using  an  oxygen  carrier  material.  Particles  containing  a  suitable 
metal  oxide  are  used  as  oxygen  carriers,  and  these  particles  are 
moved between two coupled, circulated gas-solid fluidized beds (air 
and fuel reactors). In the air reactor, the oxygen carrier is oxidized; in 
the fuel reactor, the fossil fuel reacts with the oxygen carrier material 
to form carbon dioxide and steam. The reduced oxygen carrier is then 
sent to the air reactor to be regenerated by the air. In an ideal case, 
the flue gas at the fuel reactor outlet consists of CO2  and H2O. The 
latter  can  be  easily  removed  by  a  condensation  process.  For  the 
chemical-looping combustion of solid fuels, the following global re-
action mechanism can be applied for the fuel reactor (see Fig. 2.31 
(b)): 

R0 : Raw solid fuel→SF + H2O
R1 : SF⇒C + CxHy + CO + ... + H2O + N2
R2 : C + H2O→H2 + CO
R3 : C + CO2→2CO
R4 : CO + H2O⇄H2 + CO2
R5 : CH4 + (4Fe2O3 + 8TiO2)→2H2O + CO2 + 8FeTiO3
R6 : H2 + (Fe2O3 + 2TiO2)→H2O + 2FeTiO3
R7 : CO + (Fe2O3 + 2TiO2)→CO2 + 2FeTiO3

(2.254)  

For the chemical reactions (R0 to R4), the reaction rate models of 
conventional combustion can also be used. The rates, at which the 
oxygen carrier (R5, R6, and R7) reacts with reductive gases (CH4, H2, 
and CO) are calculated using the transport capacity of the oxygen 
carrier, time for complete solid conversion, and the conversion of the 
oxygen carrier [890,891]. 

In  the  above-mentioned  processes,  and  due  to  the  chemical  re-
actions  (homogeneous  and  heterogeneous  reactions),  there  are 
temporal changes in the concentrations of the chemical components 
of the gas and solid phases. The formation/reduction of the gaseous 
component i due to homogeneous chemical reactions is taken into 
consideration in the species transport equations of the gas phase (see 
Eq. (2.70)), represented with the source term Sc,i
f . 

In gas-solid flows, a distinction is made between processes with or 
without  mass  transfer  (phase  transformation)  from  gas  to  solid  or 
vice versa. For systems with mass transfer between the gas and solid 
phases,  the  conservation  equations  of  the  mass,  momentum,  and 
gaseous species of both phases should be modified during the tran-
sient simulation. The mass transfer can take place due to different 
mechanisms such as the heterogeneous chemical reactions between 
the gas and solid phases or the particle-particle/wall collisions (e.g. 
adhesive forces with physical contact, see Short-range surface forces 
section).  The  heterogeneous  chemical  reactions  may  consume  or 
produce  solids  (e.g.  combustion  of  biomass  particles  or  CO2  ab-
sorption by quicklime particles). Here, the mass transfer between the 
gas and solid phases may occur without a change in particle size or 
can be accompanied by the shrinkage or growth of particles. In the 
latter case, the motion equations of the particles should be modified, 
taking  into  account  the  variable  particle  diameter  during  the 

transient simulation (see the Balance equations for solid phase sec-
tion). As an example, the combustion rate of a char particle i is shown 
during combustion with oxygen. The combustion rates of char par-
ticles  depend  on  the  size  of  the  particles,  the  concentration  of 
oxidant,  and  its  diffusion  rate  to  the  particle  surface,  and  can  be 
determined  according  to  the  kinetics/diffusion-limited  reaction 
model [76]: 

dmhet,rea
p,i
dtp

= (cid:0) khet,rea
p,i

aspec
p,i ,

(2.255)  

p,i  and  the  total  reaction  rate 

with  the  specific  particle  surface  aspec
constant khet,rea
pO2

p,i

: 

khet,rea
p,i =

(

).

(2.256)  

1
kcha
kin

+ 1
kchar
dif

The pressure pO2  represents the oxygen partial pressure, kcha
kcha
dif  denote the kinetic and diffusion rate reaction constants. 
The production/consumption of gas mass per unit volume Sm

p→f  in 
the continuity equation of the gas phase (see Eq. (2.67)) is defined for 
each  fluid  cell  by  summing  all  the  contributions  of  the  particles 
located in the control volume CV: 

kin  and 

Sm
p→f =

1
V CV
f

∑k=NCV

i=1

Xp,k.

(2.257)  

Here,  the  symbol  Xp,k  describes  the  mass  of  gas  produced  or 
consumed per second by the particle k. Since the source terms in the 
species transport equations Sc,i
f  (see Eq. (2.70)) do not depend on the 
production/consumption of gases, these terms should be calculated 
from the rate of mass transfer. Analog to the heat transfer correla-
tions  of  the  Nusselt  number  in  terms  of  the  Reynolds  and  Prandtl 
numbers, several correlations based on the Sherwood number have 
been proposed to calculate the gas-particle mass transfer coefficient 
as  a  function  of  Reynolds  and  Schmidt  numbers.  The  Sherwood 
number  that  is  also  known  as  the  mass  transfer  Nusselt  number 
represents the ratio of the convective mass transfer coefficient αconv 
to the mass diffusion rate D is given as: 

Sh =

αconvdp
D

,

(2.258)  

where dp is the diameter of the particle, over which fluid flows. The 
heat  transfer  correlation  for  spheres,  given  by  Ranz  and  Marshall 
[869], can be modified to a mass transfer correlation, as follows: 

Sh = 2 + aRe1/2Sc1/3,

case

0 ≤ Re < 200, 0 ≤ Pr < 250,

(2.259)  

with the parameter a that is set equal to 0.6 in most cases. 

For  systems  with  no  mass  transfer  between  the  solid  and  gas 
phases, the source term Sm
p→f  in the continuity equation of the gas 
phase will be set equal to zero (see Eq. (2.67)). If, however, the ho-
mogeneous  chemical  reactions  are  part  of  the  process,  then  the 
species  conservation  equations  must  be  modified  with  the  source 
terms Sc,i
f  that describe the formation/reduction of gaseous compo-
nents due to homogeneous chemical reactions (see Eq. (2.70)). 

2.5.5. Particle time step 

To enable the time-dependent motion of the gas and solid phases to 
be  calculated,  the  time  step  size  should  be  defined.  In  the  two-fluid 
model,  a  general  time  step  is  used  (known  as  the  fluid  time  step), 
while in the context of the discrete-particle model different time steps 
can be applied (the two-time-step approach: the fluid time step and the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093065F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

particle time step). The size of the fluid time step needs to be carefully 
selected  based  on  the  Courant  number  for  given  mesh  size  and  flow 
velocity  and  is  linked  to  the  Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy  (CFL)  stability 
condition  of  numerical  schemes;  otherwise,  the  simulation  might 
diverge or lead to nonphysical results. In most of the commercial soft-
ware packages such as ANSYS-FLUENT, the fluid time step is selected 
before  the  simulation  (sure  to  satisfy  the  numerical  criterion  for  nu-
merical  stability).  However,  in  other  CFD  software  packages  such  as 
MFiX, the fluid time step can be varied during the simulation, aiming at 
accelerating the simulation (the new selected time step should meet the 
numerical stability criterion). The particle time step is chosen as a var-
iable or constant based on the selected particle-particle and particle-wall 
collision model. If the particle-particle and particle-wall collisions are 
detected deterministically with a constant particle time step, the soft- 
sphere  model  is  applied  to  model  the  collision  treatment.  The  hard- 
sphere model is used when the particle-particle and particle-wall colli-
sions are detected deterministically with an adaptive particle time step. 
In both the soft-sphere and hard-sphere models, the size of the particle 
time step is much smaller than the fluid phase step. The particle time 
step  can  therefore  be  selected  as  a  general  time  step  for  both  phases 
(single-time-step approach). This is a valid concern, and results in more 
accurate simulation results, but can lead to a significant increase in the 
computational cost. The single-time-step approach is preferred when the 
turbulence of gas-solid flows is considered using large eddy simulation, 
where  a  finer  fluid  time  step  is  already  required.  If  the  turbulence 
modeling  is  disregarded  or  taken  into  consideration  using  Reynolds- 
averaged Navier-Stokes simulation techniques, then the two-time-step 
approach is much more favorable. 

As an example of the two-time-step approach, Fig. 2.32 shows the 
motion of particles when the soft-sphere model is applied with a con-
stant  particle  time  step  and  the  hard-sphere  model  is  applied  with  a 
variable particle time step. Here, for instance, the fluid time step and the 
particle time step in the soft-sphere model are selected as 0.2 s and 0.1 s, 
respectively. In the hard-sphere model, the particle time step is, how-
ever, variable (see the Collision detection models section) [83]. 

2.5.5.1. Adaptive  particle  time  step. In the  hard-sphere model with an 
adaptive  particle  time  step  size,  a  particle  will  collide  with  another 
particle or with a wall only at the time t + Δtp. The time that the particle i 
needs to come into contact with a possible collision partner j is written as 
follows [766]: 

r→

ij⋅ u→

ij (cid:0)

(cid:0)

Δtp,i(j) =

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(
]
)2
r→

(cid:0) u→2

Ri (cid:0) Rj

ij⋅ u→

)2

r→2
ij (cid:0)

[

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

ij

ij

u→2

ij

, ∀j ∈ A,

(2.260)  

involving the list A = {1, 2…, N} that includes all particles and walls in 
the computational domain. The minimum of all Δtp,i(j) of the particle i 
with  the  possible  collision  partners  j  from  the  list  A  is  known  as  the 
collision time Δtcol
p

(i) of the particle i: 

Δtcol

p (i) = min

(cid:0)

Δtp,i(j)

)
, ∀j ∈ A.

(2.261) 

The minimum  collision  time for  all particles  in the  computational 

domain is then determined using the following expression: 

Δtcol

p (i, j) = min

(

)
p (i)

Δtcol

, ∀(i, j) ∈ A.

(2.262) 

The minimum collision time for all particles is added (accumulated) 
to the last minimum collision time (within the current fluid time step 
size): 

p = tacc,0
tacc

p + Δtcol

p (i, j).

(2.263) 

The  particle  i  and  its  collision  partner  j  are  transferred  to  their 
collision positions at the point in time t + tacc
. The distance traveled in 
p
each case is the result of the product of the old velocity and the current 
(i, j). When the collision is determined, the 
minimum collision time Δtcol
p
translational  velocities  of  colliding  objects  after  the  collision  can  be 
calculated  using  Eq.  (2.154).  To  calculate  the  angular  velocities,  Eq. 
(2.155) is applied. In the next step, a new minimum collision time is 

Fig. 2.32. Time-dependent motion of particles (a) with a constant particle time step, and (b) with a variable particle time step.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093066F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

detected and the previous procedure is repeated. The cycle runs until the 
accumulation time tacc
is greater than or equal to the fluid time step size 
p 
Δtf. If this happens, the gas phase and the interphase values are calcu-
lated. Finally, all particles in the computational domain move to their 
new positions, and the distance traveled by each particle k is written as 
follows (see Fig. 2.32 (b)): 
Δ x→

, ∀k ∈ A.

(cid:0) Δtcol

k = u→

Δtf (cid:0)

)]

(

[

k

(2.264) 

p (i, j)

tacc
p

If the hard-sphere model with an adaptive particle time step size is 
applied  to  dense  gas-solid  flows,  this  leads  to  an  enormous  computa-
tional cost. Therefore, Ouyang and Li [892,893] and Helland et al. [894] 
proposed an alternative “time-driven” hard-sphere model. Similarly to 
the soft-sphere model, a constant particle time step is assumed during 
the  simulation  (much  lower  than  the  particle  time  step  used  in  the 
soft-sphere model), resulting in minor penetration depth between the 
collision partners. Compared to the hard-sphere model with an adaptive 
particle  time  step  size,  the  “time-driven”  hard-sphere  model  has  the 
advantage of a lower computing time, leading many authors to use it, for 
example in [84,666]. 

gas-solid flows is generally disregarded, thus the influence of the fluid 
behavior on the particle time step can be neglected.  

II  Particle time step due to contact force curve 

The particle time step size must be selected so that the approximation 
of  normal  and  tangential  contact  force  curves  during  the  particle- 
particle or particle-wall collision is carried out with a good level of ac-
curacy.  The  particle  time  step  sizes  in  the  normal  direction  and  the 
tangential direction are written as: 

Δtn,con

p =

T n
p
NT

=

π
NT λn
p

,

Δtt,con

p =

T t
p
NT

=

π
NT λt
p

,

(2.270)  

(2.271)  

with the normal and tangential contact times Tn  and Tt  identifying the 
duration of the collision. The time constants λn
p  are determined 
using the following expressions: 

p  and λt

2.5.5.2. Constant  particle  time  step. In the soft-sphere model, the fluid 
time  step  size  Δtf  is  divided  into  several  equal  time  step  sizes,  each 
known as the particle time step Δtp (see Fig. 2.32 (a)). The translational 
and angular velocities of particles are obtained by solving the conser-
vation  equations  of  momentum  and  angular  momentum  using  the 
explicit Euler method, for example: 

λn
p =

λt
p =

√
√
√
√
√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
⎞
⎛
2
⎝ ηn
2 ̂mij

kn
̂mij

⎠

(cid:0)

,

√
√
√
√
2
√
7

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
⎞
⎛
2
⎝ ηt
2 ̂mij

kn
̂mij

⎠

(cid:0)

.

(2.272)  

(2.273) 

u→

p(t)dt, ⇒ x→(j)

p = x→(j(cid:0) 1)

p + Δtp u→(j)
p ,

(2.267)  

Δtt,con

p =

(cid:0)

u→

p

t + Δtp

(cid:0)

ω→

p

t + Δtp

)

)

= u→

p(t) +

1
mp

= ω→

p(t) +

1
IP

∫t+Δtp

∑

→
F

k(t)dt, ⇒ u→(j)

p = u→(j(cid:0) 1)

p +

k

t

→
F

p,

Δtp
mp

(2.265)  

∫t+Δtp

∑

→
T

k(t)dt, ⇒ ω→(j)

p = ω→(j(cid:0) 1)

p +

k

t

→
T

p.

Δtp
Ip

(2.266) 
The indices (j) and (j (cid:0) 1) stand for the current and previous particle 
time steps. By integrating the last two equations over time, the current 
position  and  angular  displacement  of  the  particle  can  be  determined 
using the explicit Euler method as follows: 

(cid:0)

x→

p

t + Δtp

(cid:0)

φ→

p

t + Δtp

)

)

= x→

p(t) +

= φ→

p(t) +

∫t+Δtp

t

∫t+Δtp

t

ω→

p(t)dt, ⇒ φ→(j)

p = φ→(j(cid:0) 1)

p + Δtp ω→(j)
p .

(2.268) 

The particle time step size can be defined according to the following 

minimum function: 
(

Δtp = min

Δttur

p ; Δtcon

p

)
,

; Δtcol
p

(2.269)  

with the particle time step due to turbulence Δttur
due to the contact force curve Δtcon
collision Δtcol

p

p .  

p , the particle time step 
, and the particle time step due to 

I  Particle time step due to turbulence 

The  particle  time  step  size  has  to  be  selected  so  that  the  particle 
trajectory is calculated during the free-flight phase with a certain degree 
of  accuracy.  This  is  of  high  relevance  for  turbulent  flows,  where  the 
aerodynamic  surface  forces  acting  on  particles  are  subjected  to  high 
temporal and spatial fluctuations. The modeling of turbulence in dense 

The total contact time is resolved by NT sub-steps. Generally, 10 to 20 
sub-steps are used if only the absolute values after the collision are of 
interest, while a higher number of sub-steps are required to accurately 
calculate the contact force curves. By inserting Eqs. (2.272) and (2.273) 
into Eqs. (2.270) and (2.271), considering the damping parameter in the 
tangential and normal directions (Eqs. (2.192) and (2.197)) for a linear 
spring model (a = 1) with a linear visco-elastic damping element (b = 0), 
the following relations are obtained to calculate the particle time step in 
normal and tangential directions due to the contact force curve: 

Δtn,con

p =

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
̂mmin
ij
,
kn(4 (cid:0) α2
dam(en))

2π
NT

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
̂mmin
7
ij
kt(4 (cid:0) α2
2

,
dam(βt))

2π
NT

(2.274)  

(2.275)  

where  the  empirical  damping  constants  αdam(en)  and  αdam(βt)  can  be 
modeled  using  Eqs.  (2.194)  and  (2.198).  G¨otz  [107]  compared  the 
course of the normal penetration depth δn  as a function of time for a 
linear  spring  model  with  a  linear  visco-elastic  damping  element  with 
different damping constants αdam(en). If the damping constant increases, 
the  contact  time  Tn
p  increases  and  so  does  the  particle  time  step  size 
Δtn,con
. Here, the maximum penetration depth δn  of the locus shifts to 
p
smaller values at an earlier point in time (see Fig. 2.33 (a)). If the particle 
time step size is too large, as illustrated in Fig. 2.33 (b), the collision 
partners  can  exceed  the  maximum  penetration  depth  δn,max  by  Δδn 
within  the  first  time  step.  This  can  result  firstly  in  an  overestimated 
elastic force (spring force) due to the excessive depth of penetration δn, 
max + Δδn and secondly in an overestimated damping force caused by the 
→n
+ Δ u
excessive relative velocity  u

ij  (see Eq. (2.188)).  

→n
ij

III  Particle time step due to collision 

The particle time step size has to be selected so that each collision is 
registered in time. Independently of the particles’ relative velocity, the 
collision partners must not penetrate far away into each other before the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093067F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.33. Penetration depth course in the normal direction as a function of time (reproduced from reference [50], with permission of authors).  

collision is detected and the corresponding contact forces counteract the 
particles’ movements. Large particle time steps lead to great penetration 
depths,  causing  unrealistic  contact  forces  and  consequently  an  erro-
neous energy balance. In order to detect the collision at the right time, a 
path length is introduced, which neither collision partner should exceed 
within the particle time step. Here, the maximum normal penetration 
depth is defined using the following formula [107]: 

δn,max =

√

(0)

⃒
⃒
⃒

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→n,max
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(λn)2 + (Dn)2

ij

[

(

exp

(cid:0)

)

Dn
λn

arctan

)]
.

(

λn
Dn

(2.276) 

The  normal  particle  time  step  Δtn,col

p 

during  which  the  maximum 

normal penetration depth is traveled is written as follows: 

Δtn,col

p =

δn,max
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→n,max

ij

(0)

=

⃒
⃒
⃒

√

1
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(λn)2 + (Dn)2

[

exp

(cid:0)

)

(

Dn
λn

(

arctan

)]
.

λn
Dn

A similar procedure is applied to determine the maximum tangential 

penetration δt,max and the tangential particle time step size Δtt,col

p

. 

According to Link et al. [772], the following conditions should be 

met in order to ensure energy conservation: 

(2.277) 

Δtn,con

p = Δtt,con

p

Δtn,col

p = Δtt,col

p

,

,

(2.278)  

(2.279)  

which in turn leads to the following equation for the tangential stiffness 
coefficient kt: 
(cid:0)

kt = kn

28 (cid:0) 7α2
(8 (cid:0) 2α2

)
dam(en)
dam(βt))

.

(2.280) 

The  normal stiffness  coefficient  kn  is  calculated  using  Eq.  (2.189), 
while  the  tangential  stiffness  coefficient  is  defined  either  with  Eq. 
(2.196)  or  with  Eq.  (2.280).  The  normal  and  tangential  stiffness  co-
efficients are determined based on the material properties of the colli-
sion partners, resulting in values that range between 104 and 109 N/m 
for most granular systems. Stiffness coefficients with such a high order of 
magnitude need very small particle time steps. Due to the computational 
limitations,  the  simulation  is  still  unfeasible,  and  therefore  smaller 
stiffness  coefficients  are  usually  applied.  Accordingly,  the  size  of  the 
particle  time  step  increases,  and  the  computational  effort  is  reduced 
significantly. If the stiffness coefficient value is underestimated or the 
relative collision velocities are very high, great penetration depths are 
found  between  the  collision  partners.  In  such  cases,  the  elastic  force 
becomes  much  greater  than the  damping  force,  leading  to  unrealistic 
contact  forces  and  an  energy  imbalance.  To  define  the  minimum 

stiffness  coefficient  that  prevents  unphysical  particle-particle  and 
particle-wall  penetration,  an  extra  condition  has  to  be  defined.  The 
penetration  depth  is  unrealistic  if  the  maximum  penetration  depth  is 
greater than the smallest particle radius. The minimum normal stiffness 
coefficient can be defined as: 

kn,min =

4
3

(

)3

Rmax
π
p
(δn,max)2 ρp

⃒
⃒
⃒ u→n,max
⃒

ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

2

[

exp

√

(cid:0) 2αdam
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
4 (cid:0) α2
dam

arctan

√

( ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
4 (cid:0) α2
dam
αdam

)]

,

where the maximum relative velocity  u
tration  depth  δn,max ≤ Rmin
simulation. 

p 

(2.281)  

and the maximum pene-

→n,max
ij 

should  both  be  given  before  starting  the 

2.6. Turbulence 

Turbulent flows are encountered in most engineering applications in 
practice. In contrast to laminar flows, turbulent flows are characterized 
by  eddies  with  irregular  sizes,  leading  to  higher  rates  of  momentum, 
mass, and heat transfer. The Reynolds number, defined as the ratio of 
inertial  force  to  the viscous  force, is  commonly  used  as  a  measure of 
turbulence.  If  the  Reynolds  number  exceeds  a  certain  value  (critical 
Reynolds number), inertial forces and associated fluctuations are strong 
enough to create instabilities in the flow, and turbulence occurs. It is a 
well-known  fact  that  in  simulations  of  gas-solid  flows,  predicting  the 
velocity  field  of  the  fluid  phase  is  essential  to  precisely  calculate  the 
particle  motion  within  a  turbulent  flow.  Three  common  numerical 
methods are available to describe turbulence flows: (i) direct numerical 
simulation,  (ii)  large  eddy  simulation,  and  (iii)  Reynolds-averaged 
Navier-Stokes simulation, described in detail in [895-897].  

(i)   Direct numerical simulation (DNS), despite being the simplest 
method  in  terms  of  content  and  concept,  is  the  most  exact 
approach for simulating turbulence and thus particle motion in 
turbulent  multiphase  flows.  All  length  and  time  scales  of  the 
turbulence structures are completely resolved by DNS. In order to 
resolve all turbulence scales, a very fine grid and adequate fluid 
time  step  should  be  used.  The  grid  resolution  and  time  step 
required  to  resolve  all  the  turbulence  structures  lead  to  an 
extremely  high  computational  effort.  In  other  words,  DNS  be-
comes impractical for the high Reynolds numbers used in most 
industrial  applications.  The  computational  time  of  the  DNS  is 
almost  proportional  to  the  number  of  grid  cells  NCV.  The  real 
computational cost is equal to O(NCV)1.1 due to additional cost of 
the numerical algorithm. The number of grid cells required for 
the numerical simulation of a turbulent channel flow depends on 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093068F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the fluid Reynolds number and can be determined by applying 
the following relation (Lumley [898] and ANSYS-FLUENT): 

NCV ∼ Re3.

(2.282)    

(ii)   Large eddy simulation (LES) is particularly preferred for flows 
with high Reynolds numbers and/or for computational domains 
with  complex  geometries.  The  computational  effort  of  LES  is 
much lower than the DNS, but LES is still currently only feasible 
using  high-performance  computers.  The  largest-scale  motions 
(eddy elements) of the flow are resolved by the numerical grid, 
while  the  small-scale  motions  (subgrid-scales)  are  modeled. 
Similarly  to  DNS,  LES  is  a  numerical  approach  applied  to  un-
steady flow simulations, i.e. all physical variables of the flow are 
spatially and temporally resolved. The earliest and most known 
LES  turbulence  model  dates  back  to  Smagorinsky  [899].  Since 
that time, LES has been further improved, e.g. by using the dy-
namic  model  developed  by  Germano  [900],  which  does  not 
require any model parameters.  

(iii)   Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes simulation (RANS) is another 
possibility to model turbulence in fluid flows. In the context of 
RANS, equations of motion are averaged over time, i.e. each fluid 
variable  is  written  as  the  sum  of  a  time-averaged  value  and  a 
fluctuation element. By inserting this into the continuity equation 
and  the  Navier-Stokes  equation,  the  time-averaged  continuity 
equation  and  Navier-Stokes  equation  are  obtained.  Different 
levels of approximations are available to close the equation sys-
tem,  such  as  the  algebraic,  one-equation,  two-equation,  and 
Reynolds stress models. The discussion above suggests that LES 
offers a good compromise between the three main modeling ap-
proaches for turbulence since it can be applied in turbulent flows 
with higher Reynolds numbers than in DNS, and it predicts much 
more  accurate  results  than RANS  (among  others:  Breuer [901] 
and  Sommerfeld  et  al.  [103]).  However,  statistical  turbulence 
models  in  the  context  of  RANS  are  distinguished  by  their  nu-
merical  stability  and  high  efficiency  when  applied  to  complex 
flow  configurations.  For  multiphase  flow  simulations 
in 
large-scale industrial applications, RANS has been computation-
ally more attractive than DNS and LES. 

the turbulence structures (eddies) and the solid particles. Furthermore, 
additional  disturbances  in  the  flow  field  may  arise  due  to  particle- 
particle  and  particle-wall  collisions.  The  simulation  of  turbulent 
dispersed multiphase flows including particle-turbulence interactions is 
today  considered  the  current  state  of  research.  Leading  contributions 
were published, among other researchers, by the team around Prof. R.O. 
Fox.  In  comparison  to  single-phase  flows,  the  number  of  terms  to  be 
modeled in the momentum equations of gas-solid flows is large, making 
the problem extremely complex. Thus, further experimental and theo-
retical investigations are required. In most studies on turbulent gas-solid 
flows, particle-turbulence interaction has been described following the 
principle of two-way coupling (turbulence modulation and turbulence 
dispersion, as depicted in Fig. 2.34). Turbulence modulation takes into 
account how the solid phase influences turbulence in the fluid phase (see 
the Turbulence modulation section), while the turbulent dispersion of 
particles takes into account how turbulence in the fluid phase influences 
the solid phase (see the Turbulent dispersion section). 

2.6.1. Turbulence modulation 

Turbulence  modulation  takes  into  account  the  effect  of  the  solid 
phase on the turbulence, which can lead to overall turbulence modifi-
cation [902]. The main two effects of particles on the turbulence, and 
accordingly on the fluid velocity, the field can be summarized as follows:  

• The  movement  of  relatively  large  particles  with  a  Stokes  number 
larger  than  unity  (St  > 1)  in  the  fluid  flow  leads  to  an  additional 
disturbance  in  the  velocity  field  of  the  flow  (i.e.  boundary  layer 
separation and thus vortex shedding around the particle or formation 
of a wake behind the particle). This effect results in the additional 
production or enhancement of turbulence, referred to as “turbulence 
augmentation”  (see  Fig.  2.35),  which  implies  a  higher  apparent 
viscosity due to particles.  

• The  presence  of  small  particles  may  mechanically  influence  the 
turbulence  structures  by  destroying  the  large-scale  turbulence 
eddies, leading to smaller-scale turbulence eddies or even a total lack 
of turbulence eddies (i.e. the turbulent kinetic energy is dissipated), 
especially when the size scales of the particles and the fluid turbu-
lence time are of approximately the same order of magnitude (i.e. St 
≤ 1). As shown in Fig. 2.35, the additional dissipation of turbulent 
kinetic energy due to particles is termed “turbulence attenuation”. 

For the time being, the modeling of turbulent gas-solid flows presents 
a  considerable  challenge  due  to  the  considerable  interaction  between 

It is important to note that most gas-solid flows in technical appli-
cations  include  polydisperse  particles  with  a  wide  range  of  Stokes 

Fig. 2.34. Schematic representation of the interaction between a single particle and turbulent eddies in a turbulent gas-particle flow.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093069F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.35. Turbulence modulation as a function of Stokes number (St = τp/τf) and particle volume fraction: (1) one-way coupling, (2) two-way coupling with tur-
bulence augmentation, (3) two-way coupling with turbulence attenuation, and (4) four-way coupling (τp, τf and εpare the particle relaxation time, the time-scale of 
large eddies in a turbulent flow, and particle volume fraction, reproduced from reference [73,74,905], with permission of Elsevier). 

numbers,  meaning  that  the  turbulence  modulation  involves  both 
augmentation and attenuation of the turbulent kinetic energy [903]. A 
recent  review  on  turbulence  modulation  in  particulate  flows  [904] 
shows that non-spherical particles, compared to spherical particles, lead 
to a more adverse effect on the turbulence of the fluid phase. 

(cid:0) 6  < εp  ≤ 10

According to Elghobashi [73,905,906], the presence of particles with 
(cid:0) 6) has a negligible effect on turbulence, 
a volume fraction of (εp  ≤ 10
since the momentum transfer from the particles to the turbulence has an 
irrelevant  influence  on  the  flow  field  (see  Fig.  2.35,  the  one-way 
coupling  approach).  However,  some  researchers  (among  others:  Guo 
et  al.  [907],  Hwang  and  Eaton  [908],  Wu,  Wang  et  al.  [844],  Bala-
chandar and Eaton [909]) have found that even for a very low volume 
(cid:0) 6), the presence of particles attenuates the 
fraction of the solid (εp < 10
turbulence of the fluid phase (i.e. two-way coupling) and the attenuation 
increases for higher volume fractions of the solid. For volumetric frac-
(cid:0) 3)  and  relatively  larger  particles,  the 
tions  of  solid  (10
momentum transfer from the particles to the turbulence becomes strong 
enough to alter the turbulence. Such particles absorb the kinetic energy 
from the turbulence (leading to turbulence attenuation) when the Stokes 
number  is smaller  than unity  (St ≤ 1)  (i.e. the relaxation time of the 
particles  is  less  than  or  on  the  same  scale  as  the  time  scale  of 
energy-containing eddies). For (St > 1) (i.e. when the particle relaxation 
time τp is increased), the particles will not follow the streamlines of the 
fluid, as depicted schematically in Fig. 2.4. Instead, these particles only 
interact with the mean flow, enhancing the production of the turbulent 
kinetic energy due to the vortex shedding or “wake-induced” turbulence, 
which occurs for particle Reynolds numbers (Rep ≥ 400) (see Fig. 2.35). 
In the four-way coupling regime with a volume fraction of solid (εp  >
(cid:0) 3), the interaction  between turbulence and particles (i.e. two-way 
10
coupling) should be taken into account. 

In  the  context  of  two-equation  turbulence  models  (e.g.  k (cid:0)

ϵ  and 
k (cid:0) ω in RANS or LES models, or the kinetic energy subgrid-scale model 
in LES), the effect of the dispersed phase on the turbulence (turbulence 
modulation)  is  taken  into  account  by  including  source  terms  in  the 
turbulence transport equations to describe the production or dissipation 
of  the  turbulent  kinetic  energy  and  dissipation  rate.  Typically,  a 
distinction  is  made  between  three  models  of  turbulence  modulation, 
namely the mixture turbulence model, the dispersed turbulence model, 
and  the  per-phase  turbulence  model.  These  three  models  are  briefly 
explained in the following sections as used in ANSYS-FLUENT. 

2.6.1.1. Mixture turbulence model. Within the framework of the mixture 
turbulence  model,  the  classical  turbulence  closures  for  single-phase 
flows  (standard,  renormalization  group  (RNG),  realizable  k (cid:0) ϵ,  and 
k (cid:0) ω  models)  are  extended  to  be  typically  applied  to  turbulent  two- 
phase flows. The mixture turbulence model can be used in (i) separate 
phases, (ii) stratified (or nearly stratified) flow regimes, and (iii) gas- 
solid flows if the density ratio of the dispersed phase to the continuous 
phase is close to unity (ρp/ρf  ≈ 1). In such turbulent flow regimes, the 
mixture properties (e.g. the mixture density ρm, the dynamic viscosity of 
→
the mixture μm, and the mixture velocity  u
m) are sufficient to capture 
the  key  flow  patterns.  The  next  model  to  be  summarized  is  the  k (cid:0) ϵ 
mixture  turbulence  model,  a  standard  turbulence  model  used  in  the 
simulations  of  practical  applications.  In  this  context,  the  transport 
equations for the turbulent kinetic energy and the dissipation rate read 
as: 

∂
∂t

∂
∂t

(ρmk) + ∇⋅

(

ρm u→

mk

)

((

= ∇⋅

μm +

μtur,m
σk

)

)

∇k

+ Gk,m (cid:0) ρmϵ + Sk

p→f ,

(ρmϵ) + ∇⋅

(
ρm u→

mϵ

)

((

= ∇⋅

μm +

+ Sϵ

p→f ,

(2.283)  

)

)

∇ϵ

+

ϵ
k

μtur,m
σk

(cid:0)

)
C1ϵGk,m (cid:0) C2ϵρmϵ

(2.284)  

with the production of the turbulence kinetic energy Gk,m. The turbulent 
viscosity of the mixture μtur,m is given by: 

μtur,m = ρmCμ

k2
ϵ

.

(2.285) 

In Eqs. (2.283) and (2.284), the source terms Sk

p→f  take the 
turbulence modulation into account and are modeled based on various 
approaches  [910-912].  For  example,  Troshko  and  Hassan  [912]  pro-
posed the following relations: 
)2

p→f  and Sϵ

,

(2.286)  

Sk
p→f = Cke

(⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

∑n

Kpq

p=1

p (cid:0) u→

q

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093070F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Sϵ
p→f =

Ctd
τp

Sk
p→f ,

(2.287)  

with the model constants Cke = 0.75 and Ctd = 0.45. The index n refers to 
the number of phases, Kpq denotes the turbulent interphase momentum 
→
exchange  coefficient  (turbulent  drag  term),  and  u
q  are  the 
phase-weighted  velocities, respectively. The characteristic time of the 
induced turbulence τp is expressed using the following formula: 

→
p  and  u

τp =

3Cdra

2Cverdp
(⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

p (cid:0) u→

q

),

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(2.288)  

where Cver and Cdra are the vertical mass and drag coefficients. 

In summary, if the above-mentioned conditions of the mixture model 
are satisfied, gas-solid flows can be simulated using the mixture model 
(see  the  Mixture  model  section),  two-fluid  model  (see  the  Two-fluid 
model  section),  and  disperse-phase  model  (see  the  Discrete-particle 
model section). However, the mixture turbulence model is inappropriate 
for  fluidized-bed  systems since  the  density ratio  between the  gas and 
solid phases is much higher than unity (ρp/ρf ≫ 1). 

2.6.1.2. Dispersed turbulence model. For dilute turbulent particle-laden 
flows,  where  the  particle-particle  collisions  are  not  considered,  the 
random motion of the particles only takes place due to the turbulence of 
the gas phase. In the dispersed turbulence model, the turbulence in the 
gas  phase  is  obtained  by  modifying  the  classical  RANS  turbulence 
models, adding extra source terms taking into account the turbulence 
modulation, commonly known as the turbulent drag term. The predic-
tion of the turbulence quantities in the dispersed phase relies on Tchen’s 
theory, which assumes that inhomogeneous turbulence leads to particle 
dispersion [913]. The dispersed turbulence model that is recommended 
for multiphase flows with one gas phase (primary phase) and at least one 
dispersed  phase  can  be  applied  in  the  context  of  the  two-fluid  or 
discrete-particle model, as explained below. 

2.6.1.2.1. Two-fluid  model. In  the  context  of  the  two-fluid  model 
(see the Two-fluid model section), the transport equations for the tur-
bulent  kinetic  energy  and  the  dissipation  rate  in  the  k (cid:0) ε  dispersed 
turbulence model are given by: 
(

)

(

)

)

εqρqkq

+ ∇⋅

εqρq u→

qkq

(cid:0)

∂
∂t

= ∇⋅

εq

μtur,q
σk
+ εqρqSk
p→f ,

velocity taking into account the turbulent dispersion of the particles due 
to turbulence-particle interaction (i.e. the effect of the turbulence in the 
fluid phase on the solid phase; see Turbulent dispersion section). 

Elghobashi  and  Abou-Arab  [914]  modeled  the  source  term  Sϵ

p→f 

based on Sk

Sϵ
p→f = C3ϵ

p→f  as follows: 
ϵq
kq

Sk
p→f ,

(2.293)  

taking  into  consideration  the  model  constants  C1ϵ = 1.44,  C2ϵ = 1.92, 
C3ϵ = 1.2, σk = 1 and σϵ = 1.3. 

In  the  last  two  decades,  the  dispersed  turbulence  model  has  been 
applied to fluidized-bed simulations (see, among others, the works of 
Gryczka  et  al.  [915],  Almohammed  et  al.  [643]).  Although  the  main 
focus was not on how turbulence affected the hydrodynamic behavior of 
the gas-solid flow in a fluidized bed, it was reported that this turbulence 
model leads to good agreement with the experimental results. 

In  2001,  Troshko  and  Hassan  [912]  proposed  another  relation  to 
p→f  in the turbulent kinetic energy equation, as 

model the source term Sk
follows: 

Sk
p→f = Cke

∑n

p=1

Kpq
εqρq

(⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

p (cid:0) u→

q

)2

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

,

(2.294)  

where the source term Sϵ
p→f  in the dissipation equation is expressed as 
shown in the Mixture turbulence model section using Eq. (2.287) with 
the same coefficients as in Eq. (2.288). 

2.6.1.2.2. Discrete-particle  model. As previously explained, the mo-
mentum transfer from the solid phase to the fluid phase is taken into 

→u

account  by  including  the  source  term  S

p→f  in  the  extended  Navier- 
Stokes equations (see the Momentum transfer section). The turbulence 
modulation  is  taken into  consideration  by  including the  source terms 
p→f  and Sϵ
Sk
p→f  in the corresponding transport equations of the turbulent 
kinetic energy and the dissipation rate (see Eqs. (2.289) and (2.290)). 
Broadly  speaking,  there  are  three  main  models  for  the  turbulence 
modulation that can be applied to the discrete-particle model, namely 
the standard model, the consistent model, and the composite model, as 
explained below:  

∇kq

+ εqGk,q (cid:0) εqρqϵq

i  Standard model 

)

εqρqϵq

(cid:0)

∂
∂t

(

+ ∇⋅

εqρq u→

qϵq

)

(

= ∇⋅

+ εq

εq

ϵq
kq

μtur,q
σϵ

(cid:0)

)

∇ϵq

C1ϵGk,q (cid:0) C2ϵρqϵq

(2.289)  

In the standard model, a Stokes flow is assumed, implying that the 
turbulence modulation occurs due to drag force and the source term in 
the extended Navier-Stokes equations is reduced as described by Mandø 
et al. [916] to: 

)

+ εqρqSϵ

p→f .

→u
S

p→f =

εpρp
τp

(
u→

p (cid:0) u→

f

)

.

(2.295) 

The turbulent viscosity of the phase q is written as follows: 

[916-919]: 

(2.290) 

The  source  term  Sk

p→f  is  modeled  using  the  following  expression 

μtur,q = ρqCμ,q

k2
q
ϵq

.

(2.291) 

p→f  and  Sϵ

Various models are available in the literature to determine the source 
terms  Sk
p→f  (turbulence  modulation).  For  example,  in  1990 
Simonin and Viollet [911] proposed the following expression to model 
Sk
p→f : 

p→f = u→′
Sk

→′u
f S

p→f ,

(2.296) 

→′
The vinculum refers to the Reynolds averaging procedure,  u

f  is the 
fluctuation  velocity  of  the  fluid  phase  (see  the  Turbulent  dispersion 

→′
section), and  S
which can be expressed similarly to Eq. (2.295) as: 

u
p→f  stands for the fluctuating momentum exchange term, 

Sk
p→f =

(

∑n

p=1

Kpq
εqρq

kpq (cid:0) 2kq + u→

pq⋅ u→

drift

)

,

(2.292)  

→′u
S

p→f =

εpρp
τp

(
u→′

p (cid:0) u→′

f

)

.

(2.297) 

→
here Kpq represents the turbulent drag term and  u
→
locity  u

′
q  .  u
→
covariance  of  fluid  and  particle  velocities  and  u

′
q).  The  term  kpq = 〈u

→
pq = ( u

→
u

p (cid:0)

pq  is the relative ve-
p〉 stands  for  the 
drift  denotes  the  drift 

By substituting the above relation into Eq. (2.296), the source term 

Sk
p→f  reads: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093071F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

⎛

⎞

Sk
p→f =

εpρp
τp

⎜
f u→′
⎝ u→′
⎜
p
⏟̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅⏟
Term 1

⎟
⎟
⎠,

(cid:0) u→′

f u→′
f
⏟̅̅⏞⏞̅̅⏟
Term 2

(2.298)  

the standard model and the consistent model. The following expression 
is used to calculate the source term Sk

Sk
p→f =

εpρp
τp

[⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

f (cid:0) u→

p

(

2

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

(cid:0)

u→′

p u→′

p (cid:0) 2k

p→f : 
)]

,

(2.302)  

where the first term, representing the correlation between the particles 
and  turbulent  eddies,  is  still  unknown  and  was  therefore  modeled 
(among others: Chen and Wood [917], Mostafa and Mongia [920], Tu 
and Fletcher [921], Lightstone and Hodgson [919]). The second term is 
→′
= 2k using the turbulence model k (cid:0) ϵ. Table 2.12 shows 
given by  u
a  summary of  the  selected  models  for  turbulence  modulation.  Mandø 
et al. [916] stated that the standard model is dissipative, implying that 
the turbulence is attenuated since the particles are accelerated by the 
fluid phase. Therefore, the standard model is only able to predict tur-
bulence attenuation.  

→′
f u
f

ii  Consistent model 

while Eq. (2.301), with the constant (Cϵ3 = 1), is used to calculate the 
source term for the dissipation rate Sϵ

p→f . 

2.6.1.3. Per-phase  turbulence  model. The  per-phase  turbulence  model 
(or  phase-dependent  model)  is  applied  when  the  turbulence  transfer 
between  the  two  phases  has  a  dominant  role.  In  this  model,  a  set  of 
turbulence transport equations is solved for each phase. Therefore, the 
per-phase  turbulence  model  is  computationally  more  costly  than  the 
mixture  turbulence  and  dispersed  turbulence  models  [923].  Troshko 
and Hassan [912] modified the turbulent kinetic energy equations for 
the  fluid  and  solid  phases  by  adding  the  source  terms  Sk,q
p→f , 
given by: 

p→f  and  Sk,p

The  consistent  model  was  originally  proposed  by  Crowe  [903]. 
Starting from the mechanical energy of the fluid phase, the following 
relation can be used for Sk

p→f : 

Sk,q
p→f = Ckeεq

∑n

p=1

Kpq

(⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

p (cid:0) u→

q

p→f = u→
Sk

→u
p S

p→f (cid:0) u→

→u
f S

p→f .

(2.299) 

Sk,p
p→f = CkeεpKqp

(⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

p (cid:0) u→

q

)2

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

.

)2

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

,

(2.303)  

(2.304) 

Assuming that there is only a drag force in the momentum transfer 

term, Eq. (2.299) can be written as: 

Sk
p→f =

εpρp
τp

⎡
⃒
⃒
⎢
⃒ u→
⃒
⎢
⎣

f (cid:0) u→

p

⎤

⃒
2
⃒
⃒
⃒

(cid:0)

)

p u→′

(
p (cid:0) u→′
u→′
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Redistribution term

f u→′

p

⎥
⎥
⎦.

(2.300) 

Here, the first term represents the mechanical energy transferred by 
the drag force into turbulence kinetic energy and is always positive. The 
redistribution  term  represents  the  particle  kinetic  energy  transferred 
into the fluid phase and is negligible for dilute gas-solid flows [903]. In 
contrast to the standard model, the consistent model leads to an accurate 
prediction of the turbulence augmentation in the fluid phase [916]. 

In  the  context  of  the  consistent  model,  the  source  term  for  the 

dissipation rate is given by: 

Sϵ
p→f = Cϵ3

ϵ
k

Sk
p→f ,

(2.301)  

with the value of 1.8 that was suggested for the constant CCϵ3  by Lain 
and Sommerfeld [922].  

iii  Composite model 

Mandø  et al. [916] introduced the composite model by combining 

Table 2.12 
Summary of common models for the source terms Sk

p→f  and Sϵ

p→f  [919].  
/(cid:0)

Sk
p→f

2kρpεp

/

)

τp

{

(cid:0) 0.5τp
(k/ϵ)
}

exp

{

τLI
τLI + τp

}

(cid:0) 1    

(cid:0) 1

Model 

Chen and Wood (1985) [917] 

Mostafa and Mongia (1988) [920] 

Tu and Fletcher (1994) [921] 

Lightstone and Hodgson (2004) [919] 

The  corresponding  source  terms  S

ϵ,p
p→f  in  the  dissipation 
equations are modeled for both phases using Eq. (2.287) with the same 
coefficients  as  in  Eq.  (2.288),  as  previously  explained  in  the  Mixture 
turbulence model section. 

ϵ,q
p→f  and  S

2.6.2. Turbulent dispersion 

In the discrete-particle model, the motion of a particle in a turbulent 
flow is based on the mean (RANS) or the filtered (LES) fluid velocity at 
the particle location, depending on the turbulence model applied. Thus, 
the  determination  of  the  aerodynamic  surface  forces  (see  the  Aero-
dynamic surface forces section) based on Eq. (2.102) does not take into 
account the particle interaction with the unresolved turbulent fluctua-
tions, which are held responsible for the particle dispersion. Generally, 
the effect of the turbulence on the particles is referred to as “turbulent 
dispersion”. 

In  the  work  of  Elghobashi  [73,905,906],  it  is  stated  that  in  the 
(cid:0) 6), the turbulent 
one-way coupling region (see Fig. 2.35) with (εp ≤ 10
dispersion of particles strongly depends on the state of turbulence. As 
previously mentioned in the Turbulence modulation section, for a Stokes 
number (St ≤ 1) (i.e. when the particle relaxation time is smaller than or 
of  the  same  order  as  the  smallest  fluid  time  scale),  the  effect  which 
turbulent eddies in the fluid field exert on the solid motion has to be 
taken into account. In most studies, the dispersion of particles due to 

/(cid:0)

2ϵρpεp

/

)

τp

Sϵ
p→f

1 

}

{

τLI
τLI + τp

(cid:0) 1    

τLI = 0.35k/ϵ    
}

{

exp

(cid:0) 0.09τp
(Wnk/ϵ)

(cid:0) 1

exp

{

(cid:0) 0.4τp
(Wnk/ϵ)

}

(cid:0) 1    

n = 0 for W ≤ 1 and n = 1 for W > 1    
{

}

τ*
τ* + τp

(cid:0) 1

1/τ* = 1/(0.135k/ϵ) +

(

| u→

f (cid:0) u→
p|

)/
(cid:0)

0.22k3/2

)

/
ϵ

}

{

τ*
τ* + τp

(cid:0) 1     

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093072F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

turbulence is treated based on stochastic models by adding a perturba-

→′
tion (or fluctuating) velocity  u

f  to the mean (RANS) or the filtered (LES) 

→
fluid  velocity at the particle  location  u

f . Thus,  the instantaneous  ve-
→
f  required  to  determine  the  forces 
locity  of  the  continuous  phase  u
acting on the particle (see the Aerodynamic surface forces section) can 
be expressed as follows: 
u→

+

.

f =

(2.305) 

u→
f⏟⏞⏞⏟
Mean fluid velocity (RANS, LES)

u→′
f⏟⏞⏞⏟
Fluctuating velocity

The second term in Eq. (2.305) represents the fluctuating velocity 
“seen in the particle”, which causes the dispersion of a particle in the 

→
turbulent flow. Note that in laminar flows  u
f , therefore the par-
ticle  follows  a  unique  path  (deterministic  particle  trajectories).  The 
turbulent dispersion is explained in the following section, depending on 
the turbulence model used in RANS or filtered LES. 

→
f = u

Finally, It should be mentioned here that the stochastic approaches 
can be implemented not only using the stochastic velocity, but also at 
different stages, such as stochastic particle position, and stochastic force, 
see for example the recent publication by Lattanzi et al. [924]. 

2.6.2.1. Coupled RANS-DPM simulations. Gosman and Ioannides [925] 
proposed a stochastic model to describe turbulent dispersion in coupled 
RANS-DPM  simulations.  In  the  commercial  software  ANSYS-FLUENT 
and CFX, this model is referred to as the discrete random walk (DRW) 
model or the stochastic eddy lifetime model. This model assumes that if 

→’
a particle enters a single turbulent eddy (its fluctuating velocity  u
f  and 
characteristic length leddy and lifetime τeddy), the fluctuating velocity of 
′
the eddy u
f prevails if (i) the interaction time between a particle and the 
fluid eddy is less than the eddy lifetime τeddy or (ii) the displacement of 
the particle relative to the eddy is smaller than the characteristic eddy 
length leddy. In the context of a discrete random walk model, the eddy 

→′
fluctuating velocity  u

f  appearing in Eq. (2.305) is sampled based on a 
Gaussian distribution function. The components of the turbulence fluc-

→′
tuation  u

f  are generated as follows: 

′→
u

→
,
f ,i = σ ξ

(2.306)  

→
where  ξ
is a vector formed by normally distributed random numbers, 
mimicking the spatial randomness of the turbulence, and σ stands for the 
standard  deviation  that  is  determined  based  on  the  RANS  turbulence 
model  (applied  in  the  simulation).  For  the  two-equation  turbulence 
models (i.e. k (cid:0) ε and k (cid:0) ω models and their variants), isotropic stresses 
are assumed and thus the standard deviation appearing in Eq. (2.306) is 
formulated as: 
̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
√
2
3

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
w′2
,
f

̅̅̅̅̅̅
u′2
f

̅̅̅̅̅
v′2
f

σ =

√

√

=

=

=

k

(2.307)  

where k represents the turbulent kinetic energy at the particle position. 
Applying the Reynolds stress transport model (RSTM), i.e. anisotropic 
stresses, the components of the fluctuating velocity u
f are expressed as: 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
w′2
f

̅̅̅̅̅̅
u′2
,
f

√
ξ

̅̅̅̅̅
v′2
f

f = ξ

(2.308)  

√

√

u

ξ

,

,

′

′

with the random number ξ accounting for different values of the com-
ponents of fluctuating velocity in each eddy (randomness effect). 

The eddy lifetime τeddy is defined either as a constant time τeddy = 2tL 
or as a random time τeddy = (cid:0) tLln (ξn), where tL is the integral time and 
ξn  stands for a uniform random number between zero and unity. Note 
that  the  correlation  function  is  described  more  realistically  using  the 
random  calculation  of  τeddy.  For  small  particles,  the  integral  time 
required to determine the eddy lifetime is assumed to equal the fluid 
Lagrangian integral time: 

tL ≈ C

k
ϵ

.

(2.309) 

The  constant  C  depends  on  the  turbulence  model  applied  in  the 
simulation.  For  the  two-equation  turbulence  model  (e.g.  k (cid:0) ϵ  and 
k (cid:0) ω), the constant C is equal to 0.15, whereas for RSTM C is 0.3 [926]. 
The time interval, during which the particle completely crosses the eddy 
is referred to as the eddy crossing time tcross  and is defined as follows 
[925]: 

⎛

tcross = (cid:0) τpln

⎝1 (cid:0)

τp

leddy
f (cid:0) u→

⃒
⃒ u→

p

⎞

⎠,

⃒
⃒

(2.310)  

→
f  and  u

→
p stand for the fluid and particle velocity vectors, and τp 
where  u
is the particle relaxation time. The characteristic length of the eddy leddy 
is given by: 
√

leddy = τeddy

= τeddy

̅̅̅̅̅̅
u′2
f

̅̅̅̅̅̅
√
2
3

k

.

(2.311) 

Within the framework of the discrete random model, the interaction 
time tint  between the particle and the turbulence is limited by the eddy 
lifetime τeddy (if the eddy is dissipated) or by the eddy crossing time tcross 
(if  the  eddy  is  crossed  completely).  In  this  stochastic  approach,  it  is 
→
assumed that the random number  ξ
is fixed during the interaction time 
tint. When this time interval has elapsed, it is assumed that the particle 
enters a new eddy with a new characteristic velocity, time, and length 

→′
scale. Hence, the fluctuating velocity  u

→
number  ξ
following expression [919,927]: 

is generated. The interaction time is determined using the 

f  is resampled and a new random 

⎧
⎨

(cid:0)

min

τeddy, tcross

)

,

tint =

⎩

τeddy,

for

for

leddy < τp

leddy ≥ τp

⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
⃒ u→

f (cid:0) u→
f (cid:0) u→

p

p

⃒
⃒,
⃒
⃒.

(2.312) 

Afterward, the new instantaneous fluid velocity, to which the par-
ticle is exposed is obtained based on Eq. (2.305) and used to calculate 
the aerodynamic forces and the moment of force acting on the particle, 
included in the solution of the particle equations of motion. It is worth 
mentioning  that  the  energy  transfer  from  the  turbulent  eddies  to  the 
disperse phase reduces the turbulent kinetic energy k, which leads to 
turbulent  attenuation  (see  the  Turbulence  modulation  section), 
implying a mutual interaction between the particle dispersion and the 
fluid turbulence. 

2.6.2.2. Coupled  LES-DPM  simulations. In  coupled  LES-DPM  simula-
tions, the unresolved eddies in LES (subgrid scales) have a noticeable 
effect on the dynamics of tiny (or micron-sized) particles with a Stokes 
number of about unity (St ≈ 1) (i.e. the relaxation time of the particles is 
of  the  same  order  as  the  smallest  fluid  time  scale).  The  turbulent 
dispersion due to the unresolved scales of the fluid field in LES is taken 
into  consideration  when  calculating  the  translational  motion  of  the 
particle, whereas its effect on the rotational motion of the particle (i.e. 
angular velocity) is commonly not taken into account (among others: 
Armenio  et  al.  [928],  Kuerten  and  Vreman  [929],  Pozorski  and  Apte 
[930], Alletto and Breuer [931], Breuer and Almohammed [666], Bre-
uer and Hoppe [672], Breuer and Khalifa [675,676]). In the four-way 
coupled  LES-DPM  simulations,  the  inclusion  of  the  subgrid-scale 
model  for  the  particles  leads  to  higher  particle  velocity  fluctuations, 
implying  a  higher  number  of  particle-particle  and  particle-wall  colli-
sions. Broadly speaking, for the eddy-resolving technique, a distinction 
is  made  in  the  literature  between  two  common  types  of  turbulent 
dispersion models (also referred to as subgrid-scale models for the par-
ticles), namely approximate deconvolution approaches (for example, see 
the  work  of  Shotorban  and  Mashayek  [932])  and  stochastic  models, 
usually based on solving a differential Langevin equation (for example, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093073F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

see the works of Fede et al. [933], Pozorski and Apte [930], Breuer and 
Hoppe [672] and Hoppe [673]). In contrast to the approximate decon-
volution approaches, the stochastic subgrid-scale models are frequently 
applied  in  the  literature  and  therefore  will  be  summarized  next.  The 
stochastic subgrid-scale models for the particles used in various coupled 
LES-DPM  simulations  are  the  trivial  model  and  the  Langevin-type 
model. As indicated in Eq. (2.305), the instantaneous fluid velocity  μ→
f 
for  both  models  is  broken  down  into  a  filtered  fluid  velocity  at  the 
particle position  μ→

→′
f  and a subgrid-scale velocity fluctuation  u

f . 

2.6.2.2.1. Trivial model. The stochastic model is usually described in 
the literature as the trivial model due to its relatively simple formula-
tion, in which isotropic turbulence is assumed to be homogeneous. No 
sophisticated  models  based  on  the  approximate  deconvolution  or  the 
stochastic differential (Langevin type) equations are used (for example, 
see the works of Shotorban and Mashayek [932], Kuerten [934], Fede 
et al. [933], Bini and Jones [935], Pozorski and Apte [930] and Jin et al. 
[936]). In the context of the trivial model, the effect of the unresolved 
subgrid-scales on the  particle motion is  taken into account, using the 
subgrid-scale fluctuation velocity, appearing in Eq. (2.305): 

′→
u

→
;
f = σSGS ξ

σSGS =

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2
kSGS
3

,

(2.313)  

→
where  ξ
stands for a vector formed by the normally distributed random 
numbers  obeying  a  Gaussian  distribution  with  zero  mean  and  unit 
variance.  In  Eq.  (2.313),  the  standard  deviation σSGS  (i.e.  the  charac-
teristic  velocity  of  the  subgrid  scales)  is  obtained  from  the  turbulent 
kinetic energy of the subgrid scales kSGS, given by: 

kSGS =

(
1
2

u→

f (cid:0) u→

f

)2

.

(2.314) 

The  subgrid-scale  kinetic  energy  is  estimated  relying  on  the  scale 
similarity  approach  developed  by  Bardina  et  al.  [937],  in  which  a 

→
double-filtering  fluid  velocity  u
f  is  applied  at  the  particle  position 
(more details can be found, for example, in [931]). Note that this trivial 
model has been applied to various studies as a first approximation to the 
particle  dispersion  due  to  its  low  computational  effort  compared  to 
other, more sophisticated models. However, this simplified model might 
not be entirely valid for LES-DPM simulations. 

2.6.2.2.2. Langevin-type model. This stochastic Langevin-type model 
dates back to Pozorski and Apte [930], who took into account the effect 
of  unresolved  subgrid  scales  on  the  particles.  In  the  context  of  this 

→
rel = u

→
model, it is assumed that the relative velocity  u
p is aligned 
with  only  one  of  the  major  axes  of  the  fluid  flow.  Breuer and  Hoppe 
[672]  avoided  this  restriction  and  extended  the  original  stochastic 
model to create a cost-efficient subgrid-scale model for the particles by 
assuming that the relative velocity had a random orientation, which is 
the  case in  most  practically relevant  flows.  The  following  differential 
equation of the subgrid-scale fluctuations for the fluid phase is solved: 

→
f (cid:0) u

′

du

′

f ,i = (cid:0) Gijdu

f ,jdt
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Drift term

+

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2σ2

BijdWj
SGS
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Stochastic diffusion term

,

(2.315)  

√

where the matrices Gij  and Bij  denote the drift and diffusion of the sto-
chastic  process,  respectively.  The  symbol  dWj =
ξj  stands  for  the 
Wiener increment obeying a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and a 
variance equal to the simulation time step Δt = t (cid:0)
t0 and ξj is a random 
vector  [938].  As  suggested  by  Minier  et  al.  [939]  and  Peirano  et  al. 
[940],Eq. (2.315) can be solved by analytical integration between the 
instants  in time t0  and  t. According  to  Kloeden  and Platen  [938] and 
Gardiner [941], the integrated solution of the relation can be written as: 

̅̅̅̅̅̅
Δt

′(n+1)
f ,i

u

= Eij(t, t0)u

′(n)
f ,j + Wij(t, t0)ξj,

(2.316)  

where Eij(t,t0) is exponential of the drift matrix and Gij,Wij(t,t0) denotes 
the  square  root  of  the  covariance  matrix.  The  time-dependent  matrix 
Eij(t,t0) in Eq. (2.316) is given by the following expression: 

Eij(t, t0) = E⊥(t, t0)δij + [E‖(t, t0) (cid:0) E⊥(t, t0)]rirj,

(2.317)  

rel

with  the  component  of  the  unit  vector  of  the  relative  velocity 

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ [939] and the time-dependent coefficients E⊥(t,t0) = exp 

⃒
⃒
→
⃒
ri = urel,i/
⃒ u
( (cid:0) Δt/τ′
L,⊥) and E‖(t,t0) = exp( (cid:0) Δt/τ′
L,‖). In this context, the symbols 
τ′
L,⊥ and  τ′
L,‖ stand  for  the  time  scales,  over  which  the  subgrid-scale 
fluctuations are correlated in the direction perpendicular or parallel to 
→
rel, respectively. According to Csanady [942], the 
the relative velocity  u
L,⊥ and τ′
time scales τ′
L,‖ are defined by: 
τSGS
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
,
⃒
⃒
2
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
⃒
⃒
kSGS

√
√
√
√
√

1 + 6λ2

L,⊥ =

rel

τ

′

′

τ

L,‖ =

√
√
√
√
√

τSGS
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
.
⃒
⃒
2
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒
⃒
⃒
kSGS

1 +

3
2

λ2

rel

(2.318) 

Here, λ  stands for the ratio of the Lagrangian to the Eulerian time 
scales and is assumed to be equal to unity (λ = 1), according to Pozorski 
and Apte [930]. Other studies, such as the works of Berrouk et al. [943] 
and Cernick et al. [944], based on a previous study by Wang and Stock 
[945], have proposed the value of 0.356 for λ. 

Breuer and Hoppe  [672] modeled the time scale  of subgrid  scales 
τSGS = C(Δ/σSGS) based on the filter width Δ, the standard deviation σSGS 
,  and  the  constant  C = 1.  The  square  root  of  the  covariance  matrix 
Wij(t,t0) appearing in Eq. (2.316) is expressed as follows: 

Wij(t, t0) = W⊥(t, t0)δij + [W‖(t, t0) (cid:0) W⊥(t, t0)]rirj,

(2.319)  

with  the  coefficients  W⊥(t,t0)  and  W‖(t,t0),  defined  by  the  following 
formulae: 

W⊥(t, t0) = σSGS

√

(

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
,

1 (cid:0) exp

(cid:0) 2

Δt
τ

′

L,⊥

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)

(

(2.320) 

W‖(t, t0) = σSGS

1 (cid:0) exp

(cid:0) 2

Δt
τ

′

L,‖

.

Note that the Langevin-type model can be reduced to the formulation 
of the trivial model when (Gij  . Δt ≫  1). In this case, the coefficients 
E⊥(t,t0) and E‖(t,t0) tend to zero, whereas the coefficients W⊥(t,t0) and 
,
= σSGSξi
W‖(t,t0) reduce to σSGS. Thus, Eq. (2.316) can be reduced to u
which is identical to Eq. (2.313) of the trivial model. 

′(n+1)
f,i

2.7. Particulate system 

Particles  in  industrial  processes  (e.g.  in  energy,  pharmaceutics, 
agriculture,  metallurgy,  and  mining)  have  irregular  shapes,  and  their 
shapes  and  sizes  may  undergo  continuous  change  (see  Fig.  2.36).  In 
modern industries, at least 70  % of  the raw  materials consist of non- 
spherical  particles  with  a  broad  range  of  particle  size  distributions 
[946]. The interactions between non-spherical particles and their part-
ners and the surrounding gas are far more diverse than those of spherical 
particles,  leading  to  different  dynamics.  Furthermore,  industrial  pro-
cesses are often operated under complicated conditions with the parti-
cles  undergoing  complicated  translations,  deformations,  rotations, 
wear, aggregations, and breakages [947]. An in-depth understanding of 
the  underlying  mechanisms  of  real  particulate  systems  is  therefore 
essential. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093074F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 2.36. Examples of real particulate systems: (a) combustion and gasification of solid fuels (e.g. biomass or refuse-derived fuel, with permission of nostal6ie/ 
Shutterstock.com), (b) grain transportation (with permission of Fotokostic/Shutterstock.com), (c) conveyor belts (courtesy of Chilean Mining), (d) municipal waste 
incinerator (with permission of LASE GmbH), (d) blood cells in vessels (Unsplash license), and (f) medicine tablet coating (Unsplash license). 

2.7.1. Particle size distribution 

Particle sizes are defined either by mechanical or optical methods. 
Sieve  analysis  is  a  typical  mechanical  method.  Here,  particles  pass 
through  a  series  of  screens  with  standardized  mesh  sizes  through 
swirling or shaking. This analysis is fast and simple to conduct. More 
sophisticated  methods  are  based  on  imaging  techniques,  gravity  and 
centrifugal sedimentation, and elutriation effects [948]. In these cases, 
the particle size distribution can be characterized by simple statistical 
descriptions such as the mode, median, and mean value. Often, more 
complex  parameters  are  applied  to  represent  the  solid  sample  (e.g. 
Normal,  Log-Normal,  and  Rosin-Rammler  distribution). 
In  the 
following,  a brief  introduction to  different average particle  diameters 
and other descriptive statistical parameters is presented. Further infor-
mation can be found, for example, in [86,741]. 

The particle size distribution can be described either by a cumulative 
distribution  function  (CDF)  Qr  or  a  probability  distribution  function 
(PDF)  qr  [949].  Schematic  drawing  of  both  functions  is  illustrated  in 
Fig. 2.37. The x-axis of the CDF represents an arbitrary quantity of in-
terest  such  as  the  particle  size,  while  the  y-axis  is  a  cumulative  size 
distribution  function  with  a  steadily  growing  function  from  zero  to 
unity. The x50,r defines the particle size, where the cumulative function 
Qr has the value of 0.5 (median of the size distribution). The mode of the 
size distribution is defined when the PDF function has its maximum. 

The  CDF  and  PDF  can  be  determined  for  number  (r = 0),  length 
(r = 1),  surface  (r = 2),  and  volume  or  mass  (r = 3)  fractions.  The  cu-
mulative function is written as: 

Qr(xi) =

Amount of particles with x ≤ xi
Total amount of particles

.

(2.321) 

The PDF can be determined from the difference quotients of the CFD 

and the particle size: 

(

)

qr

xi

=

Qr(xi) (cid:0) Qr(xi(cid:0) 1)
xi (cid:0) xi(cid:0) 1

=

ΔQr(xi)
,
Δxi

(2.322)  

where  xi  is  the  arithmetic  average  of  the  discrete  interval  (Δxi)  and 
ΔQr(xi) is the difference of the CDF for the discrete interval (Δxi). If the 
discrete interval is decreased to infinitesimal step size, the continuous 
distribution density function for a random variable can be given as: 

qr(x) =

dQr(x)
dx

.

(2.323) 

The probability density function qr(x) for a random variable defines 

the probability being of quantity x from a particle sample. 

In gas-solid applications, the particle size distributions often use the 
number  q0(x)  or  mass  q3(x)  density  functions.  The  number  density 
function is written as: 

Fig.  2.37. (a)  schematic  drawing  of  the  cumulative  size  distribution  function,  (b)  discrete  probability  density  function,  and  (c)  continuous  probability  den-
sity function. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093075F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

q0(x) =

1
N0

dN
dx

,

(2.324)  

with the total number of particles of the investigated solids sample N0. 
Further  normalization  condition  applies,  resulting  in  the  following 
relation: 

∫xmax

x2q0(x)dx

d2
20 =

M1
M0

=

xmin

∫xmax

.

q0(x)dx

xmin

(2.330) 

(2.325) 

The diameter of a sphere that has the same averaged volume as the 

sample is termed as the volume mean diameter: 

∫xmax

xmin

q0(x)dx = Qr(xmax) = 1.

It  is  useful  to  transform  e.g.  the  number  density  function  in  mass 
density function or vice versa. For instance, the mass density function 
can be obtained from the number density function: 

q3(x) =

x3q0(x)

∫xmax

xmin

x3q0(x)dx

.

(2.326) 

The denominator refers to the third initial complete statistic moment 

(summation over the complete interval). 

In many cases, it is of interest to describe the measured discrete pairs 
of values e.g. (qr,xi) by a continuous distribution function, allowing the 
determination of intermediate sizes that were not measured during the 
analysis. There are four often used continuous distribution functions: the 
normal distribution function, the logarithmic normal distribution func-
tion,  the  Rosin-Rammler  distribution  function,  and  the  power-law 
function  [741].  Furthermore,  a  single  mean/average  particle  size  is 
often used for the description of a polydisperse solid sample. Various 
options to calculate an average diameter can be followed. Depending on 
the application, this includes median diameter, arithmetic mean diam-
eter, surface mean diameter, volume mean diameter, De Broucker mean 
diameter or Sauter mean diameter. The so-called statistic moment Mk is 
approximated by a discrete sum function to calculate the mean diameter 
of a discrete random variable: 

∫xmax

Mk =

xkqr(x)dx ≈

xmin

(

)

xk
i qr

xi

Δxi.

∑I

i=1

(2.327) 

Based on the number density, the different mean diameters can be 

expressed as: 

∫xmax

xmq0(x)dx

d(m(cid:0) n)
mn =

Mm
Mn

=

xmin
∫xmax

xmin

xnq0(x)dx

(2.328) 

The  median  diameter,  also  known  as  the  D50  diameter,  can  be 
calculated  from  the  CDR  function.  It  defines  the  boundary  diameter 
where 50 % of all particles are larger than the D50 diameter and 50 % of 
all particles smaller than the D50 diameter. The median diameter is not 
affected by statistical outliers and thus has an advantage over the other 
representative diameters. 

The  arithmetic  mean  diameter  is  based  on  the  average  number 
density function and is calculated by the ratio of the statistic moment of 
order one to the statistic moment of order zero: 

∫xmax

xq0(x)dx

.

q0(x)dx

d1
10 =

M1
M0

=

xmin

∫xmax

xmin

∫xmax

x3q0(x)dx

d3
30 =

M3
M0

=

xmin

∫xmax

.

q0(x)dx

xmin

(2.331) 

The Sauter’s mean diameter is the hypothetical diameter of a sample 

with the same averaged specific surface area per unit volume. 

∫xmax

d1
32 =

M3
M2

=

xmin
∫xmax

xmin

x3q0(x)dx

.

x2q0(x)dx

(2.332) 

For gas-solid flows with chemical reactions, the Sauter diameter is 
important since the specific surface to volume ratio has a great effect on 
the reaction rate. 

Based  on  the  number  density  (r = 0),  the  De  Broucker’s  mean 
diameter is determined with the statistic moment of order four divided 
by the statistic moment of order three, as follows: 

∫xmax

d1
43 =

M4
M3

=

xmin
∫xmax

xmin

x4q0(x)dx

.

x3q0(x)dx

(2.333) 

The  De  Broucker’s  mean  diameter  is  also  known  as  the  mass- 
weighted mean diameter and therefore can be calculated with the sta-
tistic moments, based on the mass density (r = 3): 

∫xmax

xq3(x)dx

.

q3(x)dx

d1
10 =

M1
M0

=

xmin

∫xmax

xmin

(2.334)  

2.7.2. Non-spherical particles 

The roundness and sphericity indices (dimensionless numbers) were 
introduced to analyze the shape of particles. The sphericity index de-
scribes the degree, to which a particle approximates the shape of the 
sphere (independently of its size), while the roundness index describes 
the degree of sharpness of the particle’s edges and corners. The round-
ness  index  is  determined  by  comparing  the  outline  of  the  two- 
dimensional projection of the particle to a circle, defined as [950,951]: 

(2.329) 

R =

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

rcur
p
rmin
cs

, Wentworth (1919),

∑i=n

i=1

rcur
p,i
rmin
cs
n

, Wadell (1932).

(2.335) 

The surface mean diameter defines the diameter of the particle that 

has the same averaged surface area as the sample: 

Here, rcur
particle, rcur

p  denotes the radius of curvature of the sharpest corner of the 
p,i  represents the radius of curvature of the particle corners, n 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093076F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

identifies the number of particle corners, and rmin
cs  represents the radius of 
the minimum circumscribing sphere (see Fig. 2.38). The measurements 
are carried out using two-dimensional images of the maximum projec-
tion area of the investigated particle. As defined by Wadell [950], the 
true sphericity is the ratio of the particle surface area to the area of a 
sphere with the same volume. The true sphericity is difficult to measure 
and thus the operational sphericity is used: 

Table 2.13 
Particle shape classification scheme [952].  

Class 

b/c 

I 
II 
III 
IV 

> (2/3) 
> (2/3) 
< (2/3) 
< (2/3) 

c/b 

< (2/3) 
> (2/3) 
< (2/3) 
> (2/3) 

Particle shape 

Oblate (discoidal, tabular) 
Equiaxial (spherical, equant) 
Triaxial (bladed) 
Prolate (rods)  

√

3

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Vp
V min
cs

,

Ψ =

(2.336) 

The symbol VP stands for the particle volume and Vmin

is the volume 
of the smallest circumscribing sphere. Eq. (2.336) can be simplified to: 

cs 

√

3

̅̅̅̅̅
bc
a2

,

Ψ =

(2.337)  

with the long axis dimension a, the intermediate axis dimension b, and 
the short axis dimension c of the investigated particle. The value of the 
sphericity index varies from unity to almost zero. A value of unity im-
plies  a  perfect  sphere,  while  a  value  near  zero  corresponds  to  a  non- 
spherical particle. Most particles involved in engineering applications 
have a sphericity index of 0.3 to 0.9. 

Zingg [952] proposed a more versatile shape classification scheme, 
using the particle dimensions along the three principal axes (a, b and c). 
Depending  on  b/a  and  c/b  ratios  (see  Fig.  2.38),  Zingg  classified  the 
particles into four form categories: spheroids, discoids, rods, or blades 
(see Table 2.13). 

The  dynamic  behavior  of  non-spherical  particles  with  PSDs  in 
fluidized-bed applications is significantly more complicated compared 
with mono-spherical particles. This is because the contact area between 
a  non-spherical  particle  and  its  collision partner  is  highly  diversified. 
Furthermore, gas-particle interactions are quite different, e.g. particles 
with an elongated or flatted shape have higher drag coefficients than 
spherical particles and may interlock with each other to form solid-like 
assemblies, in turn resulting in a further increase in drag coefficients. 
The heat and mass transfer rates also depend on the particle geometries. 
Large  particles  correspond  to  higher  temperature  gradients  and  have 
longer fluid residence times [953]. The particle shape has specific effects 
on  the  pyrolysis  process.  Compared  to  spherical  particles,  ellipsoidal 
particles with the same volume require more time to complete the py-
rolysis  process.  While  the  released  volatile  components  and  gases 
dominate  for  spherical  particles  during  the  pyrolysis,  in  the  case  of 
particles with an ellipsoid shape they are outweighed by the remaining 
pyrolysis  products  (e.g.  tar)  [954,955].  The  numerical  simulation  of 
such  non-spherical  particulate  systems  (NSPSs)  remains  a  significant 
challenge not only regarding the modeling of mechanical behavior of 

these particles but also due to the related additional computational cost. 
The models, equations, and correlations explained in the Force balance 
and  Moment  of  force  balance  sections  (volume  forces,  aerodynamic 
surface forces, and short-range surface forces including contact forces 
and adhesive forces associated either with or without physical contact, 
as well as moments of force) are suited for circular particles in 2D cases 
or spherical particles in 3D cases. Since the modeling experiences for 
spherical particles can be only partially applied, the numerical simula-
tion of particles with complex geometries is currently limited to simple 
geometries such as cylindrical or ellipsoidal particles. 

According to Zhong et al. [946], the representation of non-spherical 
particles can mainly follow two approaches: the single-particle method 
(SPM) and the composite-particle method (CPM). The idea behind the 
single-particle method is that the particle shape is described implicitly 
by  a  mathematical  function.  The  latter  can  be  polygons  and  poly-
hedrons,  continuous  function  representations,  the  discrete  function 
representation,  the  virtual  space  model,  or  the  combined  geometric 
element  model.  The  single-particle  method’s  ability  to  represent 
non-spherical  particles  unproblematically  makes this  method  the  first 
choice for authors. However, the conventional models that are used to 
calculate the volume and surface forces, as well as the moment of force, 
cannot be directly applied and new models should be developed, taking 
into account the particle shapes. In the composite-particle method, the 
non-spherical particle is formed by combining simple geometries. The 
multi-sphere  model  (MSM)  represents  the  most  efficient  composite 
approach  [956,957].  Here,  a  finite  number  of  spheres  with  different 
amounts of overlaps approximate the particle shape. The advantage of 
MSM  is  that  the  mechanical  behavior  of  spherical  particles  has  been 
investigated and therefore the conventional models can be applied with 
minor modifications. Against expectations, the multi-sphere model only 
had limited success due to several challenges such as the determination 
of the optimal number of spheres, their sizes, and their locations, which 
are required to assemble the non-spherical particles without difficulty. A 
small number of simple particle shapes were approximated, but research 
is  still  ongoing  to  assemble  spheres  more  efficiently  using  the 

Fig. 2.38. Examples of particle shapes.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093077F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

multi-sphere model. 

Compared to monodisperse systems, several factors can significantly 
increase  the  computational  cost  when  simulating  spherical  or  non- 
spherical particles with PSDs (a binary mixture of particles or contin-
uous  distribution).  First,  the  number  of  particles  sharply  increases 
compared  to  an  equivalent  monodisperse  system.  Second,  a  smaller 
particle time step is required to properly resolve collisions involving the 
finest particles (see the Particle time step section). Third, the compu-
tational cost for collision detection between particles with PSDs is much 
higher than with the monodisperse systems (see the Collision detection 
models section). Fourth, additional computational costs may arise when 
the  interphase  values, the  forces, and  the moment  of  force  are  deter-
mined.  Finally,  the  communicational  costs  (running  on  a  parallel  ar-
chitecture)  for  polydisperse  systems  are  much  higher  than  for 
monodisperse  systems  [958].  These  challenges  make  the  particulate 
systems with a broad range of particle size distributions expensive to 
simulate  with  existing  modern  computers  or  even  high-performance 
clusters.  In  the  literature,  various  approaches  have  been  proposed  to 
accelerate the simulations such as reducing the number of operations 
performed at the single-particle level, eliminating the finest particles in 
the  simulation,  and  improving  the  efficiency  of  collision  detection 
models [644,959,960]. Taking the reduction of operations performed at 
the single-particle level as an example, Zhang et al. [961] proposed an 
Eulerian-Lagrangian-Lagrangian (ELL) model to simulate gas-solid flows 
containing spherical particles with PSDs. The idea behind this model is 
that  fine  particles  were  simulated  using  the  coarse-grained  parcel 
method (for example, all particles with a diameter less than D50, see 
Fig. 2.37), while larger particles were treated using the discrete element 
method (the gas phase was still modeled in an Eulerian way as a con-
tinuum). A hybrid Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian (EEL) model to simu-
late  monodisperse  particles  in  a  bubbling  fluidized  bed  was  also 
suggested by Qinghong et al. [962]. In this study, the hydrodynamics of 
the gas phase were described with the Eulerian model, while the parti-
cles were treated with the Eulerian and the Lagrangian models. Hirche 
et  al.  [963]  used  this  model  to  increase  the  accuracy  and  simulation 
speed  of  gas  flows  with  monodisperse  particles.  Despite  the  potential 
benefits, the EEL model was not applied to polydisperse systems. In the 
latter cases, the fine particles can be represented in an Eulerian way (for 
example,  all  particles  with  diameters  less  than  D50  or  D20,  see 
Fig.  2.37),  while  the  larger  particles  can  be  simulated  using  the 
coarse-grained parcel method or discrete element method. 

3. State-of-the-art studies 

3.1. Two-fluid model 

The two-fluid model has been widely applied to fluidized-bed sys-
tems in different engineering sectors. In the first part of this section, a 
general overview of the history of the model is given. In the second part, 
current  studies  are  presented,  starting  with  non-reactive  simulations 
followed  by  publications  on  reactive  simulations.  Due  to  the  large 
number of publications in the field of non-reactive simulations, refer-
ence is made here only to review papers, and the focus lies on reviewing 
reactive simulations. 

3.1.1. Development status and research findings 

Anderson  and  Jackson  introduced  in  their  famous  and  influential 
article from 1967 the continuum equations of motion for gas-solid flows 
[735]. This was then followed by Ishii [964] in 1975, who derived the 
multiphase  fluid-fluid  governing  equations  with  slightly  different  as-
sumptions that were applied by Anderson and Jackson. Since that time, 

the two-fluid model has already been used for a variety of non-reactive 
and  reactive  gas-solid  flows,  including  fluidized  bed  systems.  Lycz-
kowski, who worked with Gidaspow [10] for 40 years, gives a detailed 
summary of the two-fluid model history, mixed with personal memories 
in his book [965] published in 2018. According to this, the history of the 
two-fluid model starts in 1966 with the development of RELAPSE-1; a 
computer program for analyzing nuclear reactor accidents. Compared to 
current  multiphase  programs,  this  program  was  quite  primitive  as  its 
calculations involved only three nodes and neglected different physical 
phenomena  and  interactions.  Furthermore,  the  fluid  flow  equations 
looked quite different from those used today in multiphase simulations. 
Only one mass, momentum, and energy equation were solved to calcu-
late steam and water. Therefore, it was a single-phase program, similar 
to the  mixture model. [966,967].  In 1971, Solbrig and Hughes [968] 
came up with the idea of formulating separate continuum equations for 
every phase. They wrote down the equations and launched a program to 
develop the SLOOP software. Unfortunately, this project failed in 1975. 
Amongst other things, one reason was the computational difficulty in 
solving  the  two-phase  equations  at  that  time.  Nevertheless,  several 
members  of  the  SLOOP  program  used  pieces  of  the  code  to  develop 
RELAP5, KACHINA; K-FIX, and other computer codes. F. Harlow and A. 
Amsden  [969,970],  who  developed  the  KACHINA  code  in  1974  and 
1975, summarized the previous literature on this subject, defined the 
nomenclature, and tried to eliminate disagreements, e.g. regarding the 
description of the phase interaction. They also performed calculations of 
particles falling through vapor. During the oil crisis in the mid-1970s, 
the  US  Department  of  Energy  initiated  the  development  of  pro-
grammes to better understand the hydrodynamics of coal gasification 
[971]. Unfortunately, this project failed. In the 1980s, the kinetic theory 
of granular flow introduced the concept of using the granular temper-
ature to describe the motion of particles and to calculate further values 
such  as  the  solid  pressure  or  solid  viscosity.  According  to  Jakobsen 
[708], the standard references for this model are given by [10,110,686, 
689,694,972-974].  This  concept  was  discussed  at  several  meetings 
beginning  in  the  year  1986  and  eventually  accepted  [975].  Around 
1985, the development of the MFIX code was started by M. Syamlal by 
extending  the  K-FIX  code  and,  in  a  first  step,  developing  the 
Non-Isothermal  Multiparticle  Fluidized  bed  (NIMPF)  program.  In  a 
second step, T. O’Brien and M. Syamlal started the development of the 
MFIX  code  at  the  National  Energy  Technology  Laboratory  (NETL)  in 
1991. The first version of the MFIX program was released in 1993. Two 
years  later,  in  1995,  FLUENT  and  NETL  signed  a  cooperative  R&D 
agreement for the transfer of the multiphase code in the FLUENT code. 
In 1997, the first FLUENT version containing the two-fluid model was 
released. As can be seen in Table 2.2, most of the papers found in the 
literature use ANSYS-FLUENT or MFIX today. Nevertheless, it should be 
mentioned  that  other  open-source  and  commercial  CFD  codes  are 
capable of applying the two-fluid model. Commercial codes include the 
PHOENICS code, which was developed and released by D.B. Spalding 
[976] in 1978, or the Star-CD code, which was developed to become the 
STAR-CCM+ code in 2004 (the company was acquired by Siemens in 
2016). Another open-source code besides the MFIX program that is also 
capable of applying the two-fluid model, and has been used more and 
more  frequently  in  recent  years,  is  OpenFOAM  [977].  An  extensive 
search  of  the  literature  was  carried  out,  starting  from  1991  and 
extending until 2020. Around 1000 papers were found on the two-fluid 
model, many of which (around 80 %) are in the field of non-reactive 
simulations. These papers deal mainly with the hydrodynamics of the 
multiphase flow regarding different aspects such as scale-up, compari-
son of 3D and 2D simulations, turbulence models, heat transfer, different 
aspects of the kinetic theory of granular flow, or drag models. A lot of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093078F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.1 
A review of the two-fluid model, applied to chemical and energy processes.  

Applications 

Studies 

Main observations 

Pyrolysis/gasification and combustion 

CO2 capture technologies (oxy-fuel and post-combustion 

processes) 
Polymerization 
Steam reforming 
Fluid catalytic cracking 
Ozone decomposition 
Methanol-to-olefins 
Coating and granulation 
Electric and magnetic 
Other chemical and metallurgical processes (e.g. crystallization, 
methanation, cyclone separator, ironmaking blast furnace, 
lime shaft kiln, tube erosion in a fluidized bed, reduction of 
ores, directly-irradiated fluidized bed reactor, pulsed-fluidized 
bed, pressurized fluidized bed, vibrated fluidized bed, and 
particle-driven solar power receivers)  

[33,135-184,271,272,274-276,280, 
284-287,289,294,306,371-373,422-429, 
445,448,592-594,600-607,613,618-620, 
981]  
[185-211,277,278,282,283,291,300, 
430-437,446,595,596,608,617] 
[82,212-217,296,438,439] 
[218-226,273,440,441,447,597,598] 
[227-235,279,609] 
[236-242,610,614] 
[243-248,297] 
[249-251,442] 
[252-258,982,983] 
[134,259-270,292,293,298,301,304,305, 
374,443,444,563,591,599,611,612,623, 
624,984,985]  

• Two-fluid model simulations are used to model a wide variety of 
industrial processes. Most of the studies are found in the field of 
CO2 capture, pyrolysis/gasification, and combustion  

• Most of the studies are two-dimensional, using one particle size 

and assuming that particles are spherical  

• Due to the overestimation of the drag of homogeneous models, 
some groups use meso-scale modeling (EMMS). Nevertheless, 
most of the studies use homogeneous drag models  

• In the field of polymerization, most of the studies use the 

population balance model to describe the evaluation of the 
particle size distribution  

• Ozone decomposition simulations are often used to study the 

mass transfer (Sherwood number) 

research  is  found  in  the  field  of  drag  modeling  in  particular,  as  this 
parameter  has  a  very  high  impact  on  the  correct  prediction  of  the 
multiphase flow. So far, no drag model has been created, which applies 
to all multiphase flows. It is known that conventional homogeneous drag 
models overestimate the drag and can therefore lead to wrong results 
[126]. The reason is that in the homogeneous models the resistance is 
proportional to the number of particles in a cell. The particles in a flu-
idized bed form clusters that can be smaller than the cell size, so the 
resistance  is  lower  than  assumed  in  the  homogeneous  case  [978]. 
Different approaches have been developed to overcome this limitation. 
They can be classified into “fine-grid” and “coarse-grid” simulations. In 
the “fine-grid” approach, the mesh is refined until a mesh-independent 
solution  is  reached.  In  “coarse-grid”  simulations,  a  factor  is  used  to 
correct the homogeneous drag model variable [126]. One well-known 
approach  is  the  EMMS  model  (see  the  Structure-dependent  drag 
models section). Another current field of research is into how to deal 
with  different  particle  sizes  in  the  two-fluid  model.  For  example  in 
catalytic reactions such as the FCC process, the properties of solid par-
ticles (e.g. size, density) do not change with time, while for non-catalytic 
processes such as pyrolysis and polymerization, the properties of solid 
particles change with chemical reactions. One possibility is to define a 
fluid phase for every particle size. Nevertheless, this has the drawback of 
a higher calculation time and numerical instabilities. For this reason, the 
population  balance  model  (PBM)  was  introduced  into  the  two-fluid 
model  (see  the  Two-fluid  model section).  In this  model, a  population 
balance  equation  describing  the  evolution  of  particles  is  introduced 
[708,979,980]. Nevertheless, due to the large number of publications in 
the field of non-reactive simulations this review is limited to reactive 
simulations.  References  are  given  to  review  papers  dealing  with 
non-reactive  simulations.  A  large  number  of  different  processes  (e.g. 
pyrolysis, gasification, combustion, carbon capture and storage (CCS), 
polymerization and other technologies) have been simulated using the 
two-fluid model. 

3.1.2. Non-reactive simulations 

In the field of non-reactive simulations, there are a huge number of 
publications. Around 800 studies were found during the research into 
the  literature.  Most  of  them  investigate  gas-solid  interaction  (drag 
modeling) or hydrodynamics or deal with mathematical aspects of the 
two-fluid model (kinetic theory of granular flow formulation, etc.). Due 
to the large number of studies, reviews of different aspects of the non- 
reactive simulations are mainly given in Table 3.2. Another interesting 
aspect is the question of whether two- and three-dimensional simula-
tions produce the same results. This question was discussed in several 
studies that were found during the review. 

3.1.3. Reactive simulations 

The two-fluid model has been widely applied to fluidized-bed sys-
tems in different engineering sectors. In the following, an overview of 
recent  publications  will  be  given,  divided  depending  on  the  modeled 
process: pyrolysis, gasification, combustion, carbon capture and storage 
(CCS), polymerization, and other technologies. 

3.1.3.1. Pyrolysis,  gasification,  and  combustion. The  thermochemical 
conversion processes of solid fuels mainly include combustion, gasifi-
cation,  and  pyrolysis.  In  these  processes,  the  fluidized  beds  involve  a 
large fraction of inert material that does not participate in the conver-
sion reactions. This has the consequence of slight temperature gradients 
within the reactor that remain small even when a sudden shift in fuel 
supply occurs. Due to the inherently good mixing behavior of the gas and 
solid, solid fuels can be utilized, which have widely differing particle 
shapes,  or  widely  distributed  particle  sizes  or  energy  contents.  Addi-
tional advantages are summarized below as:  

• Continuous operation with the possibility of solid transport in and 

out of the system 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093079F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.2 
Review studies on the two-fluid model, applied to non-reactive simulations.  

Studies 

Main observations 

Drag models 

[125]  

• Comparison of different formulations for gas-solid flow in two-fluid models  
• Various closure models are compared (drag, frictional, and solid stress models)  
• The study was done to show the impact of various closure models and two different sets of governing equations, which are used in two-fluid 

modeling based on simulation predictions 

[126]  

[127]  

[128]  

[129]  

[986]  

Hydrodynamics 

[130]  

[131]  

Theory 

[132]  

[133]  

[20]  

[987]  

[975]  

[988]  

• Review of multiscale CFD (EMMS)  
• Homogeneous drag models overestimate the drag and mesh-independent solutions of fine-grid two-fluid models seem to show inexact results  
• Homogeneous drag models fail to capture the S-shaped axial profile of voidage in fluidized-bed risers  
• Extension of multiscale CFD to include mass transfer shows that the Reynolds number is not sufficient for correlating the overall Sherwood 

number 

• An extensive review of the meso-scale (EMMS) model  
• Non-reactive and reactive studies are shown with the implemented meso-scale model 
• Review of five homogeneous drag models (Syamlal and O’Brien, Gidaspow, Richardson Zaki, RUC, and Hill, Koch and Ladd)  
• Simulations with the drag model are performed and compared to experimental results 
• Review of non-spherical biomass particles  
• A summary of spherical and non-spherical drag models is given  
• The suggestion is made to run DNS or CFD-DEM simulations in small periodic domains to obtain closures for two-fluid models 
• Second-order Taylor expansion is used to approximate the drag force  
• Four relevant sub-grid quantities affect the structure-dependent drag model  
• Gas drift velocity is the most important parameter in determining the filtered drag force 
• Review of techniques for solid flow measurement  
• Review of the Eulerian approach including the kinetic theory approach and cohesive and non-cohesive particles is shown  
• Studies are presented for 2D and 3D transient numerical simulations 
• Review of two-fluid and DEM spouted-bed simulations  
• Both models predict the typical flow patterns of the spouted bed  
• The two-fluid model needs a proper description of pseudo-fluid properties (solid pressure, solid viscosity, etc.) 
• Different aspects of the two-fluid theory are presented (equations of mass and momentum, averaging procedures, closure laws, etc.)  
• Interface momentum transfer (drag) is discussed in detail  
• Review is given of published studies in the field of hydrodynamics in bubbling and circulating fluidized beds 
• Models for multiphase simulations are presented  
• Averaging techniques and closure models for two-fluid models are described  
• Review is given of monodisperse and bidisperse fluidized-bed simulations 
• A short review of different models for multiphase flow simulations 
• Physical models are presented for the numerical description of multiphase flows, including the two-fluid model  
• Closure models are described for interphase momentum transfer, kinetic theory of granular flow and dense particle flows 
• Review of simulations using kinetic theory of granular flow  
• A new model is described relating particle solids pressure to granular temperature  
• Two different kinds of turbulence in fluidized beds are measured via PIV 
• Three multiphase models are presented including a description of their equations and how to solve them  
• Future challenges for multiphase gas-phase simulations are discussed    

2D/3D 

simulations 

[120-124]  

• 2D simulations are often performed to reduce computational costs. These studies examine whether this simplification is justified  
• According to [121], 2D simulations and experiments showed systematic differences when comparing fluidization velocity, bed loading, and 
particle size. One reason could be that 2D simulations neglect the wall friction at the front and back walls of the reactor. Therefore, flow 
velocities are higher in 2D simulations compared to 3D simulation results  

• Reactor performance is over-predicted when using two-dimensional simulations [120]  
• Using an EMMS drag model, Chang et al. showed that 2D and 3D simulations gave reasonable results for the dense bed region, but the 2D model 

over-predicted the solids concentrations and particle velocity in the region above the bed  

• Shi et al. [124] showed in their study that 2D simulations over-predicted the experimental results for the void fraction distribution. The authors 

concluded that only 3D simulations give physically realistic results  

• High  heat  and  mass  transfer  rates  from  gas  to  solid,  resulting  in 
uniform  temperature  gradients  in  the  bed  even  with  highly 
exothermic or endothermic reaction rates  

• Possible operation over a wide range of geometrical and mechanical 

particle properties  

• Excellent particle mixing performance  
• The possibility of using different solid fuels such as coal, biomass, 
RDF, or fuel blends, as well as the very low NOx and SO2 emissions 
compared to pulverized firing systems because of lower combustion 

temperatures,  ensuring  that  the  energy  supply  is  secure,  environ-
mentally friendly and sustainable  

• Low operating cost compared to other competing technologies and 

suitability for a large-scale operation  

• Simple construction requiring low investment 

Pyrolysis  is  an  irreversible  process,  which  involves  the  thermal 
destruction of organic substances taking place in the absence of oxygen. 
◦
The process occurs at elevated temperatures above 250 
C and does not 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093080F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

involve  reaction  with  oxygen,  water,  or  other  species,  in  contrast  to 
high-temperature processes such as hydrolysis and combustion. Since an 
oxygen-free  environment is not possible in practice, oxidation always 
takes place during the pyrolysis process. The term “pyrolysis” is derived 
from the Greek word “pyro”, which means fire, and the word “lysis”, 
which  means  separating.  Usually,  the  pyrolysis  process  is  applied  to 
convert  organic  substances  into  a  solid  residue  that  contains  ash  and 
carbon and lesser quantities of liquid and gases [989]. During biomass 
pyrolysis, for example, the products of char, tar, gases (such as carbon 
monoxide,  carbon  dioxide,  and  nitrogen),  and  volatile  organic  com-
pounds are formed, which are released in different proportions. The tar 
is composed of various species including heavy hydrocarbons, organic 
acids, aldehydes, alcohols, and phenols. In a subsequent reaction, the tar 
splits  into  char,  volatile  components,  and  gases.  The  char  is  the 
remaining solid and consists almost entirely of pure carbon. The pro-
portion  of  the  major  components  is  determined  depending  on  the 
biomass properties, the oxidizer (nitrogen, air, or steam), the heating 
rate, and the residence time. The pyrolysis of a solid feedstock within a 
◦
narrow temperature range of 200 
C for a residence time of 15 
min to 90 min is known as “torrefaction”. Here, water and low calorific 
gaseous species are released, leading to an increase in the calorific value 
(weight-related)  by an approximate factor of 1.3 [990]. For example, 
torrefied biomass is a solid, brittle product with several positive char-
acteristics in comparison to raw biomass, such as improved grindability 
and the lower capacity needed for transport and storage. Extreme py-
◦
rolysis at higher temperatures ~ 600 
C, with a certain level of oxygen to 
supply  heat  to  the  process  via  combustion,  yields  fixed  carbon  as  a 
residue. The process is known as “carbonization”. This produces more 
energy-dense  solid  fuel,  but  carbonization  has  a  much  lower  energy 
yield than torrefaction. 

◦
C to 400 

◦

feedstock 

The gasification process converts the solid fuels into a combustible 
gas mixture that mainly consists of H2  and CO, with lower amounts of 
CO2,  H2O,  CH4,  N2,  and  C2+ (higher  hydrocarbons)  [991].  The  yield 
mixture is known as producer gas. It can be utilized in power generation 
or  as  a 
for  producing  high-value  chemicals  (e.g. 
Fischer-Tropsch synthesis, methanol, and ammonia). The process occurs 
at  elevated  temperatures  above  500 
C  with  a  controlled  amount  of 
gasification  agent  using  e.g.  oxygen,  steam,  and/or  carbon  dioxide 
(feedstock  is  not  fully  combusted).  Different  types  of  carbon-based 
feedstock  such  as  biomass,  coal,  petroleum,  petcoke,  and  industrial 
wastes can be utilized. In the gasification process, the pyrolysis takes 
place, first producing volatiles and char, followed by char gasification, 
cracking,  and  reforming  of  the  volatiles.  The  main  drawback  of  the 
conventional  gasification  process is  the  demand  for pure  oxygen as  a 
gasifying agent (required to obtain high-quality producer gas) as well as 
the gas cleaning, which depends on end-use technology and/or emission 
standards (e.g. CO2, H2S, and COS removal). Recently, new gasification 
technologies have been proposed, such as chemical-looping gasification 
(CLG) [992,993], calcium-looping gasification (CALG) [994,995], dual 
fluidized  bed  gasifiers  (indirect  steam  gasification)  [981,996],  solar 
gasification  in  a  dual  fluidized  bed  [997]  and  indirectly  irradiative 
fluidized-bed solar steam gasifier [998]. 

The  combustion process  is  an  exothermic redox  chemical reaction 
between a fuel and an oxidant. In various applications such as thermal 
power  plants  (combined-cycle  power  plants,  coal-fired  power  plants, 
municipal  waste  incineration)  and  heat  engines,  the  required  heat  is 
obtained  from  the  combustion  process  using  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous 
fuels  [52].  Compared  to  the  combustion  process  of  liquid  or  gaseous 
fuels,  the  combustion  of  solid  fuels  (e.g.  coal,  biomass,  or  municipal 
waste)  is  more  complex.  It  involves  three  major  mechanisms:  drying, 
pyrolysis, and oxidation of the volatiles and char. The flue gas formed in 
the combustion chamber of a steam generator or a gas turbine consists 

is 

from 

known 

combustion 

chemical-looping 

mainly of CO2, H2O, O2, N2, SO2, and Ar. Usually, atmospheric air is used 
as an oxidant, but recently the oxy-fuel process has been proposed to 
capture the CO2 during the combustion process. The pure oxygen can be 
provided using an air separation unit (cost-intensive process, leading to 
a high loss of overall efficiency) or chemical looping combustion that 
enables  CO2  to  be  captured  with  a  low  energy  input  [48,999].  One 
spin-off 
as 
oxygen-carrier-aided  combustion  (OCAC)  [1000].  Here,  the  conven-
tionally  used  silica-sand  bed  material  is  replaced  with  a  metal  oxide 
during the combustion in the fluidized bed using air. The use of oxygen 
carriers as bed material  leads to a  more homogeneous distribution of 
oxygen  and  temperature  in  the  bed  since  it  improves  the  contact  be-
tween fuel and air via redox sequence (i.e. the oxygen can be transported 
from oxygen-rich regions in the fluidized bed to oxygen-poor regions). 
3.1.3.1.1. Pyrolysis. The modeling of the pyrolysis process in fluid-
ized beds is related to the feedstock types (e.g. coal or biomass). In this 
review, only the biomass pyrolysis process will be discussed. The first 
application of the two-fluid model to biomass pyrolysis in fluidized beds 
was  presented  by  Lathouwers  and  Bellan  [600,601]  at  the  California 
Institute of Technology. Based on the kinetic theory of granular flow, a 
comprehensive model is developed including mass transfer, heat trans-
fer, and a multicomponent multi-step kinetic model. The CFD model is 
used to evaluate different operating conditions and scale-up behavior. 
Based on previous work [600], Xue et al. [422] at the Iowa State Uni-
versity  modeled  a  continuously  fed  fluidized-bed  biomass  pyrolysis 
reactor  using  a  multi-fluid  model  approach  in  the  MFIX  software, 
considering sand as a bed material and biomass as separate solid phases. 
A time-splitting approach was introduced for reasons of stability, with 
transport phenomena being solved in the first fractional time step and 
reaction source terms being solved in the second. The CFD model was 
able to predict the steady-state experimental results for fast pyrolysis of 
a biomass mixture (pure cellulose and red oak) with an error tolerance of 
about 20 % in product yields [137]. The authors also investigated the 
influence  of  polydispersity  and  particle  density  variation  caused  by 
chemical conversion [423].  A uniform particle  conversion model was 
implemented  and  the  population  balance  equation  (PBE)  was  solved 
using  the DQMOM method  with a  different number  of  corresponding 
moments (N=2, 3, 4). It was shown that taking into consideration the 
particle  size  distribution influences  both  the  bed  height  and  the  tem-
perature  and  velocity  distributions,  which  in  turn  leads  to  a  slight 
improvement in the biomass conversion. However, the predicted prod-
uct yields at the reactor outlet deviated from the experiment with an 
error between 9 % and 27 %. 

At the Eastern Regional Research Center, Boateng and Mtui [138] 
modeled  the  bio-oil  production  for  different  biomass  feedstock  types, 
taking into consideration secondary homogeneous pyrolysis reactions in 
ANSYS-FLUENT. The numerical results deviated to an acceptable extent 
from their own experiments, while non-condensable concentrations of 
gases, especially CO2, were over-predicted. 

At the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Mellin et al. [139-141] 
applied  a  comprehensive  kinetic  model  (see  Fig.  3.1),  taking  into  ac-
count  primary  pyrolysis  reactions  and  tar  cracking  [1001,1002]  to 
model a lab-scale fluidized-bed biomass pyrolizer using ANSYS-FLUENT 
(see  Fig.  3.2).  While  this  sophisticated  model  can  predict  the  overall 
experimental  product  yield  with  a  deviation  of  10  %,  the  measured 
water content cannot be sufficiently estimated. The authors concluded 
that the secondary tar reactions and dehydration of primary pyrolysis 
products need to be considered to improve the water content prediction. 
Here, it should be mentioned that there are other comprehensive kinetic 
models available in the literature, for example, the kinetic models by the 
groups around Prof. Bi [1003,1004] and Prof. Mazza [1005–1007]. 

At  the  Iowa  State  University,  Xiong  et  al.  [371]  developed  an 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093081F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.1. Comprehensive kinetic model for biomass pyrolysis (reproduced from reference [139], with permission of Elsevier).  

Fig.  3.2. Species  concentration  distribution  for  a  lab-scale  fluidized-bed  biomass  pyrolizer  at  plane  z=0,  and  10.75  s  (reproduced  from  reference  [139],  with 
permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093082F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

process 

conditions  were  modeled 

open-source  code,  known  as  BIOTC,  to  simulate  the  fast  biomass  py-
rolysis reactors and investigate the effects of operating conditions [602], 
interphase  transport  [372],  and  devolatilization  mechanism  [603]. 
However,  the  authors  also  used  the  MFIX  software  to  investigate  the 
influence of hydrodynamics [424] and a distributed activation energy 
model for kinetics [425]. Yan et al. [142] at Taylor’s University vali-
dated their CFD model against experimental data by Xue et al. [137] and 
investigated how the fuel feeding point influenced the product yield. At 
Yonsei University, Lee et al. [426] applied a hybrid method coupling 
process modeling and CFD to optimize the performance of a fast biomass 
pyrolysis  reactor,  including  upstream  and  downstream  processes. 
Different 
the 
Euler-Euler-Lagrange approach in the MFIX software and a yield data 
map was generated to integrate the CFD results into the process simu-
lation. However, no details were given about the CFD model validation. 
At the National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technol-
ogy,  Ranganathan  and  Gu  [143]  compared  simple  [1008],  global 
[1009], and advanced [1001] kinetics schemes for fast pyrolysis reactors 
using ANSYS-FLUENT and validated their CFD results with experiments. 
The advanced scheme performed best, while the yield of the predicted 
product deviates about 12 % from experiments [1010], especially for 
non-condensable gases. However, the CFD simulations did not confirm 
estimated  product  yield  trends  with  increasing  particle  diameters. 
Sharma  et  al.  [144],  at  Curtin  University,  also  used  a  simple  kinetic 
scheme  [1011]  to  investigate  the  effect  of  operating  conditions  and 
particle  size  on  fast  biomass  pyrolysis  in  a  fluidized  bed  using 

using 

ANSYS-FLUENT. The CFD model was validated against experiments by 
Xue et al. [137]. The lack of predictability of non-condensable gases was 
concluded  to  be  attributed  to  experimental  uncertainties.  Aizi  and 
Mowla [427] modeled a fluidized-bed reactor for the flash pyrolysis of 
algae using the MFIX software. The CFD results for this batch process 
were validated against the authors’ experiments, i.e. unsteady temper-
ature and mass flow rates. Lee et al. [428], at Yonsei University, also 
used MFIX software, applying a semi-global kinetic model to investigate 
the effect of column size on the pyrolysis of lignocellulose biomass in a 
fluidized bed. The bubble sizes, pressure fluctuations and reaction rates 
were  compared  for  four  different  column  shapes  with  variable 
length-to-width ratios. However, only the fluidization behavior, e.g. the 
minimum fluidization velocity, was validated against experiments. 

At Beihang University, the effect of the potassium concentration on 
the fast pyrolysis of cellulose was investigated by Eri et al. [145] using 
ANSYS-FLUENT.  The  authors  applied  a  modified  reaction  mechanism 
[1012] based on [1013] (an improved version of [1001]), taking into 
account  potassium’s  effects  on  kinetics.  The  CFD  results  sufficiently 
predicted  experimental  product  yields  [1012,1014]  within  a  10  % 
tolerance. In a recent work [146], the authors compared four different 
biomass feedstock types, e.g. bagasse, beech, oak, and pine, to evaluate 
the effect of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin on bio-oil production. 
At Cranfield University, Liu et al. [135] modeled biomass pyrolysis, 
taking into consideration a more general reaction mechanism for cel-
lulose, hemicellulose, and lignin using a 3-parameter shrinkage model 
and  the  QMOM  method  (see  Fig.  3.3).  The  numerical  results  were 

Fig. 3.3. Distribution in a fluidized-bed pyrolizer (a, b, and c), and distribution along the axis for the apparent density (d) and diameter (e) of the biomass particles 
for different shrinking patterns: (a) no shrinkage, (b) pattern 1, and (c) pattern 2 (reproduced from reference [135], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093083F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

compared against experiments with red oak (Xue et al. [137]), beech-
wood, and bagasse (Patel et al. [1014]), while the modeling accuracy 
strongly depends on the estimated biomass composition. 

At Xi’an Shiyou University, Zhong et al. modeled the fast biomass 
pyrolysis  experiments  carried  out  by  Xue  et  al.  [137]  using 
ANSYS-FLUENT, taking into account different effects caused by particle 
conversion. The effect of particle shrinkage [147,148], different pyrol-
ysis mechanisms [149], and intra-particle heat transfer was investigated 
[150] similarly to Dong et al. [604]. Additionally, the authors imple-
mented  a  combination  of  EMMS  and  the  Lu-Gidaspow  drag  model  to 
take into account Geldart classification changes [151]. 

In conclusion, most applications of the two-fluid model (TFM) or 
multi-fluid model (MFM) for pyrolysis processes are dedicated to the 
fast pyrolysis of biomass in bubbling fluidized beds. The main differ-
ences found involve (a) the feedstock, (b) the reaction kinetics, (c) the 
particle conversion model, and (d) the CFD code used. There are a vast 
range of feedstock types in terms of their main components (cellulose, 
hemicellulose, lignin). Several reaction mechanisms have been applied 
in  the  literature  with  different  levels  of  complexity  concerning  the 
main components. Interested readers are referred to the work of Xiong 
et al. [1015]. In terms of the particle conversion model, most publi-
cations only consider the change of the particle structure in terms of 
different  densities  for  char  and  fresh  biomass.  Recently,  different 
particle shrinkage models have been investigated and even a popula-
tion balance equation has been successfully coupled to the multi-fluid 
model. Most CFD models are either compared against experiments by 
Xue et al. [137] and Patel et al. [1014] or the authors’  experiments 
[138-141,427]. 

Papadikis  et  al.  [1016–1019]  proposed  a  so-called  Euler-Euler-La-
grange approach, Unlike the classical CFD-DEM approach, this involves 
modeling the inert sand material as an Eulerian phase, while single reactive 
biomass particles are traced as discrete elements. To model the fast pyrol-
ysis of biomass, a pyrolysis model is implemented via user-defined func-

tions in FLUENT 6.2. Additionally, other reactive multiphase systems have 
been modeled using MFM, e.g. downer reactors [1020], solar-thermal re-
actors [1021], vortex reactors [1022], and auger reactors [1023]. 

3.1.3.1.2. Gasification. Typical  feedstock  types  for  fluidized-bed 
gasifiers  are  (a)  biomass  or  (b)  coal.  Most  of  the  relevant  modeling 
steps (e.g. particle conversion model, homogeneous reactions, and heat 
transfer)  are  similar  for  both  feedstock  types,  but  heterogeneous  re-
actions, in particular, need to be modeled differently.  

(a)  Biomass gasification 

At the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Wang et al. [592] were the 
first to model the gasification of sorghum biomass in a fluidized bed by 
solving  the  multi-fluid  model  in  a  finite-element  method  using  their 
in-house code. A multi-step kinetic model was applied, similarly to the 
works of Lathouwers and Bellan [600,601]. No comparison to experi-
mental data was provided. Gerber et al. [429] at the Technical University 
of Berlin modeled a bubbling fluidized-bed wood gasifier using the MFIX 
software.  In  contrast  to  most  fluidized-bed  biomass  applications, 
char-coal  was  used  as  the  bed  material.  Three  solid  phases  were 
modeled: wood as 4 mm particles and two char phases with diameters of 
1.5 mm and 2 mm, respectively (see Fig. 3.4). For pyrolysis, two different 
two-step models were compared, which both used the simple primary 
pyrolysis model proposed by Grønli et al. [1024], but involved different 
secondary pyrolysis models including an inert tar component as well as 
(a)  a  single  reactive  tar  component  [1025]  and  (b)  two  reactive  tar 
components with different reaction rates [1026]. Additionally, hetero-
geneous  and  homogeneous  reactions  (combustion  reactions  and 
water-gas shift reaction) were taken into consideration. By varying the 
parameters, it was shown that the pyrolysis model has the most impact 
on  product  gas  compositions.  However,  the  numerical  results were  in 
good agreement with experiments by Neubauer and Behrendt [1027] as 
they  scatter  significantly  in  terms  of  the  outlet  gas  composition  and 

Fig. 3.4. Lab-scale bubbling fluidized-bed biomass gasifier: (a) experimental configuration, (b) snapshots of gas phase volume fraction, and (c) char volume fraction 
(dchar1= 2 mm, dchar2= 1.5mm) (reproduced from reference [429], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093084F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

temperature. Although the segregation effect was observed for the char 
particles (see Fig. 3.4), including only two different particle sizes, the 
model most certainly cannot reliably capture the effect of polydispersity 
and  particle  shrinkage.  Chen  et  al.  [445]  at  the  Harbin  University  of 
Science  and  Technology  also  modeled  the  experimental  fluidized-bed 
wood  gasifier  by  Neubauer  and  Behrendt  [1027]  with  a  similar  CFD 
model to [429]. The authors implemented a bubble-based EMMS drag 
model proposed by Shi et al. [1028] and achieved better agreement with 
experiments compared to the Gidaspow drag model. 

At  the  Fraunhofer  Institute  and  the  Hamburg  University  of  Tech-
nology, He et al. [152] modeled a lab-scale bubbling fluidized-bed wood 
gasifier using ANSYS-FLUENT. Char and tar were considered as hypo-
thetical empirical formulas, consisting of C, H and O only [1029]. For 
pyrolysis char and gas, yields are taken from Wiest [1030] and two tar 
components  are  modeled  according  to  Rath  and  Staudinger  [1026]. 
Homogeneous  and  heterogeneous  reactions  were  stated,  but  kinetics 
were not taken into account. The CFD results were validated for different 
equivalent ratios and steam-to-biomass ratios, but the comparison was 
provided  only  in  terms  of  the  gas  yield  and  composition.  While  the 
predicted  H2  and  CH4  values  were  in  good  agreement,  experimental 
trends for CO and CO2  were not captured by the CFD model. Liu et al. 
[153] at the University of Waterloo modeled a circulating fluidized-bed 
biomass  gasifier  using  a  3D  steady-state  model  based  on  the  TFM 
approach.  Here,  all  transient  terms  in  the  governing  equations  were 
neglected, similarly to Deng et al. [154], who modeled the coal gasifi-
cation in a pressurized spout-fluid bed. Validation against experiments 
from Garcıa-Ibanez et al. [1031] showed good agreement for outlet gas 
concentrations,  while  the  reactor  temperature  is  over-predicted. 
Furthermore,  the  difference  between  turbulence  models,  the  effect  of 
the radiation model, and the effect of the water-gas shift reaction were 
investigated. Xue and Fox [605] at the Iowa State University carried out 
a  numerical  investigation  into  the  gasification  of  wood  in  a  lab-scale 
fluidized-bed  reactor  designed  and  operated  at  pyrolysis  conditions 
(see the Pyrolysis section). The previously developed CFD model [422] 
in MFIX software was extended, adding heterogeneous char reactions 
and homogeneous reactions, to investigate the effect of the equivalent 
ratio,  reactor  temperature,  and  biomass  moisture  content.  A  uniform 
conversion  model  was  implemented,  assuming  that  there  was  a 
decreasing biomass density rather than a shrinking particle diameter, as 
widely used in the literature. It is shown that the biomass density de-
creases rapidly at the biomass inlet due to a fast devolatilization reac-
tion.  However,  this  effect  could  not  be  verified  as  there  was  no 
experimental validation. Eri et al. [155], at Beihang University, modeled 
the  steam  gasification  of  crushed  almond  shells  in  a  fluidized-bed 
implemented  a  multi-step 
gasifier  with  ANSYS-FLUENT  and 

for 

the  gasification  of  coffee  husk  biomass.  While 

multicomponent pyrolysis model, similarly to Mellin et al. [139], as well 
as heterogeneous char reactions and homogeneous reactions. Although a 
sophisticated pyrolysis model was used, the simulation results deviate 
considerably  from  the  experimental  results  obtained  by  Rapagn`a 
[1032]. The tar content and char yield are over-predicted by about 50 % 
and the gas composition deviation ranges within 25 % for H2  and CO. 
Only the CO2 and CH4 fractions agree well with the experimental results. 
At the University of Tr´as-os-Montes and Alto Douro and the University 
of Porto, several papers were published related to the two-fluid simulation 
of a pilot-scale gasification plant in Portalegre, Portugal (see Fig. 3.5). In 
2013, Couto et al. [156] first presented experimental and numerical re-
sults 
the 
two-dimensional  CFD  model  developed  in  ANSYS-FLUENT  agreed  well 
with measured outlet gas compositions, no details are given on the dis-
tribution of properties within the reactor, e.g. volume fractions or species 
concentrations.  However,  the  authors  emphasized  that  the  CFD  model 
needs to be extended to include tar production as well as detailed devo-
latilization reactions. The  CFD model was further improved  [157,158], 
implementing  a  single-rate  devolatilization  model  by  Badzioch  et  al. 
[1033], the finite-rate/eddy-dissipation model for homogeneous reactions 
with kinetics similar to Yu et al. [606], and the kinetic/diffusion surface 
reaction  model  proposed  by  Field,  Baum  and  Street  [1034,1035]  for 
heterogeneous reactions. A total of 9 experimental runs for three different 
biomasses (forest residues, coffee husk, and vine-pruning residues) were 
given, each at three different operating conditions (reactor temperature 
and biomass/air ratio) [157]. Validation was presented for coffee husks 
only, showing that the predicted producer gas compositions deviate with 
an approximately 20 % error (see Fig. 3.6). It should be mentioned that 
the particle diameter was not given either in the experiments or in CFD. 
To  model  municipal  solid  waste  (MSW)  gasification,  Couto  et  al. 
[159,160]  applied  the  same  previous  CFD  model  with  an  improved 
pyrolysis model, taking into account secondary tar production [1036]. 
The simulations were based on experiments by Wang et al. [1037]. Good 
agreement  was  achieved  for  most  process  conditions.  However,  some 
gas components, especially hydrocarbons (CH4 and C2H4), deviate up to 
40  %, which  might be  due to  the  incomplete  understanding  of waste 
composition and kinetics. Using the validated CFD model, the pilot-scale 
gasifier using MSW from Portugal was investigated for different process 
conditions (reactor temperature, fuel feed rates, air feed rate). Later, the 
authors further modeled the gasification of the investigated MSWs and 
biomasses using CO2 [161] and steam [163,607] as gasification agents. 
The authors also extended the CFD model to include miscanthus gasi-
fication  [162],  while  the  main  trends  were  covered  for  a  range  of 
equivalent ratios, but the CH4  concentration was over-predicted in all 
cases. Ismail et al. [170,373] also modeled the pilot-scale fluidized-bed 

Fig. 3.5. (a) pilot-scale biomass gasification plant in Portalegre, Portugal, and (b) schematic view of the main components (reproduced from reference [162], with 
permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093085F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.6. (a) gasifier geometry, (b, c and d) distribution of gas molar fraction, and (e, f  and g) validation results for three experimental runs with coffee husks 
(reproduced from reference [158], with permission of Elsevier). 

gasifier using an in-house code, so-called combustion mathematics, and 
energy transport. Similar modeling approaches are considered in [159, 
160]. CFD results for coffee husks [170], peach stones [373,613] and 
miscanthus  [164,373]  were  validated  successfully  against  different 
experimental gasifiers [157,158,1038,1039]. More studies on the CFD 
model  are 
reported  here  as  examples:  comparison  between 
zero-dimensional approach and CFD [272], analysis of scale-up effects 
[1040], and coupling of CFD with Response Surface Method [165,271].  

(b)  Coal gasification 

At  the  Chinese  Academy  of  Sciences,  Gao  et  al.  [166]  applied  the 
two-fluid model to simulate a spouted fluidized-bed coal-char gasifier. 
Only char gasification reactions and the water-gas shift reaction were 
taken into account, with kinetics from Patel, Bi and Kojima [1041,1042]. 
The CFD results were validated against the experiments obtained by Bi 
and Kojima [1041]. It was found that the temperature profiles over bed 
height could be predicted with reasonable accuracy. However, the trends 

for the gas composition, especially CO2, could not be captured by the 
CFD  model.  Yu  et  al.  [606]  first  modeled  a  bubbling  fluidized-bed 
gasifier for Columbian coal including drying, devolatilization, and het-
erogeneous and homogeneous reactions (see Fig. 3.7). The reaction ki-
netics for char reactions were taken from de Souza-Santos, Chejne, and 
Hernandez [1043,1044]. The two-dimensional CFD model was validated 
against the experiments performed by Ocampo et al. [1045] for different 
process conditions. A modeling error between 5 % and 10 % indicates 
that the numerical model can sufficiently reproduce the gasifier. 

At Southeast University, Wang et al. [167] further extended the CFD 
model to include a three-dimensional model. Although a more sophisti-
cated two-equation devolatilization model was used, the model predic-
tion could not be improved in comparison to Yu et al. [606]. One reason 
for this was that the effect of limestone desulfurization was neglected in 
the model, while limestone was considered as an additional fuel feed with 
coal in the experiments. While Yu et al. and Wang et al. [167,606] used 
only one solid phase, Armstrong et al. [274] at the University of South-
ampton included limestone and coal particles as separate solid phases, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093086F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.7. Bubbling fluidized-bed coal gasifier: schematic view (a), and validation results (b) for different experimental configurations (reproduced from reference 
[606], with permission of Elsevier). 

raising  the  modeling  accuracy.  Although  Yu  et  al.  [606]  considered 
limestone  calcination  as  a  significant  reason  for  modeling  inaccuracy, 
Armstrong et al. [275] could not confirm this when including the effect of 
limestone  calcination.  The  CFD  results  deviated  considerably  from  ex-
periments even when parametric studies were performed to account for 
variations  in  experimental  boundary  conditions  [1046].  Furthermore, 
Cornejo  and  Farías  [168]  mentioned  a  similar  deviation  from  experi-
ments carried out by Ocampo et al. [1045] in their 3D-CFD model, when 
applying  a  shrinking  core  model  to  the  two-fluid  approach  in 
ANSYS-FLUENT. Shuai et al. [276] at the Harbin Institute of Technology 
extended  the  two-fluid  model  to  take  in  the  kinetic  theory  of  rough 
spheres  (KTRS)  and  validated  their  CFD  model  against  the  work  of 
Ocampo et al. [1045]. The CFD results with KTRS predicted experiments 
better  than  KTGF.  Similarly to  Yu  et al.  and Wang  et al. [167,606],  a 
single solid phase consisting of limestone and coal was examined. 

Recently,  at  the  University  of  Zaragoza,  Cubero  et  al.  [169]  also 
modeled the bubbling fluidized-bed gasifier developed by Ocampo et al. 
[1045], using OpenFOAM. The authors investigated the effect of poly-
dispersity on the interaction of hydrodynamics and gasification reaction 
by comparing solutions with monodisperse coal particles to real PSD. 
Rather than modeling the PSD with PBE similarly to Xue et al. and Liu 
et al. [135,423], Cubero et al. [169] modeled seven solid phases with 
fixed size diameters corresponding to the experimental PSD obtained by 
Chejne  and  Hernandez  [1043]  (see  Fig.  3.8).  It  was  shown  that  the 
polydispersity affects the spatial distribution of the solid volume frac-
tion, the species concentration, and local reaction rates (see Fig. 3.9). 
Although  the  modeling  of  multiple  solid  phases  has  a  significant 
computational  drawback,  validation  against  experiments  showed  that 
the prediction of experimental outlet concentrations was not improved 
(see Fig. 3.10). 

Fig. 3.8. Experimental coal particle size distribution, and numerical volume fraction distribution for monodisperse (s0) and polydisperse coal phase (s1-s7) after 120 s 
(reproduced from reference [169,1043], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093087F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.9. Distribution of phase volume fraction, species mass fraction and local reaction rates for monodisperse (a), and polydisperse coal phase (b) (reproduced from 
reference [169], with permission of Elsevier). 

model. The CFD results agreed well with the experiments, within a 10 % 
deviation range. Due to under-prediction of the methane fraction in the 
devolatilization  process,  the  methane  outlet  concentration  was  over-
estimated with a maximum relative error of 25 %. Ghadirian et al. [136] 
coupled  the  two-fluid  model  in  ANSYS-FLUENT  with  PBE  using  a 
method  of  moments, known as  the finite-domain  complete  trial  func-
tions  method of  moments (FCMOM).  The authors  modeled the gasifi-
cation of PITTSBURGH No. 8 char-coal in a fictitious fluidized-bed batch 
process to investigate the interaction of hydrodynamics and coal char 
size variations due to chemical reaction. A shrinking core model pro-
posed by Johnson [1050] was considered, where particle size reduced 
with char conversion. As a result of decreasing particle diameter, two 
counteracting effects on mixing behavior were shown: (a) the formation 
of  bubbles  is  enhanced  while  the  minimum  fluidization  velocity  de-
creases and (b) bed height is reduced, limiting the effect of bubble for-
mation. However, the CFD results were not validated as no experimental 
data was available on char property changes during gasification. 

3.1.3.1.3. Combustion. At 

Cha-
lermsinsuwan  et  al.  [593]  studied  three  different  riser  geometries: 
tapered-in, tapered-out and non-tapered. The focus of this study was on 
chemical reactions and validating the model against the experimental 

Chulalongkorn  University, 

Fig.  3.10. Comparison  of  outlet  gas  concentrations  for  experimental,  mono-
disperse  (1  size),  and  polydisperse  (7  sizes)  CFD  results  (reproduced  from 
reference [169,1045], with permission of Elsevier). 

The effect of the bed temperature and pressure on the gasification of 
Chinese coal in a spouted, pressurized fluidized-bed gasifier was inves-
tigated by Deng et al. [154] at Southeast University, using a steady-state 
two-fluid approach, which sets all terms involving ∂/∂t equal to zero. 
Experiments  by  Xiao et  al.  [1047–1049] were applied to  validate the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093088F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

data. A two-dimensional domain with a height of 14.2 m and a diameter 
of  0.2  m  in  the  middle,  discretized  with  a  mesh  of  5,415  cells,  was 
simulated using ANSYS-FLUENT. The cold flow simulations were vali-
dated  using  the  experimental  data  collected  by  Particulate  Solid 
Research Inc. for the solid density distribution at a height of 3.9 m. The 
numerical results were in good agreement with the measurements. The 
main objective of the reactive part was to understand the effects of riser 
geometry on chemical reactions using a simplified propane combustion 
reaction: 

C3H8 + 5O2→3CO2 + 4H2O,

with the reaction rate: 

r = (cid:0) ke(cid:0) E

RT

a CC3H8 C5
O2

,

(3.1)  

(3.2)  

applying  five  different  activation  rates.  The  results  revealed  that  the 
tapered-in  risers  were  suitable  for  reactions  with  a  slow  rate,  while 
tapered-out risers were preferred for fast reaction rates. At medium re-
action rates, the typical riser geometry gave the best results. 

At  Southeast  University,  several  papers  have  been  published  on 
different  aspects  of  coal  combustion  in  fluidized  beds.  In  their  first 
publication on this topic, Zhou et al. [171] investigated combustion in a 
50 kW CFB using a two-dimensional model that discretized with a mesh 
of 8,500 cells. The geometry of the test rig is shown in Fig. 3.11 (a). The 
drag force was modeled using an EMMS model and seven combustion 
reactions were introduced into the model. The gas composition at the 
outlet and temperatures at different heights were compared to experi-
mental data, showing good agreement (see Fig. 3.11 (b)). In their second 
paper [594], the authors described the chemistry of nitrogen and sulfur 
emissions, as well as improving some aspects that related to their first 
paper.  The  four  reactions  were  expanded,  and  eleven  reactions  were 
added to describe the nitrogen and sulfur emissions. As can be seen in 
Fig. 3.11 (c), the predicted concentrations of nitrogen and sulfur oxide 
emissions were in good agreement with the experimental data. 

In  their  third  paper,  Zhou  et  al.  [172]  investigated  the  oxy-fuel 
combustion of coal using similar reactions to those in their first paper 
[171], with the addition of sulfur reactions. In the first step, the model 
was  validated  with  experimental  data  from  combustion  experiments 
with air. Afterward, different ratios of oxygen to recirculated flue gas 
were simulated. It was found that a volume fraction of CO2 up to 70 % 
can be achieved at the outlet of the reactor. Although no validation was 
carried  out  regarding  the  oxy-fuel  combustion  of  coal,  this  issue  was 
dealt  with  by  the  authors  in  their  last  paper  [173].  They  compared 
simulations  of  O2/CO2  combustion  mode,  O2/recirculated  flue  gas 
mode, and 30 % O2 / 70 % CO2 case with experimental data. The results 
showed deviations in the prediction of NO and SO2  emissions. The au-
thors explained these deviations as being due to the assumption of one 
particle  diameter  and  non-corresponding  reaction  kinetics  for  the 
sulphation. 

Xie et al. [174] carried out a numerical investigation into gaseous 
pollutant emissions during the combustion of olive cake. The numerical 
results  were  compared  with  the  experimental  data.  Twenty-one  re-
actions were introduced into the model, describing the pyrolysis, com-
bustion  reactions,  nitrogen  oxide  emissions,  and  sulfur  dioxide 
emissions. The three-dimensional domain described a cylindrical reactor 
with a diameter of 0.125 m and a height of 1.8 m, filled with sand as the 
bed material. It was found that the numerical results described the trend 
of the experiments but showed some deviations. 

In the years 2017-2018, Wu et al. at Southeast University published 
three works on coal combustion in fluidized beds. In their first work, Wu 
et al. [175] investigated circulating fluidized-bed combustion under air 
employing a pilot-scale 50 kWth test rig. The riser part of the CFB system, 
with a height of 4.2 m, was only calculated. The bottom part of the riser 
had a height of 0.8 m and a diameter of 0.122 m, while the upper part 
from 1 m to 4 m had a diameter of 0.150 m. In between, there was a 
conical  widening.  For  the  three-dimensional  simulation,  a  mesh  with 
around 98,000 cells was used and two different coals (anthracite and 
bituminite) were simulated. The EMMS model drag model was applied 

Fig. 3.11. (a) geometry of CFB riser, (b) gas composition from the outlet (simulation and experiment), and (c) measured and simulated concentrations of nitrogen 
and sulfur oxide emissions (reproduced from references [171,594], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093089F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

and  fifteen  reactions  were  integrated  into  the  model,  describing  the 
pyrolysis  reactions,  the  oxidation  and  gasification  reactions,  and  the 
formation of pollutants. The validation of the experimental results with 
the experimental data showed that the EMMS drag model can predict the 
solid  volume  fraction  profile.  The  temperature  profile  and  the  gas 
composition also agreed well (see Fig. 3.12). Using the developed model, 
in their second paper, Wu et al. [176] modeled the oxy-fuel combustion 
in a CFB with and without warm flue gas recycle (WFGR). Validation 
with experimental results showed good agreement regarding the outlet 
volume fractions of the gases on a wet basis. The authors concluded that 
the  model  is  capable  of  predicting  the  hydrodynamics,  temperature 
profile,  and  gas  characteristics.  Furthermore,  the  simulations  showed 
that  there  were  fluidization  changes  from  fast  fluidization  to  turbu-
lent/bubbling fluidization when the O2  concentration at the inlet was 
increased.  In addition,  the CO emissions  decreased as  the O2  concen-
tration increased. In their third paper [177], the homogeneous Gidas-
pow drag model was applied and compared to the EMMS model that was 
used in their first and second paper. The authors showed that the hy-
drodynamic, temperature, and species distributions were worse when a 
homogeneous drag model was used. 

At the Lappeenranta University of Technology, many articles have 
been published investigating interphase mass transfer in fluidized-bed 
combustion.  Veps¨al¨ainen  et  al.  [178]  evaluated  the  gas-to-char  mass 

transfer  coefficient  in  a  bench-scale  and  a  pilot-scale  bubbling  and 
circulating  fluidized  bed.  Different  two-dimensional  meshes  were 
created. The pilot-scale fluidized bed, which has a height of 2 m and a 
width  of  0.2  m,  was  discretized  with  16,000  cells.  The  bench-scale 
reactor was scaled down from the pilot-scale with a factor of 0.25. As 
the focus of this study was on determining the gas-to-char mass transfer 
coefficient, only one combustion reaction (i.e. the oxidation of char with 
oxygen) was examined in the simulations. By comparing the results of 
the  simulations  with  experimental  data,  the  authors  showed  that  the 
two-fluid model correctly predicts the Sherwood number. The values of 
the Sherwood number drop were also found when the reactor width was 
increased. In a second work, Veps¨al¨ainen et al. [179] derived interphase 
mass transfer coefficients for Geldart B and Geldart D solids using the 
same  simulation  domain  as  in  [178].  The  results  were  compared  to 
empirical  data  and  correlations  available  for  Geldart  A  particles.  The 
authors  found  that  the  average  mass  transfer  coefficient  increases  in 
bubbling and turbulent regimes for Geldart A particles, as also shown in 
the literature. Furthermore, the mass transfer coefficient for Geldart B 
particles is a function of particle size and independent of the fluidization 
velocity. In contrast, this is not the case for the Geldart D particles. Here, 
the mass transfer coefficient rises as the fluidization velocity increases. 
My¨oh¨anen et al. [1051] developed a three-dimensional CFB model to 
predict  the  effects  of  oxy-fuel  combustion  based  on  an  air-firing 

Fig. 3.12. Comparison between simulation and experiment regarding solid volume fraction, temperature and gas compositions for different fuels (reproduced from 
reference [175], with permission of ACS Publications). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093090F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

full-scale unit (460 MWel supercritical CFB power plant at Lagisza). The 
model was validated using bench-scale and pilot-scale experiments at 
the  Technical  Research  Centre  of  Finland.  The  results  showed  that 
adapting the design of an existing CFB furnace for oxy-fuel combustion 
seems technically feasible. The author concluded that the existing boiler 
structures and heat exchangers can be used with minor changes if a ratio 
of oxygen to recycled flue gas is selected that produces a similar adia-
batic combustion temperature to that in the air-firing CFB furnace. 

At the National Technical University of Athens and the Centre for 
Research  and Technology Hellas,  Nikolopoulos et  al. [180]  simulated 
the formation of NOx  and N2O in a 1.2 MWth  CFB pilot plant, fired by 
lignite. The authors decoupled the simulation of combustion from the 
NOx  and N2O simulations, aiming to reduce the computational cost of 
the calculation. In a first simulation, only the hydrodynamic field and 
the combustion process were calculated, taking into consideration the 
devolatilization, the combustion of CH4, H2, CO, and char combustion. 
The  simulation  was  run  until  an  equilibrium  state  was  reached.  In  a 
second step, the species transport equations for NO, HCN, CNO, N2O, 
and  CO  were  solved,  using  the  results  of  the  first  simulation  for  the 
values such as the velocity, mass fraction, and so on. This means that 
these values were constant in every cell during the second simulation. 
The authors implemented two different reaction mechanisms for the NO 
and N2O formation and validated their results with experimental data. 
For the simulation of combustion, the results were in good agreement 
with  experimental  data  regarding  the  species  concentrations  and  the 
temperature profiles. The results for NO and N2O agreed well with the 
measurements. The authors claimed that the decoupled approach is a 
useful method with a relatively low computational cost. 

At the National University of Comahue, Soria et al. [181] modeled a 
solid waste incinerator using a coupled two-scale CFD model, focusing 
on the heavy metal vaporization of cadmium (Cd) and lead (Pb). The 
numerical results were validated against the experimental data obtained 
from  a  lab-scale  fluidized-bed  reactor.  In  the  experiment,  synthetic 
waste  pellets  were  introduced  in  a  fluidized  bed  with  a  hot  sand  in-
ventory.  At  the  outlet,  the  concentrations  of  the  heavy  metals  were 
measured continuously. A computational domain with a height of 3.95 
m  and  a  diameter  of  0.1065  m  was  generated  and  discretized  with 
around 135,000 cells. For the simulation, a particle model was coupled 
with the two-fluid model. In the first step, the two-fluid model equations 
were solved, representing the hydrodynamic and chemical reactions in 
the bed. In the latter, one pellet was modeled as a particle. Once per 
second, the position of the particle and the relative velocity between the 
particle  and  the  fluidizing  air  was  calculated  and  sent  to  the 
two-dimensional single-particle model, which calculated the tempera-
ture of the particle, the heavy metal vaporization rate, and so on. These 
values were then returned to the two-fluid model and the loop closed. 
The results were found to be in good agreement with the experiments. 
The authors stated that their model can provide a rigorous description of 
the real incineration process. 

At  Tianjin  University,  Li  et  al.  [182,183]  developed  a  model  to 
simulate  chemical  reactions  in  bubbling  fluidized  beds.  In  their  first 
paper,  the  authors  integrated  a  closure  model  for  the  turbulent  mass 
transfer equation, meaning that the simulation no longer relies on the 
empirical turbulent Schmidt number. Simulations were carried out using 
a  simple  ozone-decomposition  reaction  mechanism  and  the  obtained 
results were validated against the experiments performed by Fryer and 
Potter [1052]. A two-dimensional domain was used with a height of 2 m, 
a width of 0.229 m, and a grid size of 36,750 cells. Satisfactory agree-
ment was shown between the simulation results and experimental data. 
The results showed that the turbulent Schmidt number varies in the bed, 
indicating  that  it  is  not  valid  to  assume  that  the  Schmidt  number  is 
constant. In their second paper [183], Li et al. applied their validated 
model to simulate a fluidized-bed gas combustion (air-propane mixture). 
The same domain as in their first paper was used, in addition to a new 
reaction scheme containing four combustion reactions. The numerical 
results  were  compared  to  experimental  data,  showing  that  the 

simulations  agree  with  experimental  measurements  and  that  the 
Schmidt number varies from the wall to the center of the reactor and 
from the bottom of the bed to the bed surface. 

At Zhejiang University, several papers have been published on CFD 
simulations  of  supercritical  CFB  boilers,  including  the  sodium  trans-
formation process. Xu et al. [33] simulated a large-scale coal-fired su-
percritical CFB using the EMMS drag model. A coal combustion model 
was examined including evaporation, devolatilization, char combustion, 
gas reactions, and SOx and NOx  emission. The model also included the 
bed-to-wall heat transfer and the radiative heat transfer. A verification 
study was carried out by calculating a 350 MW commercial CFB boiler 
with a height of 50 m and a cross-sectional area of 31 m × 9.8 m. The 
authors  claimed  that  reasonable  results  were  obtained  for  the  solids 
distribution,  oxygen,  heat  flux,  and  temperatures.  Unfortunately,  the 
results were not validated. In order to study the sodium transformation 
in CFBs, Ji et al. [184] used the sodium mitigation model developed in 
their  previous  study  [1053],  combined  with  the  combustion  model 
proposed by Xu et al. [33]. The sodium mitigation model consists of ten 
reactions,  describing  the  sodium  species  release,  homogeneous  and 
heterogeneous reactions, vapor condensation, particle deposition, and 
shedding. A two-dimensional domain of an existing 30 kWth CFB test rig 
with a height of 4.2 m and a diameter of 0.13 m was simulated. The 
domain was discretized with around 10,000 cells. Validation was carried 
out with the measured temperature profiles, the gas species contents at 
the outlet, and the sodium distribution. Fig. 3.13 illustrates the simu-
lated  and  measured  gaseous  temperature  profiles.  The  authors 
concluded that their results agreed within a reasonable range with those 
from the experiment. Furthermore, the calculation time was shown to be 
reduced by 75 % compared to the previous study with the 3D modeling 
[1053]. It was claimed that, on the one hand, higher temperatures lead 
to higher rates of sodium emissions and reduction of NaCl and Na2SO4 
concentrations, but on the other hand, more sodium and ash deposits are 

Fig.  3.13. Gaseous  temperature  of  simulation  and  experiment  (reproduced 
from reference [184], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093091F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

collected on the heat transfer surfaces. 

3.1.3.2. CO2  capture  technologies. In  recent  years,  the  fluidized-bed 
process  for  carbon  capture  and  storage/utilization  (CCS,  CCS/U)  has 
been  investigated  extensively.  Besides  experimental  work,  many 
computational simulations using the two-fluid model have been carried 
out. Carbon capture technologies can be classified into three different 
methods:  post-combustion,  pre-combustion  and  oxy-fuel  combustion. 
The post-combustion processes separate the carbon dioxide from the flue 
gases  of  emission  sources  (e.g.  thermal  power  plants,  cement,  and 
chemical  industries).  Examples  include  the  carbonate-looping  process 
(based on the fluidized bed) and amine scrubbing. These processes have 
the advantage of retrofitting, meaning that a reconstruction of the plant 
is not required. In the pre-combustion methods, the carbon dioxide is 
removed before combustion. Therefore, the fuel is gasified and carbon 
dioxide  is  separated.  One  example  is  the  integrated  gasification  com-
bined  cycle  (IGCC)  technology.  The  third  option  for  CCS  is  the  com-
bustion  of  the  fuel  with  an  oxidizing  agent  that  is  a  mixture  of  pure 
oxygen and recycled gas. The steam is condensed from the flue gases and 
only CO2 remains. To separate the oxygen from the air, an air separation 
unit is employed (mostly based on the Linde process). Another oxy-fuel 
process that utilizes fluidized beds is the chemical-looping process. Of 
the carbon capture technologies, fluidized beds are mainly used for post- 
combustion  (carbonate-looping)  and  the  oxy-fuel  (chemical-looping 
combustion) processes. 

3.1.3.2.1. Oxy-fuel. Oxy-fuel combustion is a CO2  capture technol-
ogy, which replaces the combustion air with a mixture of oxygen and 
recycled flue gas to obtain a lower adiabatic combustion temperature. 
Many efforts have been made to develop oxy-fuel combustion methods 
for fluidized-bed applications (see the Combustion section). 

The  combustion  of  solid  fuels  using  the  chemical-looping  process 
(new oxy-fuel method) allows CO2 to be captured with low energy input. 
Chemical-looping combustion consists of two interconnected fluidized 
beds - the air reactor and the fuel reactor - with a metal oxide (Me) that 
serves as a bed material and oxygen carrier. In the air reactor, the air is 
used to fluidize and oxidize the oxygen carrier: 

MexOy(cid:0) 1(s) + 1 / 2O2(g)→MexOy(s).

(3.3) 

The oxidized particles reach the fuel reactor, where they react with 

the gaseous components of the incoming fuel. If the fuel is methane, the 
following reaction takes place: 

CH4(g) + 4MexOy(s)→CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) + 4MexOy(cid:0) 1(s).

(3.4) 

Several  scientific  groups  around  the  world  have  investigated  this 
process  experimentally  and  numerically.  At  the  Harbin  Institute  of 
Technology,  several  papers  on  chemical-looping  combustion  were 
published in the years 2012-2020. Wang et al. [185] modeled the air 
reactor and used the experiments carried out by Issangya et al. [1054, 
1055] to validate the hydrodynamics. The simulated riser has a height of 
6.1 m and a diameter of 0.0762 m. A cluster-structure-dependent drag 
model was applied along with a kinetic model for oxidizing the oxygen 
carrier (based on copper (Cu)) in the air reactor. The authors concluded 
that the model developed was able to predict the concentration of solids 
from the cold flow experiments. A validation of the air reactor reaction 
was  not  provided.  The  drag  model  used,  that  assumes  the  cluster  is 
circular, was found not to correspond to reality, as the cluster shape is 
highly variable. Therefore, the authors claim that the drag model needs 
to be refined in further works. In a second publication [186], the authors 
modeled  both  fuel  and  air  reactors  employing  the  chemical-looping 
combustion  process.  Experimental  data  from  the  Spanish  National 
Research  Council  (CSIC)  [1056]  was  used  to  validate  the  simulation 
results.  The air reactor (operated  as  a bubbling fluidized  bed) has an 
inner diameter of 0.05 m at the bottom and a height of 0.1 m. This is 
followed by a riser with a height of 1 m and a diameter of 0.02 m. After 
the air reactor, the particles reach a cyclone and enter the fuel reactor. 
The fuel reactor has a diameter of 0.05 m and a height of 0.25 m. The air 
and fuel reactors are coupled by a loop seal, which is fluidized by ni-
trogen. The thermal power of the CFB system is 0.5 kWth and it is fired by 
methane.  Four  reactions  were  introduced  into  the  two-dimensional 
model:  the  reactions  of  CuO  with  methane,  hydrogen,  and  carbon 
monoxide, which occur in the fuel reactor, and the oxidization of Cu, 
which takes place in the air reactor. The drag force was modeled using 
the Gidaspow drag model. The obtained results regarding the outgoing 
volume fraction of CO, H2 and CH4 at the outlet of the fuel reactor are in 
good agreement with the experiments (see Fig. 3.14). In addition, the 
combustion efficiency agrees well with the measured value. 

In another study, Bougamra et al. [608] used the same experimental 
test  rig  as  in  [186]  and  therefore  the  same  computational  domain 

Fig. 3.14. (a) schematic diagram of the CLC system and (b) comparison of gas species at the fuel reactor outlet and combustion efficiency (reproduced from reference 
[186], with permission of John Wiley and Sons). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093092F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

consisting of 7,900 cells. A Ni-based oxygen carrier (nickel oxide (NiO)) 
was applied, prepared by hot incipient wetness impregnation (HIWI) at 
ICB-CSIC [1057]. Therefore, the reaction rates had to be changed for the 
four reactions (reactions of methane, hydrogen, and carbon monoxide 
with NiO and oxidation of Ni). The simulations showed good agreement 
with the experiments regarding the gas concentration and solid circu-
lation rate. In 2014, Shuai et al. [187] used the experimental data ob-
tained  from  a  140  kWth  chemical-looping  test  rig  for  natural  gas 
combustion [1058] at the Vienna University of Technology as a basis for 
their CFD study. A cluster-structure-dependent drag model was used and 
compared to the homogeneous Gidaspow drag model. The oxygen car-
rier was nickel oxide and four reactions were taken into consideration 
(reactions of methane, hydrogen, and carbon monoxide with NiO in the 
fuel  reactor  and  oxidation  of  Ni  in  the  air  reactor).  The  validation 
showed  good  agreement  with  the  measurements  and  the  authors 
concluded that the cluster-structure-dependent drag model provides a 
more reasonable prediction. Wang et al. [191] used the same geometry 
and the same experimental data to model the CLC process, examining 
how the multi-scale structures affect the chemical reaction, mass, and 
heat  transfer.  The  authors  claimed  that  the  results  of  the  multi-scale 
simulations are in better agreement with the measurement than those 
produced by the conventional model, regarding the pressure profiles and 
gas concentrations. Yin et al. [192] investigated the chemical-looping 
combustion  of  biomass.  Only  the  fuel  reactor  was  considered,  and 
experimental data from Mendiara et al. [1059] at the ICB-CSIC (0.5 kWth 
CLC  test  rig)  were  used  to  validate  the  model.  Seven  reactions  were 
introduced into the three-dimensional model: pyrolysis, gasification of 
char with carbon dioxide and steam, the water-gas shift, and three metal 
oxide reduction reactions. The fuel reactor, that has a diameter of 0.05 
m,  was  discretized  with  10,000  cells.  The  results  agree  well  with 
experimental  data,  showing  that  both  the  gas  composition  and  the 
mixing behavior were well predicted. 

At Southeast University, several papers have been published inves-
tigating the influence of hydrogen partial pressure on the fuel reactor 
performance. Deng et al. [193] modeled twelve different CLC cases with 
the  fixed partial pressure of  hydrogen to investigate how  the particle 
diameter, flow rate, and temperature influenced the performance. The 
two-dimensional domain with a height of 1 m and a width of 0.4 m was 
discretized with 10,000 rectangular cells. The drag force was modeled 
with the Wen and Yu model and one reaction (CaSO4 + H2) was intro-
duced  into the  model.  The authors showed  that the  conversion of  H2 
increases with smaller particle sizes and higher bed temperatures. The 
same geometry and reaction model were also used by Jin et al. [446]. 
The Gidaspow drag model was used to study how different hydrogen 
partial  pressures  affected  the  fuel  reactor.  The  authors  stated  that  a 
higher  hydrogen  partial  pressure  leads  to  a  higher  conversion  of 
hydrogen. Deng et al. [430] fluidized the same geometry with 100 % 
hydrogen. As in the previous work, the Gidaspow drag model was used 
to  calculate  the  interaction  between  the  phases.  One  simulation  was 
performed  and  low  H2  conversion  of  only  34  %  was  calculated.  Ac-
cording  to  the  authors,  the  reasons  for  the  low  conversion  were  the 
formation of large bubbles, the lower bed temperature and the larger 
particle size. Unfortunately, the CFD models were not validated in these 
three  publications.  Wang  et  al.  [431]  developed  a  three-dimensional 
model of a square fuel reactor with a width of 0.24 m and a height of 
1  m  to  study  the  effects  of  particle  diameter  and  gas  velocity  on  the 
performance of the CLC process. A mixture of CuO (reactive component) 
and Al2O3 (inert component) was used as an oxygen carrier and the coal 
gas was fed into the fuel reactor. The Gidaspow drag model was applied 
and three reactions were taken into consideration: the reduction of CO 

and  H2  with  the  oxygen  carrier  and  the  water-gas-shift  reaction.  The 
results revealed that the conversion of CO increases when lower super-
ficial gas velocities and lower particle sizes were used. In a second study, 
Wang et al. [194] applied the same model as in the previous paper but 
changed  the  gas  inlet  composition  and  the  reactor  design.  A  round 
reactor  was  chosen  with  a  diameter  of  0.1  m  and  a  height  of  1.2  m, 
discretized with around 26,000 cells. Similarly to [431], coal gas was 
used as fuel. Different operating conditions were analyzed and results 
showed that a higher CO conversion was achieved by increasing the bed 
inventory and temperature. A higher pressure had a negative effect on 
the CO conversion. In their third publication [195], the authors simu-
lated a pressurized coal-fired fuel reactor in a three dimensional domain 
using ilmenite (FeTiO3) as an oxygen carrier. Seven reactions were taken 
into consideration including pyrolysis, char gasification and the ilmenite 
reduction reaction. The reactor was a pipe with a length of 10 m and a 
diameter of 0.076 mm, which was discretized with 143,076 cells. One 
reference condition was simulated and the results were validated with 
experimental data. Different cases were then simulated to study the ef-
fects  of  various  operating  variables  on  fuel  conversion.  The  authors 
claimed that a higher partial pressure of steam and higher temperatures 
increase the carbon conversion. In addition, the design of the reactor 
used in this work showed better results compared to experiments on a 
spouted  fluidized  bed  (i.e.  a  system  combining  a  number  of  positive 
properties of spouted and fluidized beds and applied to many processes 
such as coating, drying and granulation). 

At  the  University  of  Nottingham  Ningbo  China,  Chen  et  al.  [196] 
carried out a numerical study of the bubble fluidization of a fuel reactor 
and validated the model they developed using experimental data from 
the  Spanish  National  Research  Council  (CSIC)  [1056].  The  computa-
tional domain had a height of 0.1 m and a width of 0.050 m with an 
initial solid height of 0.06 m. The domain was discretized with 160,000 
cells. A reaction mechanism was integrated into the model, describing 
the  reactions  of  methane,  carbon  monoxide  and  methane  with  CuO 
impregnated  on  Al2O3.  Two  different  reaction  mechanisms  were 
compared:  the  shrinking  core  model  and  the  modified  shrinking  core 
model. A comparison with experimental data showed that the model is 
able to reasonably predict the key elements of the fuel reactor (e.g. the 
bubbles in the dense bed were captured and traced). 

At  the  Huazhong  University  of  Science  and  Technology,  a  5  kWth 
dual CFB system was modeled by Su et al. [197] using a two-dimensional 
domain. The geometry of the CLC process is illustrated in Fig. 3.15 (a). 
Coal was  used  as a  fuel  and  a  multiphase reactive  kinetic  model was 
implemented,  including  the  pyrolysis  reaction,  the  char  gasification 
reactions (CO2  and H2O gasification), four reactions describing the re-
action of the gaseous fuel (CH4, C2H6, CO, and H2) and an oxygen carrier 
(Fe2O3) as well as the water-gas shift reaction. The mesh consisted of 20, 
689  cells and the  drag force  was  calculated using the  Gidaspow drag 
model. Two simulations were performed, and in the second simulation 
(termed New) the temperature in the fuel reactor was increased and the 
coal feeding was decreased to 2.25 kWth. The results of the first simu-
lation  showed  some deviations  regarding  the  gas  compositions  at  the 
fuel reactor outlet, especially for hydrogen. The outlet gas compositions 
of the air reactor were more reasonable (see Fig. 3.15 (b)). The outlet gas 
volume fractions of the fuel reactor in the second simulation are pre-
sented in Fig. 3.15 (c), showing good agreement with experimental data. 
At  Zhejiang University, Lin et  al. [198]  simulated the  fuel reactor 
(batch-wise experiments) of the CLC process, investigating the behavior 
of oxygen carriers with different NiO/CuO weight ratios. Methane was 
used as a fuel and six reactions were introduced into the model (CH4, H2, 
and CO with NiO and CuO, respectively). A two-dimensional domain of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093093F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.15. (a) schematic diagram of CLC process, (b) and (c) simulated and measured exhaust gas volume fractions of the air reactor and fuel reactor (reproduced 
from reference [197], with permission of Elsevier). 

the  cylindrical  bubbling  fluidized  bed  used  in  the  experiments  by 
Ad´anez et al. [1060] was generated at CSIC with a height of 0.5 m and a 
diameter of 0.054 m. A mesh independence study was carried out and a 
grid  with  11,880  cells  exhibited  grid  independence.  Gidaspow  and 
EMMS drag models were compared to experimental data. Although the 
EMMS model agreed better, minor differences between the models were 
observed. The authors reported that the particles used were Geldart B 
group particles, meaning that the influence of meso-scale structures on 
the flow behavior is unremarkable. The results showed that a complete 
conversion of methane was reached for different NiO/CuO ratios, but 
some H2 and CO were found at the outlet of the reactor when only the 
Ni-based oxygen carrier was used. Adding CuO reduced the concentra-
tions of H2  and CO at the outlet of the fuel reactor. It was also recom-
mended to use the Ni-Cu and not a mechanical mixture of NiO and CuO 
as  an  oxygen  carrier,  since  the  equilibrium  time  and  the  conversion 
decreased when the mechanical mixture was applied. 

At West Virginia University, the National Energy Technology Labo-
ratory,  and  ANSYS  Inc.,  three  papers  were  published  with  numerical 
investigations  of  chemical-looping  combustion  with  solid  fuels  and 
gaseous fuels. Mahalatkar et al. [199] simulated two different experi-
mental cases to evaluate the model’s capability to capture changes in gas 
concentrations by varying different parameters such as the superficial 
velocity, metal oxide, and so on. Different  two-dimensional computa-
tional domains were generated and experiments found in the literature 
were  used  for  validation  (Mattisson  et  al.  [1061]  and  Son  and  Kim 
[1062]). The reduction rates of NiO to Ni and Fe2O3 to Fe3O4 and then to 
FeO using methane as fuel were introduced into the model. The drag 
force  was  modeled  using  the  Gidaspow  drag  model.  In  line  with  the 
experiment by Son and Kim [1062] at the Korea Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology, methane was used as a fuel and a mixture of 
NiO and Fe2O3 as an oxygen carrier. Here, the fuel reactor has a hollow 
cylindrical geometry. For the simulation, a two-dimensional axis-sym-
metric  geometry  was  applied  with  the  height  of  the  reactor  in  the 
experiment (0.9 m) and a width of 0.016 m (the difference between the 
outer and inner diameter). A fine mesh with 40,000 cells was selected for 

the simulation. The simulation results agreed well with the experimental 
data regarding the outlet concentrations of flue gases. Furthermore, the 
changes in the superficial velocities and compositions of the metal oxide 
were correctly reproduced by the model. Another experiment that was 
used to validate the model was carried out by Mattisson et al. [1061] at 
the  Chalmers  University  of  Technology.  Here,  a  fixed  bed  containing 
Fe2O3  granules was used in a cylindrical geometry with a diameter of 
0.03 m and a height of 0.5 m. A mesh with 5,000 cells was selected for 
the simulation. The authors claimed that the CFD model predicted the 
correct trends in the time-varying outlet flow concentrations, proving 
the generality of the approach used. In a further publication, Mahalatkar 
et  al.  [200]  simulated  a  coal-fired  batch-wise  laboratory  fuel  reactor 
with ilmenite as an oxygen carrier. The simulations were based on the 
experiments by Leion et al. [1063] at the Chalmers University of Tech-
nology. In the experiments, the reactor has a tapered/conical section at 
the bottom (diameter at the top: 0.01 m; diameter at the bottom: 0.03 m; 
height: 0.02 m) and a constant radius vertical section (diameter: 0.03 m 
and height: 0.25 m). In the experiments, the gases had a delay of around 
40 s (time taken to travel from the gas extraction to the gas analyzer). In 
order  to  take  this  delay  into  account  in  the  experiment,  the  reactor 
height in the two-dimensional simulation domain was set equal to 10 m 
and  the  gas  concentrations  were  measured  at  a  height  of  3  m.  The 
two-dimensional  domain  was  discretized  with  3,300  cells  and  the 
Gidaspow  drag  model  was  used.  The  reaction  scheme  included  coal 
devolatilization, the water-gas-shift reaction, char gasification by CO2 
and  H2O,  and  four  metal  oxide  reduction  reactions.  The  authors 
concluded that the model is able to predict the correct outlet concen-
trations of CO2, CO and CH4. Furthermore, the reactor performance at 
different operating temperatures was captured in a reasonable manner. 
In  their  third  study,  Mahalatkar  et  al.  [277]  modeled  a  circulating 
fluidized-bed  chemical-looping  combustion  system 
fuelled  with 
methane. The simulation was based on the experiments performed by 
Abad [1064] at the Chalmers University of Technology. The geometry of 
the process consisted of a two-compartment bed. The air reactor has a 
cross-sectional area of 40 × 25 mm2 at the bottom and 25 × 25 mm2 at 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093094F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

reduction 

simulation 

included  one 

the top. The fuel reactor has a cross-sectional area of 25 × 25 mm2. The 
height  of  the  reactors  was  200  mm.  Afterward,  the  reactors  were 
increased  in  width  to  avoid  the  entrainment  of  particles.  The 
two-dimensional 
reaction 
(Mn3O4 + CH4) and two oxidation reactions (MnO and CH4+O2). In the 
experiments, the system was placed in an oven. Therefore, the temper-
ature was set as isothermal in the simulation and the energy equation 
was  not  solved.  A  grid  with  around  17,500  cells  was  generated.  The 
results  were  validated  with  the  available  experimental  data,  showing 
reasonable agreement. The authors stated that the CFD model can pre-
dict the experimental data for the range of flows tested. Nevertheless, 
deviations  were  found  in  the  solids  circulation  between  the  reactors. 
Different  reasons  for  this  deviation  were  discussed,  but  need  to  be 
investigated in future studies. 

At Washington University in St. Louis, two- and three-dimensional 
simulations  of  the  same  geometry  used  in  [277]  were  performed  by 
Banerjee  and  Agrarwal  [432].  However,  they  used  a  different  fuel  (a 
syngas consisting of 50 % CO and 50 % H2) and different oxygen carriers 
(a mixture of Fe2O3 and inert Al2O3, used by Abad et al. [1065] in their 
experiments).  Two  metal  oxide  reactions  were  introduced  into  the 
model (Fe2O3 with CO/H2). A description of the mesh used in the sim-
ulations  was  not  given.  The  simulation  results  showed  deviations 
compared to the experimental data regarding the outlet mass fraction of 
CO2  and H2O for the two-dimensional case. For the three-dimensional 
case,  the  results  improved  for  the  outlet  steam  mass  fraction  but  the 
discrepancy for the outlet CO2 mass flow was still present. As the reac-
tion  rates  came  from  measurements  with  pure  Fe2O3,  the  authors 
concluded that the simulation accuracy would be improved with a more 
accurate empirical reaction rate. 

At  the  National  Energy  Technology  Laboratory,  Jung  and  Gamwo 
[201]  developed  a  reaction  kinetic  model  of  a  methane-fired  fuel 
reactor, describing the reaction of CH4 with NiO to form carbon dioxide, 
steam,  and  Ni.  The  reaction  kinetic  model  was  introduced  into  the 
two-fluid  model  and  the  Syamlal-O’Brien  drag  model  was  used.  A 
two-dimensional rectangular domain with a height of 0.6 m and a width 
of 0.25 m was discretized with 2,400 square elements. According to the 
authors,  the  bubble  behavior  and  flow  patterns  were  consistent  with 
experimental observations. The fuel conversion was relatively low, at 
around 50 %, due to fast, large bubbles rising through the fuel reactor. 
The authors recommended using smaller particles (nano-sized) to pre-
vent large bubbles from forming in the fluidized bed and to increase the 
conversion. 

At  the  Imperial  College  London,  together  with  the  University  of 
London, two papers were published, investigating full-loop simulations 
of  the  chemical-looping  combustion,  including  both  fuel  and  air  re-
actors. Kruggel-Emden et al. [202] carried out two-dimensional simu-
lations of an interconnected CFD model of an air and fuel reactor. The air 
reactor was modeled as a high-velocity riser and the fuel reactor was 
considered  a  bubbling  fluidized  bed.  Both  reactors  were  calculated 
separately and coupled through their inlet and outlet boundary condi-
tions. This study aimed to show the functionality of the coupling method 
rather  than  the  operational  setups  of  the  chemical-looping  process. 
Mn3O4 was used as an oxygen carrier and methane was used in the fuel 
reactor. For the air reactor, a mechanism for the reaction of MnO with 
the incoming O2  and the reaction of methane with Mn3O4  was imple-
mented. The fuel reactor was rectangular with a width of 0.24 m and a 
height of 0.8 m, and discretized with 2,500 cells. The air reactor was 
rectangular with a width of 0.15 m and a height of 4 m; 1,500 cells were 
used to discretize the air reactor. The drag force was modeled based on 
the Gidaspow model. The authors concluded that their newly developed 
method  for  coupling  the  two  reactors  can  run  much  faster  than 

simulating each reactor separately and is therefore of high relevance, 
especially for sensitivity studies. In addition, a wide variety of properties 
can be resolved using this method, such as volume fractions, masses, and 
mass flow rates, velocities, temperatures, and species distributions. The 
coupled  framework  also  temporarily  takes  into  account  the  inter-
connected nature of the two reactors. In their second publication [203], 
the authors studied three different oxygen carriers - CaSO4, Mn3O4, and 
NiO - using four different kinetics models. H2 and CH4 were used as fuel 
in  a  batch  type  reaction  vessel  (height:  1  m;  width:  0.25  m).  The 
two-dimensional domain was discretized with 2,500 cells. The simula-
tion  results  of  the  different  models  were  then  compared  with  experi-
mental  data.  The  study  showed  that  the  classical  model  (the 
Avrami-Erofeev  model),  the  linear  shrinking  core  model  and  the 
spherical  shrinking  core  model  were  not  applicable  over  the  whole 
conversion  range,  meaning  that  more  experimental  data  have  to  be 
collected to find a model representing the correct limits of the conver-
sion process. 

At the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, two papers 
were published on the simulation of a double-loop circulating fluidized- 
bed reactor for chemical-looping combustion. They used a similar means 
of coupling the reactors as [202] did in their work: The reactors were 
calculated  separately  and  coupled  through  their  inlet  and  outlet 
boundary conditions. In the first work, Zhang et al. [204] simulated a 
reactor design, which was proposed by SINTEF Energy Research and the 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology. The two circulating 
fluidized-bed reactors (air and fuel reactor) are connected by cyclones, 
divided loop seals, and a bottom extraction system. The one-step reac-
tion was assumed for the reaction of NiO with CH4 (fuel reactor) and Ni 
with O2 (air reactor). The air reactor domain had a height of 6 m and a 
width of 0.23 m, while the domain of the fuel reactor had a height of 6 m 
and a width of 0.154 m. Both geometries were discretized with 22,800 
cells and the Gidaspow model was used to model the drag force. The 
models were validated first with cold flow experiments and then with 
reactive experiments. The authors concluded that good agreement was 
obtained between the simulated and measured values. A methane con-
version  up  to  95  %  was  reached.  The  results  also  showed  that  the 
incoming fuel was consumed very quickly at a very short entrance sec-
tion. In their second publication [433], the authors used the same ge-
ometry but CuO was used as an oxygen carrier. The model validation 
was based on the pressure profiles along with the air and fuel reactors, as 
well  as  the  gas  concentrations  at  the  outlet  of  the  fuel  reactor  (see 
Fig. 3.16). The authors stated that the reactive performance of the air 
reactor is almost independent of the grid size because of the fast reac-
tion. This was not the case in the fuel reactor. Here, a finer grid leads to 
higher conversions. The results also showed that the temperature has the 
strongest  influence  on  the  reactor  performance,  followed  by  the  gas 
velocity  and  the  methane  concentration.  The  turbulent  fluidization 
regime is also beneficial due to the better contact between the oxygen 
carrier and the methane. 

At SINTEF Materials and Chemistry, Cloete et al. [434] performed a 
fine grid simulation of the fuel reactor of a pilot-scale CLC, set up at the 
Vienna  University  of  Technology.  The  model  showed  that  the  use  of 
highly  reactive  oxygen  carriers  is  not  appropriate  to  capture  the 
experimental trend correctly. A two-dimensional domain was generated 
with a height of 3 m and a width of 0.16 m, representing the cylindrical 
test  rig. Four different grids  were created and  the reaction  of oxygen 
carrier (NiO) with methane to form Ni, CO2, and H2O was implemented. 
In the first step, grid independence, different inlet configurations, and an 
investigation  into  the  effect  of  including  gas-phase  turbulence  on  the 
results were performed. Here, two fuel power cases were assumed (57.4 
kWth  and 139 kWth). In the second step, five different fuel rates were 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093095F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.16. (a and b) comparison of pressure profiles between simulation and experiment (fuel reactor and air reactor) and (c) comparison of gas compositions at fuel 
reactor outlet (reproduced from reference [433], with permission of ACS Publications). 

investigated. The results showed that in the 57.4 kWth  case there is a 
stronger grid dependency (also visible in the lower regions of the pres-
sure profile). The author explained that the 57.4 kWth  case contained 
much larger particle concentrations at the inlet. Because of the higher 
particle density in the 57.4 kWth case, a good resolution of the very sharp 
solids volume fractions is needed and therefore the mesh needs to be 
finer. The authors also showed that there is an over-prediction of the 
reaction rate in the 57.4 kWth  case. This is probably due to an insuffi-
cient grid resolution, leading to bubble regions, which were not suffi-
ciently resolved. Finally, the authors also showed that the correct trend 
was predicted by the model using a much less reactive oxygen carrier. 
Here, the reaction rate was the limiting factor and the accurate hydro-
dynamic resolution of the gas-solid interface was of less importance. 

At  the  Technical  University  of  Darmstadt,  three  papers  were  pub-
lished on the application of the two-fluid simulation to the CLC process. 
May  et  al.  [190]  modeled  the  coal-fired  1  MWth  fuel  reactor  with  a 
height of 11 m and a diameter of 0.4 m. A grid with 500,000 cells was 
used  and  a  chemical  reaction  model  was  implemented.  The  reaction 
mechanism consists of seven reactions including pyrolysis, char gasifi-
cation with steam and carbon dioxide, three reduction reactions of the 
oxygen  carrier  (ilmenite),  and  the  propane  combustion  reaction.  The 
two-fluid  model  was  validated  first  using  experimental  data  from  a 
cold-flow  quasi-2D  fluidized  bed  and  afterward  with  measurements 
from  the  1  MWth  CLC  combustion  plant.  The  authors  concluded  that 
good agreement was demonstrated between the numerical results and 
experimental data, but there are some deviations between the simula-
tions and measurements regarding the CLC plant. The authors claimed 
these minor deviations were due to the uncertainty regarding the oxygen 
carrier mass flow rate from the air reactor into the fuel reactor. Alobaid 
et al.[190] modeled the coal-fired (Taldinsky coal) air and fuel reactors 
of the 1 MWth  CLC pilot plant, erected at the Technical University of 
Darmstadt, including a chemical reaction model to describe pyrolysis, 
gasification, oxidation of char, and reduction of the oxygen carrier. Six 
reactions were introduced for the fuel reactor and four reactions for the 
air reactor. A radiation model was also added to the model. The fuel 
reactor has the same dimensions as described by May et al. [190]. The 
air  reactor  has  a  diameter  of  0.59  m  and  a  height  of  8.66  m.  The 
generated  meshes  were  around  96,000  cells  for  the  fuel  reactor  and 
around  150,000  cells  for  the  air  reactor.  The  Syamlal-O’Brien  drag 
model was used to calculate the drag force. For the fuel reactor, good 
agreement  in  the  pressure  distribution  was  shown.  Some  deviations 
were found when comparing the temperature and the gas species con-
centrations. For the air reactor, the authors reported good agreement 

between the numerical results and experimental data on the tempera-
ture and outgoing carbon dioxide. Sharma et al. [205] used a similar 
model for the fuel reactor but varied the secularity coefficient and the 
drag  model  (only  homogeneous  drag  models  were  used).  The  results 
showed  that  the  volume  fraction  of  CH4  agrees  well  with  the  experi-
mental values for all cases, but the predicted volume fractions of H2, 
CO2,  and  CO  were  different  from  the  measurements  as  CO  and  H2 
reacted incorrectly  with ilmenite. The predicted pressure drops along 
the height of the fuel reactor were similar to the experimental values for 
all cases but the pressure was overestimated at the bottom of the fuel 
reactor by 10 mbar. Using a certain drag model, the outgoing mass flow 
rate of the ilmenite was higher for the specularity coefficient (φ = 1) as 
compared to the specularity coefficient of (φ = 0). The authors explained 
this as being due to the higher rates of reaction for (φ = 1), meaning that 
the temperature of the outgoing gases increased and therefore the gas 
velocity rose sharply, leading to higher entrainment of the particles. 

3.1.3.2.2. Post-combustion. As existing power and industrial plants 
can be retrofitted, post-combustion CO2 capture is a key technology for 
the  reduction  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  The  CO2  capturing  takes 
place downstream of the hosting plant using either solid sorbents such as 
limestone (carbonate-looping process) or aqueous solvents, e.g. amines 
or ammonia. Another possibility is the physical separation of the CO2 
using  membranes.  The  principle  of  the  carbonate-looping  process  is 
based on a reversible reaction (carbonation and calcination) of a sor-
bent. Natural limestone sorbent, which mainly consists of calcium car-
bonate (CaCO3), is usually employed for the process for many reasons, 
including its availability in large amounts in nature and its inexpensive 
extraction  using  surface  mining  techniques  (open-cut  mining).  The 
system consists of two interconnected circulating fluidized-bed reactors, 
serving as a carbonator and a calciner. Flue gas from power plants or 
industrial plants (upstream host plants) is fed to the carbonator reactor. 
The  CO2  stream  in  the  flue  gas  comes  into  contact  with  the  solid  in-
ventory of the carbonator (mainly calcium oxide particles (CaO)). An 
exothermic absorption reaction between gaseous CO2 and the solid CaO 
takes place at optimum temperatures of approximately 650 

C: 

◦

CaO(s) + CO2(g)→CaCO3(s).

(3.5) 

At  the  outlet  of  the  carbonator  reactor,  the  solids  with  the  partly 
carbonated sorbent (CaCO3) are transferred to the calciner reactor for 
the  sorbent  regeneration  process.  The  operation  temperature  of  the 
calciner reactor should be selected optimally (around 900 
C). To ach-
ieve that, an additional heat input for the calciner reactor is required, 
which is generally supplied through a combustion process, for example. 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093096F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

The products of this reaction are the gaseous CO2 and the solid calcium 
oxide: 

CaCO3(s)→CaO(s) + CO2(g).

(3.6) 

At Chulalongkorn University and the Illinois Institute of Technology, 
several studies have been published, investigating different designs for 
carbon dioxide sorption fluidized beds. Chalermsinsuwan et al.  [595] 
modeled  a  compact  sorption-regeneration  circulating  fluidized-bed 
system  in  a  two-dimensional  domain  including  the  absorption  and 
desorption reaction of K2CO3 with CO2 and steam. The riser (absorption 
part) had a width of 3 m and a height of 15 m. The downcomer had a 
width  of  3  m  at  the  widest  position  and  a  height  of  16.7  m.  The 
computational domain was discretized using 5,500 cells. The dispersion 
and  mass transfer coefficients  were computed and  not determined by 
empirical formulas as in conventional fluidized-bed designs. The results 
showed that 70 % of the CO2  could be removed from the flue gas. A 
parametric study was carried, showing that the inlet gas velocity and the 
reaction rate constant have the highest impact on the percentage of CO2 
removed. Changes in the reactor geometry, solid sorbent density, and 
solid sorbent diameter have a minor effect. Thummakul et al. [596] used 
a  similar  geometry,  performing  parametric  studies  using  a  statistical 
that 
experimental 
circulating-turbulent  fluidization  is  advantageous  for  CO2  sorption. 
They simulated only the riser part with a width of 3 m and a height of 15 
m, as illustrated in Fig. 3.17 (a). In the first step, cold flow simulations 
were carried out and compared to the experimental data, showing good 
agreement  (see  Fig.  3.17  (b  and  c)).  In  a  second  step,  four  different 
frequency factors were tested for the sorption reaction and compared to 
experimental data (see Fig. 3.17 (d)). With the validated model, the 24 
statistical experimental design and the effect of various factors on the 
CO2  removal  percentage  were  evaluated.  The  authors  claimed  that 
circulating-turbulent  fluidization  performed  better  than  conventional 
turbulent fluidization due to the high mixing behavior between the gas 
and  solid  phases.  Therefore,  large-scale  reactors  should  consider 
changing  their  operation  mode  to  a  high  flux  circulating-turbulent 

objective  was 

design.  The 

show 

to 

fluidization bed. 

Tritippayanon et al. [206] carried out two-dimensional simulations 
of carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide capture in an industrial-scale CFB 
boiler. The study aimed to investigate the competitiveness between SO2 
limestone  as  a  sorbent  material.  A 
and  CO2  capture  using 
two-dimensional  domain  of  an  existing  riser  section 
in  an 
industrial-scale  circulating  fluidized-bed  boiler  was  created  with  a 
height of 20 m and a diameter at the top of 7.88 m. In the lower part, the 
reactor has a diameter of 4.22 m at the bottom. A grid with 8,000 cells 
was sufficient to reach the grid-independent solution. Eleven reactions 
were introduced into the model, taking into consideration flash drying, 
coal devolatilization,  combustion, gasification, and  CO2  and  SO2  cap-
ture. An EMMS drag model was implemented for drag modeling. Three 
variables (particle size, feeding position of limestone, and proportion of 
inlet  fuel  velocity  at  two-side  fuel  inlets)  were  studied  using  a  2k 
factorial  experimental  design.  The  model  was  validated  using  the 
experimental  data.  According  to  the  authors,  various  numerical  pa-
rameters such as the chemical reaction rate were adjusted to improve 
the simulation results. An optimum value for SO2 and CO2 removal was 
found for 340/450 µm particles (CaCO3/CaO), a mixed feeding position 
at the lower secondary position, and a 1.375/0.625 inlet fuel velocity 
proportion. 

At Boston University, Ryan et al. [188] simulated a low-temperature 
post-combustion reactor. Two-fluid and hybrid model simulations were 
performed  and  the  obtained  numerical  results  were  compared  with 
experimental data (more details can be found in the DDPM section). 

At the Centre for Research and Technology, Hellas (CERTH), several 
papers on the simulation of the carbonate-looping combustion using the 
two-fluid model were published in cooperation with different partners. 
Atsonios et al. [207] carried out a coupled CFD simulation and process 
simulation,  using  the  ANSYS-FLUENT  and  ASPEN  Plus  software.  The 
carbonator  and  calciner  reactors  were  simulated  independently  and 
hydrodynamic results were used as input data for the ASPEN Plus. These 
data  were  the  mass  inventory,  the  residence  time,  and  the  volume 
fractions. Experimental data from the pilot-scale DFB unit set up at the 

Fig. 3.17. (a) schematic diagram of the reactor, (b and c) solid volume fraction compared with experimental data in quantitative and qualitative aspects, and (d) 
comparison  of  CO2  removal  percentage  profiles  for  different  frequency  factors  for  chemical  sorption  kinetic  equation  (reproduced  from  reference  [596],  with 
permission of Elsevier). 

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.0Riser height[m]Solid volume fraction[-]1.00m/s1.25m/s1.50m/s1.75m/s2.00m/sExp.x = 55x = 500x = 600x = 700Experiment (Abbasi andArastoopour  Garg et al.),00.060.120.180.240.240.300.360.420.480.56Solid volume[-]fraction00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8Riser height[m]112345600.020406080100120COremoval [%]2(a)(b)(c)(d)ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093097F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

University  of  Stuttgart  [1066],  validated  the  developed  model.  The 
computational domain of the carbonator had a height of 12.29 m and a 
diameter  of  0.071,  meshed  with  286,753  cells.  The  computational 
domain of the calciner had a height of 3.494 m and a diameter of 0.149 
m. This domain was discretized with around 32,000 cells. The results of 
the cold-flow CFD simulations were validated with experimental data. In 
a second step, the results of the CFD simulations were transferred to the 
ASPEN Plus model. This hydrodynamic data allowed a more accurate 
thermodynamic  analysis  of  the  process,  including,  for  example,  the 
proper division of the CFB into two regions, which is essential to achieve 
highly accurate results. Nevertheless, the authors concluded that some 
more aspects of the carbonate-looping process need to be incorporated 
into the model, i.e. the effective heat removal from the carbonator or the 
presence of H2O in the flue gases. Zeneli et al. [189] performed two-fluid 
simulations  of  a  1  MWth  scale  carbonator,  erected  at  the  Technical 
University  of  Darmstadt.  The  simulation  results  obtained  using  the 
Gidaspow and EMMS drag models were compared. In addition, the in-
fluence of different specularity coefficients was investigated. In a second 
step,  the  heterogeneous  carbonation  reaction  was  implemented.  The 
carbonator, which has a diameter of 0.59 m and a height of 8.661 m, was 
discretized with a coarse mesh (approximately 31,207 cells) and a fine 
mesh (285.369 cells). The results showed that the Gidaspow drag model 
over-predicted the static pressure in almost all parts of the reactor. The 
EMMS drag model predicted the experimental results with greater ac-
curacy,  and  a  lower  grid  independency  solution  was  achieved.  The 
specularity coefficient has almost no effect on the axial static pressure 
but  the  core  annular  was  reproduced  better  with  a  value  of  0.01. 
Comparing  the  outlet  CO2  concentration  with  the  measurement,  a 
relative error of around 7 % was observed. 

The  Pacific  Northwest  National  Laboratory  published  studies 
regarding the predictive confidence of a device-scale solid sorbent-based 
carbon  capture  design  [208],  the  simulation  of  a  1  MWel  pilot-scale 
bubbling fluidized-bed reactor equipped with cooling tubes [209], and 
device-scale  CFD  simulations  of  micro-encapsulated  carbon  dioxide 
sorbent (MECS) [210]. In the study by Lai et al. [208], a numerical study 
was scaled up from batch experimental results to a 1 MW carbon capture 
system. For the proposed 1 MW system, experimental data was avail-
able. In a first step, the experimental data were therefore collected in a 
batch fluidized bed using the 32D1 sorbent (e.g. cold hydrodynamics, 
hot  hydrodynamics,  and  hot  reactive  adsorption  of  CO2).  The  batch 
fluidized  bed  has  a  height  of  1.02  m  and  a  diameter  of  0.15  m.  In  a 
second step, a two-dimensional numerical model with 8,640 cells was 
built, integrating three chemical reactions for the CO2  adsorption. For 
drag modeling, a filtered drag model, described by Igci et al. [702], was 
implemented.  The  statistical  calibration  “Bayesian  calibration”  was 
used.  In  this method, the  parameters  need to be  calibrated, prior  un-
certainty distribution on those parameters, and conditions that are fixed 
or  known  were  first  identified.  Then,  cold  flow  simulations,  hot 
non-reacting simulations, and hot reacting flow simulations were per-
formed and calibrated with experimental data, taking into consideration 
uncertainties. It was shown that this method can accurately capture the 
bed  pressure,  the  temperature,  the  CO2  capture  capacity,  and  the  ki-
netics  of  the  reactor.  In  their  second  study  [209],  the  authors  did 
two-dimensional  simulations  of  a  1  MWel  pilot-scale  bubbling 
fluidized-bed reactor equipped with cooling tubes. Three chemical re-
actions were introduced into the model: the reaction of CO2  with the 
amine,  the  reaction  of  CO2,  physisorbed  steam  and  amine,  and  the 
physical  adsorption  of  steam  into  the  sorbent.  The  absorber  column, 
which has a height of 6.88 m and a width of 1.33 m, was discretized with 
around 26,700 cells. The same filtered model that was used in the pre-
vious  work  was  modified  to  determine  the  drag  force  and  the  heat 
transfer. The reason for the modification is that the filtered model was 
originally developed for horizontal pipes, which produce less drag than 
the horizontal reactor used in this work. As no experimental data were 
available for the validation, the comparison was made with results from 
a process simulation model, showing reasonable agreement. In a third 

for 

investigating 

the  drag  modeling, 

study,  Wang  et  al.  [210]  used  the  same  geometry  and  also  the  same 
filtered  model 
the 
micro-encapsulated carbon dioxide sorbent for carbon capture systems. 
Chemistry that was developed for a DEM model was introduced into the 
two-fluid  model,  including  seven  reactions.  Unfortunately,  the  model 
was not validated and the only subjects studied were the hydrodynamics 
and  how  the  gas  flow  rate  and  particle  size  affected  the  CO2  capture 
efficiency.  The  results  revealed  that  lower  gas  flow  rates  and  smaller 
particle sizes were beneficial for the CO2 capture efficiency. 

At  the  University  of  Tehran,  Nouri  et  al.  [211]  carried  out 
two-dimensional simulations of a dry sorbent fluidized-bed system for 
CO2 capture. The computational domain of the carbonation reactor had 
a total height of 6 m and a diameter at the bottom of 0.035 m. From 0.6 
m the diameter was equal to 0.025 m. The reaction of K2CO3 with steam 
and  carbon  dioxide  to  form  KHCO3  and  an  EMMS  drag  model  was 
introduced into the model. A mesh independence study revealed that 
around 55,000 cells were enough to reach a mesh-independent solution. 
The validation was performed with experimental data, showing that the 
predictions were consistent with the measurement. A maximum abso-
lute error of around 6 % for the CO2 removal was revealed. The reactor 
height was optimized and decreased to three meters, taking into account 
the  optimized  water  vapor  fraction  in  the  feed  and  a  minimum  solid 
sorbent rate. 

At  the  Harbin  University  of  Science  and  Technology,  two  studies 
were published on the capture process using potassium carbonate as a 
solid sorbent. The studies investigated two different geometries, but the 
same  reaction  kinetics  and  drag  model  (EMMS)  were  used.  Yu  et  al. 
[435] examined the forward reaction (K2CO3 + H2O + CO2 → 2KHCO3) 
since  the  carbonation  reactor  was  only  simulated.  The  investigated 
reactor  has  a  height  of  6  m,  a  bed  diameter  of  0.035  m,  and  a  riser 
diameter of 0.025 m. The two-dimensional domain meshed with 46,340 
cells. The results were validated with experimental data by comparing 
the  CO2  removal  value,  showing  that  the  model  predictions  were 
reasonable.  The  influence  of  the  reactor  height  and  pressure  on  CO2 
removal was investigated, revealing that CO2 removal increases with the 
reactor height and lower operating pressure. In their second publication 
[436], the authors simulated a system with a carbonator and regener-
ator. Their first step was to examine the forward and backward reactions 
of potassium carbonate. The carbonator has a riser with a height of 3 m 
and a diameter of 0.6 m, followed by a cyclone and a downcomer section 
(regenerator zone) with a height of 3.3 m and a diameter of 0.42 m. After 
a loop seal, the particle cycle is closed. The computational domain has 
meshed  with  40,040  cells  and  the  results  were  compared  with  the 
experimental data and the simulation results with the Gidaspow drag 
model. The results with the EMMS drag model showed the best perfor-
mance, with a maximum relative error in CO2  removal of 14.6 %. The 
solid holdup was also predicted better using the EMMS drag model. The 
authors’  second step was to investigate the influences of different pa-
rameters on the simulation results. Higher initial solids concentrations, 
larger particle diameters, and lower operating velocities were found to 
be beneficial for CO2 removal. 

At  the  Illinois  Institute  of  Technology  and  Gamma  Technologies, 
LLC,  Ghadirian  et  al.  [437]  carried  out  two-  and  three-dimensional 
simulations using the experimental setup of the National Energy Tech-
nology Laboratory [1067]. The process consists of a fluidized bed (car-
bonator) with a height of 1 m and a diameter of 0.15 m. A subsequent 
riser has a height of 3.15 m and a diameter of 0.0254 m. After a cyclone 
and a loop seal, the second fluidized bed (regenerator) with the same 
dimensions  as  the  carbonator  is  installed.  From  the  regenerator,  the 
particles reach an L-valve and a second loop seal before they fall back 
into the carbonator. In the first step, three-dimensional simulations were 
performed without taking into consideration the reaction to study hy-
drodynamics and to verify the two-dimensional simulations. Both do-
mains  were  discretized  with  the  same  mesh  density,  resulting  in 
approximately 610,000 cells for the three-dimensional domain and 70, 
000 cells for the two-dimensional domain. For drag modeling, the EMMS 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093098F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

drag  model  was  implemented.  The  results  of  the  three-dimensional 
domain  were  compared  with  experimental  observations  but  a  valida-
tion  study  was  not  carried  out  (i.e.  comparison  of  measured  experi-
mental  data  with  simulation  results).  In  a  second  step,  the 
two-dimensional cold flow simulations were performed and the results 
were  compared  to  the  three-dimensional  simulations.  The  results 
showed  that  using  the  same  specularity  coefficient  (0.1)  as  in  the 
three-dimensional  simulation,  the  solid  flow  rate  was  over-predicted. 
Therefore, it was reduced to a value of 0.5 to fit the three-dimensional 
results.  In  the  last  step,  two-dimensional  reactive  simulations  of  the 
carbon capture process were performed. 

At the Illinois Institute of Technology, Kongkitisupchai and Gidas-
pow  [278]  performed  CFD  simulations  for  a  new  post-combustion 
design. The design consists of a fluidized-bed reduced-pressure regen-
erator and a fluidized-bed riser-sorber. The sorbent consisted of Na2CO3, 
which  reacts  with  CO2  and  H2O  to  form  NaHCO3.  Two  meshes  were 
generated, one for the bed sorber containing 3,276 cells and one for the 
regenerator with 8,064 cells. A reaction mechanism was implemented 
and the Gidaspow drag model was used. The authors showed that the 
undesirable  core-annular  flow  regime  in  the  riser-sorber  could  be 
eliminated  using  multiple  jet  inlets  and  large  sorbent  particles.  In 
addition,  larger  sorbent  particles  (500  μm  instead  of  75  μm)  allowed 
better settling in the downer. In the riser-sorber, approximately 60 % of 
the CO2 was removed. 

3.1.3.3. Other  processes. Several  research  groups  from  different  uni-
versities around the world have published studies on the development of 
the two-fluid model and its application in various processes (e.g. poly-
merization,  steam  reforming,  fluid  catalytic  cracking,  coating,  and 
granulation). The studies shown below are non-exhaustive and selected 
from other works to give the reader a guide to the development status of 
the process under investigation. 

3.1.3.3.1. Polymerization. Fluidized-bed  polymerization  is  one  of 
the  most  economical  production  methods  of  commodity  polymers.  In 

this process, identical or different monomer molecules react together to 
form chains or three-dimensional polymers such as polyethylene, poly-
propylene, and ethylene-propylene rubber. The fluidized-bed polymer-
ization  process  has  been  in  use  for  decades,  therefore  many  CFD 
simulation studies can be found in the literature. In these studies, the 
development of the particle size distribution needs to be taken into ac-
count. This can be achieved by solving the population balance equation 
(PBE) along with the continuity, momentum, and energy equations (see 
the Two-fluid model section and Table 3.3). 

The Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering (Xiamen 
University)  and  the  Department  of  Chemical  Engineering,  School  of 
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (Shanghai University) have pub-
lished  several  works  investigating  polymerization  in  fluidized-bed  re-
actors. Chen et al. [438] performed three-dimensional simulations of a 
fluidized-bed  polymerization  reactor  using  the  CFD-PBM  model,  to 
describe the evaluation of polymerization. A cylindrical domain with a 
diameter of 0.33 m and a height of 0.9 m was discretized with 89,010 
cells. Two cases were calculated and the verification of the simulation 
results was based on experimental data from the literature. In the first 
case, the particle size and the polymerization heat were set to be con-
stant.  In  the  second  case,  an  evolving  particle  size  distribution,  poly-
merization  kinetics,  and  polymerization  heat  models  were  integrated 
into the model. For both cases, the Gidaspow drag model was applied. 
The second case was found to be more appropriate to simulate the flow 
field in the fluidized-bed reactors than the first case. Furthermore, the 
results showed that the temperature increased from the bottom to the 
top of the reactor and the inlet temperature has a high impact on the 
temperature field of the reactor. Yan et al. [439] extended the above 
model, integrating a polymeric multilayer model to describe the growth 
of a single polymeric particle. Two-dimensional simulations were per-
formed in a rectangular domain with the same dimensions as in [438] 
(width of 0.33 m and height of 0.9 m). The geometry was discretized 
with 15,520 cells and the Gidaspow drag model was used. The model 
was  validated using  only  a  cold-flow,  pseudo-2D  laboratory-scale  flu-
idized-bed  test.  According  to  the  authors,  this  is  due  to  a  lack  of 

Table 3.3 
Comparison of methods used for solving the population balance equation within the framework of the two-fluid model [1068].  

Model 

Finding/observation 

Standard Method of Moments (SMM)  

• The population balance equation is converted into transport equations for the moments of distribution  
• The dimensionality of the problem is reduced and a relatively simple process is used to solve the transport equations for lower-order 

moments  

• The application of this method is limited to size-independent aggregation, breakage, and growth rate (modeling the size dependence 

kernels is not possible)  

Method of Moments (MOM)  

• The particle size distribution is tracked through its moments by integrating the internal coordinates  
• Usually, a lower number of scalars (4-6) are required, resulting in feasible implementation in the CFD software  
• This method is not applied frequently, because expressing the transport equations in terms of momentum is challenging  

Quadrature Method of Moments 

(QMOM)  

• This method is based on the approximation of the unclosed terms via an ad-hoc quadrature formula  
• The abscissas and weights of the quadrature approximation can be defined using lower-order moments by resorting to the product- 

difference algorithm  

• This method has been validated extensively for a wide range of problems with various internal coordinates  
• The main drawback is that the phase average velocity of the different solid phases must be known in order to solve the transport 

equations for the moments  

Sectional Quadrature Method of 

Moments (SQMOM)  

• This method uses the advantage of the class method and quadrature method of moments and minimizes their drawbacks for the 

inversion of large-sized moment problems  

• This method can track the accuracy of any set of low-order moments, with the ability to reconstruct the shape of the distribution, but 

becomes ill-conditioned when a large number of moments are used  

Direct Quadrature Method of Moments 

(DQMOM)  

• This method is directly based on integrating the transport equations of the quadrature approximation (its abscissas and weights)  
• Instead of moments, this method uses quadrature nodes and weights, which are more convenient due to the calculation of the 

quadrature nodes  

• Each node represents the properties of a solid phase (different nodes are required for different solid phases)  
• This method can model the PSD bearing particle kinetics in the context of CFD-PBM simulations  

Fixed-Pivot Quadrature Moments 

(FPQMOM)  

• This method is suitable to simulate fluidized-bed polymerization with simultaneous polymerization particle growth and aggregation  
• Breakage, 3D, and the industrial-scale need further investigation  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10093099F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

experimental data on fluidized-bed polymerization reactors. In a second 
step, five case studies were performed: (1) with evolving fluid dynamics 
coupled with a continuous PSD, (2) investigating only particle growth, 
(3) investigating only particle aggregation, (4) investigating only par-
ticle breakage, and (5) with evolving fluid dynamics and coupled with 
all the influences described above. Case 5 investigated many different 
ways, in which the intra-particle transfer limitations (i.e. the spaces in 
the  pores  of  the  particles)  influence  the  flow  field.  The  authors 
concluded  that  their  model  is  appropriate  to  simulate  flow  fields  in 
fluidized-bed  polymerization  reactors.  The  results  showed  that  with 
higher intra-particle mass transfer limitations, the time to reach com-
plete fluidization decreases. The intra-particle heat transfer limitation 
did not have a great influence on the flow within the reactor. In a further 
study  by  the  same  research  group,  Yan  et  al.  [212]  simulated  a 
multi-zone  circulating  reactor  (MZCR),  taking  into  consideration  the 
polymerization  kinetics  and 
the  particle  polydispersity.  The 
three-dimensional domain consisted of a riser with a height of 2.5 m and 
a  diameter  of  0.08  m,  and  a  downer  with  a  height  of  1.2  m  and  a 
diameter of 0.1 m. At the outlet of the riser, a cyclone is positioned to 
separate  the  particles  for  the  gas-solid  flow.  In  order  to  reach  a 
grid-independent  solution,  approximately  140,000  cells  were  used  to 
discretize the geometry. The quadrature method of moments (QMOM) 
was  applied  to  represent  the  polydisperse  solid  phase  and  particle 
growth and aggregation, while the breakage dynamics were not taken 
into consideration. The hydrodynamic model was validated in previous 
studies  [438,439].  The  effect  of  the  polydisperse  system  on  the  flow 
fields was investigated and compared to a system with uniform particle 
size. The results showed that the polydispersity of the particles led to 
more particle agglomerations. 

A further study by Yao et al. [213] integrated the performance of the 
CFD-PBM  model  using  four  different  drag  models  (Syamlal-O’Brien, 
Gidaspow, McKeen, and EMMS). The particle growth rate was included 
in  the  PBE  equation  and  the  QMOM  method  was  used  to  solve  the 
equation. A three-dimensional cylindrical bed with a diameter of 0.33 m 
and a height of 0.9 m was used, discretized with the same number of grid 
cells (89,010 cells) as in [438]. In a first step, cold flow simulations were 
performed  to  investigate how  the  drag  models affected  the  simulated 
results  without  a  polymerization  reaction.  Then,  the  polymerization 
reaction  was  taken  into  consideration,  showing  that  the  McKeen  and 
EMMS drag models result in a typical core-annulus structure with lower 
bed  heights  and  higher  temperatures.  The  Gidaspow  and  Syamlal-O’-
Brien drag models could not reproduce the core-annulus structure. The 
authors claimed that the EMMS drag model showed the best prediction 
of the pressure profile compared to theoretical values. The evolution of 
the PSD and the Sauter diameter was similar for all four drag models. In 
another  study  in  2015,  Yao  et  al.  [214]  carried  out  two-dimensional 
simulations using the geometry proposed by Yan et al. [439]. A popu-
lation balance model taking into consideration the particle growth and 
aggregation  was  used  in  the  simulation.  Three  different  numerical 
moment-based  methods  (QMOM,  FPQMOM,  and  DQMOM)  were 
applied to solve the PBE and the results of the methods were compared 
to each other. The FPQMOM method was found to predict a faster rate of 
particle growth and a larger particle cluster size. According to the au-
thors,  this  was  also  observed  in  the  experiments.  The  results  of  the 
QMOM and DQMOM methods showed the opposite trend, although their 
computational cost was higher than the FPQMOM method. 

At the East China University of Science and Technology (State Key 
Laboratory  of  Chemical  Engineering,  Key  Laboratory  of  Advanced 
Control  and  Optimization  for  Chemical  Processes,  and  Daqing  Petro-
chemical  Research  Centre),  two  publications  have  been  published  on 
ethylene polymerization in a pilot-plant fluidized-bed reactor. Che et al. 
[215]  coupled  the  polymerization  kinetics  with  the  CFD-PBM  model, 
taking into account particle growth, aggregation, and breakage of par-
ticles. A two-dimensional domain of the pilot plant was created with a 
height of 4.3 m, a diameter at the bottom of 0.7 m, and a diameter at the 
top of 1.4 m. A mesh with 91,500 cells was generated to discretize the 

domain.  To  solve  the  population  balance  equation,  the  quadrature 
method  of  moments  (QMOM)  was  used.  Furthermore,  a  simplified 
polymerization kinetics model for the polymerization reaction rate was 
applied,  which  depends  on  the  concentration  of  monomers,  the  con-
centration of catalyst active sites, and the temperature. The drag force 
was modeled employing the Gidaspow drag model. The numerical re-
sults (e.g. pressure drop and temperature in the reactor) were in good 
agreement  with  experimental  data.  Using  the  validated  model,  six 
different cases were simulated including different effects (among others: 
PSD,  reactions,  growth,  breakage,  and  aggregation).  The  authors 
mentioned that the bed expansion height and the values of solid holdups 
increased notably due to the effect of ethylene polymerization. Based on 
the previous study, Che et al. [216] extended the developed model in 
[215] to take into consideration the three-dimensional domain of the 
pilot-plant fluidized-bed reactor. The authors compared the traditional 
pelletizing polyethylene process (Case 1: the mean diameter of around 
0.45  mm,  the  superficial  gas  velocity  of  0.61  m/s)  and  the 
non-pelletizing  polyethylene  process  (Case  2:  the  mean  diameter  of 
around  1.4  mm,  the  superficial  gas  velocity  of  0.9  m/s).  The  model 
validation is based on the pressure and temperature distributions, along 
with the bed height (see Fig. 3.18), showing good agreement. The au-
thors concluded that for the non-pelletizing polyethylene process, the 
temperature distribution was not uniform in the reactor, especially at 
the top of the bed. Four different flow patterns, reported in the litera-
ture, were, however, observed in the results of the simulations in the two 
cases. 

The University of Technology, Malaysia (The Process Systems Engi-
neering Centre), with other scientific groups, have published two papers 
on the modeling of an industrial low-density polyethylene polymeriza-
tion  reactor.  In  the  first  study,  Akbari  et  al.  [217]  carried  out 
two-dimensional simulations of the 33.9 m high reactor with a diameter 
of 5 m from the bottom up to 20.5 m, followed by an expanding region. 
The geometry was discretized with 52,000 nodes and the direct quad-
rature method of moments (DQMOM) was used to solve the PBE, com-
bined with the Gidaspow drag model. The results were compared with 
operational data on the pressure drop and bed height from a real plant, 
exhibiting reasonable accuracy. In a second step, a sensitivity analysis of 
the discretization schemes and the maximum solid packing was carried 
out.  The  authors  claimed  that  the  third-order  discretization  scheme 
(monotonic upstream-centered scheme for conservation laws (MUSCL)) 
produced the best results in predicting the bed height. Furthermore, it 
was shown that a smaller value of maximum solid packing led to a lower 
bed height and pressure drop. Therefore, a value for the maximum solid 
packing  that  is  0.01  higher  than  the  specific  solid  volume  fraction  is 
suggested for the CFD-PBM modeling. In the last step, the influences of 
superficial gas velocity on the segregation of the particles were studied, 
revealing that the quasi-layer inversion of particles took place at a low 
fluidization velocity. The results also showed that the hydrodynamics 
changed  into  the well-mixed  condition when  the fluidization  velocity 
was higher than the minimum fluidization velocity of the large particles. 
In their second study, Akbari et al. [217] used the same geometry as in 
[1068] to investigate the influence of the particle growth rate on the 
minimum  fluidization  velocity.  Therefore,  a  size-dependent  particle 
growth rate was introduced into the PBM model used in [1068]. The 
results showed that the structures of the gas-solid flow are quite different 
from  monodisperse  fluidization.  Three  different  regions  of  structures 
were  observed  between  the  point  where  the  first  particles  begin  to 
fluidize until the point where vigorous bubbling occurs. 

At  the  University  of  Toulouse,  Neau  et  al.  [82]  carried  out  the 
highest-performance  two-fluid  simulation  in  terms  of  computational 
resources and mesh size, employing the NEPTUNE_CFD software, which 
is  based  on  the  open-source  software  Code_Saturne.  The  olefin  poly-
merization reactor had a height of 30 m and a diameter of 5 m (a typical 
geometry of an industrial-scale reactor, see Fig. 3.19). The geometry of 
the  reactor  was  discretized  with  1,002,355,456  hexahedrons  (billion 
mesh) and the simulation was run using efficient massively parallel CFD 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930100F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.18. Pilot plant fluidized-bed reactor: (a) schematic view, (b) reactor geometry, and (c and d) comparison of pressure drop and temperature distributions in 
simulation and experiment (reproduced from reference [216], with permission of ACS Publications). 

Fig. 3.19. (a) the commercial polyethylene production process, and (b) temperatures of gas and fine particle after 15 s of billion mesh simulation (the color scale of 
the legend is only linear between 98 

C) (reproduced from reference [82], with permission of Elsevier). 

C and 101 

◦

◦

solvers on between 1260 and 36,000 cores (15 million CPU hours were 
used),  generating  200 TB  of  raw  data.  The  multi-fluid  model  (three 
phases) was applied and the PSDs were approximated in large particles 
(1.6  mm),  representing  the  polyethylene  particles  in  the  reactor,  and 
fine  particles  (0.08  mm),  representing  the  injected  catalyst  particles. 
Wen and Yu’s model, limited by the Ergun equation for dense flows, was 
used to describe the drag force. The authors claimed that this is the first 
time that such a detailed inside view of an industrial olefin polymeri-
zation reactor has been shown, adding that fully resolved simulations of 
industrial-scale fluidized-bed reactors are possible. Nevertheless, some 
challenges  needed  to  be  dealt  with.  First  of  all,  the  generation  and 
partition of an unstructured mesh of this size took about one month of 
work.  In  addition,  and  due  to  the  high  number  of  cells,  it  was  not 

possible to save all the data, and post-processing needed to be taken into 
consideration  before  simulation.  As  the  calculation  required  a  lot  of 
resources, the authors recommended using this approach to generate a 
reference database. 

3.1.3.3.2. Steam  reforming. Steam reforming, also known as steam 
methane reforming (SMR), is a process to produce syngas (hydrogen and 
carbon  monoxide)  by  reacting  feedstock  (usually  natural  gas,  but 
sometimes ethanol and recently glycerol) with steam. A second reaction 
(the water-gas shift reaction) uses steam to convert the carbon monoxide 
into  additional  hydrogen  and  carbon  dioxide.  The  process  is  endo-
thermic  and  the  hydrogen  obtained  can  be  applied  to  the  industrial 
synthesis  of  ammonia  and  other  valuable  chemicals.  The  steam 
reforming can be autothermal when oxygen and carbon dioxide or steam 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930101F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

react with natural gas to form syngas (hydrogen and carbon dioxide). 
Although steam reforming is by far the most common process for the 
large-scale  production  of  hydrogen,  challenges  such  as  the  increased 
yield  of  hydrogen  and  the  decrease  environmental  footprint  of  the 
process  are  crucial  to  meet  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy. 
Recently, bi-functional catalyst-sorbent materials have been proposed to 
improve the steam reforming process [1069]. Sorption-enhanced steam 
methane reforming (SE-SMR) consists of catalytic steam reforming and 
the water-gas shift reaction as well as carbon dioxide chemical sorption 
by a solid sorbent, all performed in one fluidized-bed reactor. 

Between  2016  and  2020,  the  School  of  Energy  Science  and  Engi-
neering at the Harbin Institute of Technology published several papers 
concerning the numerical simulation of steam reforming of glycerol in 
fluidized beds. In 2016, Wang et al. [218] presented a numerical study 
investigating  the  performance  of  glycerol  steam  reforming  in  a 
fluidized-bed  system.  A  bubble-structure-dependent  drag  model  was 
introduced into a three-dimensional model verified with experimental 
data. Three reactions were taken into consideration (the steam reform-
ing reaction of glycerol, methane and carbon monoxide) and the laminar 
finite-rate model was used to describe the kinetics. The reactor has a 
height of 1.0 m and a diameter of 0.3 m (see Fig. 3.20 (a)). A mesh in-
dependence study was performed, showing that a grid with cell sizes of 
(9.6  mm)3  was  sufficient.  A maximum  relative  error  of 10  %  was  re-
ported 
the 
bubble-structure-dependent  drag  model,  while  the  Gidaspow  drag 
model resulted in a bigger error (Fig. 3.20 (b)). 

compositions  using 

the  outlet  gas 

regarding 

The results also revealed that a higher operating temperature led to 
better fuel conversion and higher hydrogen yields. Finally, the authors 
suggested options to improve the process such as reducing particle sizes, 
increasing steam/glycerol feed, and raising operating pressures. Base on 
this study, Yang et al. [219] studied the improvement of glycerol steam 
reforming when a membrane hydrogen separation unit is applied in the 
fluidized bed. In a further publication, Wang et al. [220] investigated the 
sorption-enhanced  steam  reforming  of  crude  glycerol  (ethanol  as  im-
purity component) using two solid phases, one describing the catalyst 
and another one for the sorbent particles. Simulations were performed 
with  two  different  sorbent  materials:  CaO  and  Li4SiO4,  each  with  a 
different kinetic model for CO2  capture. Other implemented reactions 
were the steam reforming of glycerol, ethanol, carbon monoxide, and 

methane. The reactor design was different from that used in their first 
study [218]. Here, the fluidized-bed reactor is square with a length of 
0.3 m and a height of 1.5 m, meshed with 48,000 cells. In the first step, 
the simulation results were compared to experimental data obtained by 
Rem´on  et  al.  [1070].  It  should  be  noted  that  the  geometry  in  the 
simulation  is  different  from  the  experiment.  Comparing  the  gas  com-
positions, good agreement was found between the simulation and the 
experiment. The authors conclude that the ethanol reduces the heat of 
the  autothermal  condition  and  enhances  the  hydrogen  yield.  The  ge-
ometry was also used in other publications prepared by Yang et al. [273] 
and Wang et al. [597] to investigate sorption-enhanced glycerol steam 
reforming in a fluidized-bed membrane reactor. Furthermore, in another 
study,  Wang  et  al.  [447]  used  the  same  model  as  in  [220],  but  raw 
glycerol was introduced as a fuel. A CaO-based sorbent was modeled as a 
sorbent material and several parameters of the simulation were evalu-
ated.  The  authors  conclude  that  the  absorption  reaction  of  CO2  can 
provide the heat for the reforming process. It should be noted that the 
simulations were not validated with experiments. 

At the University of Leeds, Dou et al. [221] investigated the steam 
reforming of crude glycerol by using a three-step reaction model in a 
two-dimensional simulation. The homogeneous Gidaspow drag model 
was applied along with three main reactions (steam reforming of glyc-
erol, carbon monoxide, and methane). The domain, which is discretized 
with 8,512 cells, is rectangular with a width of 0.3 m and a height of 1 m. 
Simulations were performed for four seconds in real-time and the au-
thors concluded that most of the gas products were formed during the 
first two seconds of the simulation. In the second paper by Dou and Song 
[440], carried out at the Dalian University of Technology, the model was 
validated, showing a maximum absolute error in the volume fractions of 
the  gas  analysis  up  to  8  %.  Here,  the  authors  investigated  how  the 
steam-to-carbon-feeding  molar  ratio  and  the  inlet  gas  velocity  influ-
enced the production of hydrogen. The results of the simulations show 
that the glycerol conversion and hydrogen production decreased as the 
inlet  gas  velocity 
the 
steam-to-carbon-feeding molar ratio improved the conversion of glyc-
erol and hydrogen selectivity. 

the  value  of 

Increasing 

increased. 

At  the  University  of  Rome,  Di  Carlo  et  al.  [598]  simulated 
sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming in a fluidized bed with a Ni 
catalyst  and  calcined  dolomite.  Three  homogeneous  reactions  were 

Fig. 3.20. (a) geometry of the fluidized-bed reforming system, and (b) comparison of gas composition (simulated and experimental data) for different drag models 
(reproduced from reference [218], with permission of ACS Publications). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930102F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

taken into consideration, describing the reaction of methane and steam 
to  form  hydrogen  as  well  as  the  reactions  with  carbon  dioxide  and 
carbon  monoxide. One  heterogeneous  reaction was  implemented  that 
describes  the  carbon  dioxide  capture  reaction  with  calcium  oxide.  A 
two-dimensional  rectangular  domain  with  a  width  of  0.08  m  and  a 
height of 0.6 m was simulated. The mesh consisted of quadratic cells 
with a length of 2.5 mm. Three phases were examined: one gas phase 
and two solid phases. Firstly, the model was validated with experimental 
data from an experimental rig and with the bubble diameter correlation 
function  suggested  by  Darton  et  al.  [1071].  The  comparison  of  the 
measured and simulated dry molar fractions of CO2 and CH4 is shown in 
Fig. 3.21 (a). The maximum relative error was 24 % for CO2 and 15 % for 
CH4. Furthermore, the simulated bubble diameter was in good agree-
ment with the bubble diameter calculated by the correlation proposed 
by Darton et al. [1071]. Next, three different cases were simulated: one 
case  for  steam  methane  reforming  and  two  cases  of  steam-enhanced 
steam  methane  reforming.  In  the  second  and  third  cases,  the  ratio  of 
dolomite to catalyst was varied. The molar fractions of hydrogen were 
found to increase up to 92 % in the steam-enhanced methane reforming 
cases  compared  to  the  78  %  molar  fraction  of  hydrogen  with  steam 
methane reforming. 

In  a  second  publication,  Di  Carlo  et  al.  [441]  carried  out 
two-dimensional simulations of a pilot-scale bubbling fluidized bed. The 
sorption-enhanced  steam  methane  reforming  reactor  (SE-SMR)  has  a 
height of 2 m and a diameter of 0.25 m. Verification and preliminary 
validation  were  performed,  showing  good  agreement  with  the  mea-
surements. Two homogeneous reactions were taken into consideration, 
describing the steam methane reaction and the water-gas shift reaction, 
in  addition  to  a  coarse-grained  parcel  model  for  the  heterogeneous 
carbonation  reaction.  The  results  showed  that  with  fully  calcined 

particles the dry molar fraction of hydrogen could reach up to 95 %. 
Furthermore, a more uniform temperature distribution was found in the 
reactor compared to conventional steam methane reforming. 

At the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Wang et al. 
[597] used a three-dimensional simulation to study sorption-enhanced 
steam methane reforming (SE-SMR) in a bubbling fluidized bed. They 
investigated the effects of the superficial gas velocity and the restitution 
coefficient on the reaction and solid flow pattern. Three reactions were 
introduced for the steam methane reforming and one for the carbonation 
reaction  with  calcium  oxide.  A  drag  model  proposed  by  Benyahia, 
Syamlal, and O’Brien [807] was used. The reactor is a cylinder with a 
diameter of 0.14 m and a height of 0.34 m. Information regarding the 
mesh used is not given in the publication. The results showed that higher 
restitution  coefficients  and  higher  gas  flow  rates  increased  the  bed 
height. Reactions were also affected by these two factors. The authors 
claimed  that  a  high  restitution  coefficient  and  a  lower  gas  flow  rate 
brought the reaction closer to equilibrium. 

At Aston University, Elewuwa and Makkawi produced two publica-
tions  [222,223]  investigating  hydrogen  production  via  the  steam 
reforming of dimethyl ether. In their first study, the authors described 
the model and validated it with experimental data from the literature. 
Four  reactions  were  integrated  into  the  model:  steam  reforming  of 
dimethyl ether, steam reforming of methanol, which is a product of the 
latter reaction, the methanol decomposition reaction, and the water-gas 
shift  reaction.  The  comparison  with  the  experiment  revealed  an 
over-prediction  of  carbon  monoxide,  carbon  dioxide,  and  methanol 
concentrations in the simulation. The authors explained that these issues 
were  because  dimethyl  ether  and  methanol  react  very  quickly  at  the 
bottom of the reactor and the water-gas shift takes place at the upper 
part of the reactor. In their second paper [223], a parametric study was 

Fig. 3.21. (a) schematic view of a fluidized-bed reactor, (b) CH4 and CO2 obtained from experiment and simulation, and (c) bubble diameter in the simulation and 
Darton’s correlation [1071] (reproduced from reference [598], with permission of ACS Publications). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930103F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

gas 

residence 

carried out using the developed model. Different reactor inlet configu-
rations, 
and 
times, 
steam-to-dimethyl-ether  ratios  were  evaluated.  The  best  results  were 
◦
achieved at 300 
C inlet temperature, 5.5 steam-to-dimethyl-ether molar 
ratio,  and  a  gas  residence  time  of  four  seconds.  The  dimethyl  ether 
conversion  and  hydrogen  molar  concentration  were  in  both  cases 
around 80 %. 

temperatures, 

inlet 

At  the University  of Zaragoza, in cooperation with the  Italian Na-
tional Agency for New Technologies, two papers have been published on 
the simulation of sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming. In the 
first  paper,  Herce  et  al.  [224]  investigated  the  process  in  a  bubbling 
fluidized  bed.  A  steam  methane  reforming  model  was  implemented 
including three reactions (two for the steam reforming of CH4 and one 
for  the  water-gas  shift  reaction)  and  a  fourth  reaction  describing  the 
carbon capture. A new subgrid drag model (“Modified Wang”) for coarse 
simulations  was  used.  The  model  developed  was  validated  against 
experimental data obtained from a laboratory-scale SE-SMR test rig. The 
three-dimensional geometry was simplified to a rectangular geometry 
with  a  width  of  0.1  m  and  a  height  of  1  m, discretized  with  a  4,000 
uniform  square-cell  mesh.  The  authors  concluded  that  the  simulation 
results agree well with the experimental data. In a second step, imple-
mentation at a semi-industrial scale was achieved using the same model. 
Therefore, the width and the height of the domain were increased (1 m x 
4 m) and both SE-SMR and SMR simulations were performed. The sen-
sitive analyses reveal that the temperature has the greatest impact on the 
process.  It  was  also  shown  that  sorbent  increases  the  production  of 
hydrogen. The fluctuation patterns obtained by the implemented drag 
model also seemed more reasonable. In their second publication [225], 
the  authors  used  the  same  model  and  combined  it  with  the  Taguchi 
Robust  Design  of  Experiments  (aiming  to  reduce  the  effects  of  input 
variation  on outputs  of  the  process  to  improve  quality)  to study  how 
different  sorbents,  pre-treatments  and  operation  parameters  influence 
the performance of the process. Other parameters such as temperature 
and  pressure  were  also  investigated.  They  showed  that  the  effect  of 
different  sorbents  is  small  compared  to  the  heat  and  transfer 
mechanisms. 

At  Chulalongkorn  University,  Phuakpunk  et  al.  [226]  investigated 
sorption-enhanced steam  reforming (SE-SRE)  for ethanol, focusing on 
the  design  and operating  conditions of  the  riser.  The 2k full  factorial 
design method (k=5) was applied to study how the inlet temperature, 
riser diameter, catalyst-to-sorbent ratio, solid flux, and inlet gas velocity 
influence the purity and flux of the hydrogen produced. Two different 
models were applied to the steam reforming, using a typical Ni-based 
catalyst  with  four  reactions  that  each  differs  slightly  and  have 
different kinetic data. The two-dimensional simulations were performed 
on a uniformly meshed grid with a size of 5 mm × 20 mm. The model 
was first validated against experiments obtained from a cold flow test 
rig. Second, the model was further validated against experimental data 
from  sorption-enhanced  methane  reforming  experiments 
in  a 
packed-bed reformer, since no data was available in the literature for 
SE-SMR in fluidized beds. The results showed that in descending order 
the catalyst-to-sorbent ratio, the solid flux, the riser diameter, the inlet 
temperature, and the gas velocity had highly significant effects on the 
hydrogen flux. In addition to the solid flux, the riser diameter, the gas 
velocity, and the catalyst-to-sorbent ratio also had a significant effect on 
the hydrogen purity. The best case was calculated using a riser diameter 
◦
of 0.2 m with an inlet temperature of 600 
C, a catalyst-to-sorbent ratio 
of 2.54, and a solid flux of 200 kg/m2s. This case showed a core-annular 
pattern of fast fluidization with a denser bed in the lower zone. 

3.1.3.3.3. Fluid catalytic cracking. Fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) is a 
well-known  process  in  modern  oil  refineries,  converting  high-boiling 
and  high-molecular-weight  hydrocarbons  into  lighter  hydrocarbons 
(gasoline,  olefins,  and  other  valuable  products).  The  FCC  process  is 
much  more  economical  than  other  conventional  technologies  such  as 
thermal cracking and steam cracking. It produces more gasoline with a 
higher  octane rating, by-product gases that have more carbon-carbon 

double  bonds  (i.e.  more olefins),  and  a  lower  yield  of  alkenes due  to 
the  lower  operating  temperatures  (alkenes  cause  instability  in  hydro-
carbon  fuels).  Therefore,  most  gasoline  and  an  important  fraction  of 
propylene  for  the  polymer  industry  are  currently  produced  using  the 
FCC process [1072]. The catalytic cracking process uses solid acid cat-
alysts such as silica-alumina and zeolites. The pre-heated feedstock is 
mixed with the hot catalyst material at the bottom of the riser. Due to the 
cracking  reaction,  gases  are  formed  and  the  mixture  of  catalyst  and 
feedstock moves up. At the top of the riser, the catalyst is separated from 
the mixture of catalyst, feedstock, and gases. A steam treatment strips 
the catalyst of remaining useful products. While the produced gases are 
further  refined  downstream,  the  catalyst,  which  includes  a  certain 
amount  of  fixed  carbon  (coke  that  is  deposited  during  the  cracking 
process), is transported to the regenerator. There, the coke is combusted 
and the released thermal energy is used to regenerate the catalyst so that 
it can be re-used continuously. Depending on the conditions, the tem-
C for the riser and between 
peratures range between 500 
650 

C for the regenerator. 

C and 550 

C and 760 

◦

◦

◦

◦

At  the  China  University  of  Petroleum,  Lan  et  al.  [227]  performed 
two-dimensional  simulations  of  a  commercial  two-stage  riser  FCC 
reactor. A 14-lump kinetics model describing the cracking reactions and 
a  dispersed  turbulence  model  were  used.  The  turbulent  gas-particle 
model  was  already  validated  in  another  study  [1073].  The  riser  con-
sists of two stages. The first stage has a height of 12.81 m and a diameter 
of 0.35 m, while the second stage is 10.24 m in height and has a width of 
0.305 m. To discretize the domain, 5,000 cells were used. The results 
were validated with experimental data, showing good agreement. The 
maximum absolute deviation was lower than 1 % for the product yield 
components. Based on the validated model, optimization studies were 
performed, revealing that the model is useful to improve the existing 
commercial FCC units. 

At the University of Louvain, a rotating fluidized bed in a static ge-
ometry  (RFB-SG)  for  fluid  catalytic  cracking  was  simulated  in  two 
publications. The RFB-SG has been developed recently. Here, the rota-
tional motion of the bed material is established by injecting the fluid-
ization gas into the fluidized bed tangentially through multiple slots (see 
Fig.  3.22).  The  main  advantage  of  this  system  is  the  flexibility  in 
selecting the fluidization gas flow rate, in addition to the excellent bed 
mixing,  the  uniform  bed  temperature,  and  the  improved  fluidization 
when using a polygonal instead of the cylindrical reactor because of the 
reduced solid shear with the wall [1074]. In a first study, Trujillo et al. 
[228]  investigated  different  factors  that  influence  the  new  process 
compared to conventional fluidized beds. These include, among others, 
the higher radial gas-solid slip velocities and the lower gas phase resi-
dence times. As the geometry consists of a 12-slot polygonal body with 
in  a 
equal  elements,  only  one  compartment  was  simulated 
two-dimensional  domain  using  periodic  boundary  conditions.  The  re-
actor’s inner and outer radii are 0.2 m and 0.6 m, respectively. The mesh 
size was equal to 0.2 mm and a 10-lump model was used to describe the 
cracking  reactions.  The  kinetic  model  was  verified  by  comparing  the 
results  to  1D  riser  simulations  from  the  literature.  At  conventional 
cracking  temperatures  and  using  a  conventional  catalyst,  the  results 
showed that the process could be intensified by an order of magnitude 
using the rotating fluidized bed. To further improve the process, a higher 
cracking temperature and a more active catalyst may be used. Simula-
tion results showed that by this means, the rotating fluidized bed can 
intensify the FCC process by a factor of up to 70. In their second study 
[229],  the  same  geometry  and  reaction  mechanism  was  used,  but  a 
model for catalyst deactivation due to coke formation was implemented. 
At  the  National  University  of  Sciences  &  Technology,  two  articles 
about the simulations of the fluid catalytic cracking in a FCC riser have 
been  published.  In  the  first  study,  Ahsan  [230]  carried  out 
two-dimensional simulations of an industrial riser using a 3-lump kinetic 
model. The Syamlal-O’Brian drag model was used and the (k = ∈) model 
was used to describe the turbulent motions. The riser has a height of 8.25 
m and a diameter of 0.2 m. Three grid sizes were tested and none of them 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930104F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3.22. (a)  static  rotating  fluidized  bed,  (b)  periodic  boundary  condition,  and  (c)  12-slot  polygonal  body  reactor  (reproduced  from  reference  [228],  with 
permission of ACS Publications). 

showed any major difference. A grid with around 20,000 cells was then 
selected for the simulation. Even though a very simplified model was 
used, it reasonably predicted the mass fraction profiles, phase temper-
ature profiles, and riser temperature profiles. Good agreement is shown 
between  the  simulation  results  and  experimental  data.  In  the  second 
publication [231], the author used the same computational domain but 
changed the kinetic model to a 4-lump reaction model. Comparison with 
experimental  data  produced  good  agreement  regarding  the  gasoline 
yield, light gases, coke, unconverted gas oil, and riser temperature. 

At  the  North  China  Electric  Power  University,  Chang  et  al.  [232] 
investigated  an  industrial  turbulent  fluidized-bed  FCC  regenerator 
under  various  operating  conditions.  The  reactor  has  three  different 
stages (d=2.1 m × h=7.92 m; d=2.7 m × h=3.5 m; d=2.96 m × h=5.86 
m).  A  reaction  mechanism  describing  the  regeneration  of  the  spent 
catalyst was introduced into the model. The drag force was modeled by 
the four-zone model by Li et al. [1075]. Experimental data was used to 
validate the model, showing a reasonable agreement. The relative error 
in the coke content of the regenerated catalyst was 5.1 %. Several in-
fluences on the process were investigated (e.g. the effect of the initial 
carbon  content,  reaction  pressure,  superficial  gas  velocity  and  spent 
catalyst circulation rate). The results showed that an increased operation 
pressure and superficial gas velocity accelerated the coke combustion 
reaction. It was also found that the entrance configuration of the reactor 
needs improvement, with a better gas-particle contact or a higher resi-
dence time to combust more coke under the actual operating conditions. 
At  Shanghai  Jiao  Tong  University,  Jiang  et  al.  [233]  performed 
two-dimensional simulations of an FCC riser under electrostatic condi-
tions. A 14-lump kinetic model was used to describe the chemical re-
actions,  along  with  a  first-principle  electrostatic  model  proposed  by 
Rokkam  et  al.  [252].  The riser  geometry has  a  height  of  14  m  and  a 
width/diameter  of  0.186  m  and  is  discretized  with  24,000  cells.  The 
drag force was described by the four-zone drag model proposed by Li 
et al. [1075]. The results showed that the electric potential is inhomo-
geneous  because  of  the  hydrodynamic  segregation.  The  electrostatics 
also had a significant influence on the particle distribution on the bot-
tom dense region of the FCC riser. The electrostatics were found to have 
a weak influence on the particle concentration, gas-phase temperature, 
and main product yields. 

At the King Mongkut’s University of Technology, North Bangkok and 
Kasetsart University, Khongprom et al. [234] investigated the up-scaling 
of  heavy  oil  catalytic  cracking  in  three  downer  reactors  (d=0.127 
m × h=5 m; d=0.381 m × h=15 m; d=0.762 m × h=30 m). A 4-lump 
kinetic  model was  implemented and  a modified  up-scaling parameter 
was  proposed  for  the  chemical  performance  similarity.  The  hydrody-
namics were validated for the smallest geometry. The reaction perfor-
mance  was  validated  by  comparing  the  results  to  ideal  reactors  (mix 
flow and plug flow). Different simulations were performed, showing that 

the  classic  dimensionless  group  (Gs /ρsUg) can  be  used  as  a  scaling 
parameter for the hydrodynamic similarity, with Gs  as the solid circu-
lating rate, ρs as the solid density, and Ug as the superficial gas velocity. 
Nevertheless,  for  the  chemical  performance  similarity,  the  scaling 
parameter has to be extended to (GsCAoZ(k1 + k2 + k3) /U2
)including 
g
the ratio of the chemical reaction and the gas residence time, where Z is 
the reactor height, (k1 + k2 + k3) are the reaction rate constant of heavy 
oil cracking and CAo stands for the mass concentration of the heavy oil 
under initial conditions. 

At  Purdue  University  Northwest,  Tang  et  al.  [235]  carried  out 
three-dimensional simulations of an industrial fluid catalytic cracking 
reactor  using  a  modified  drag  model.  Four  void  fraction  zones  were 
defined and a suitable drag force model was used for every zone. The P1 
radiation model was applied to describe the heat transfer due to radia-
tion.  The  three-dimensional  domain  consisted  of  nine  two-stage  cy-
clones,  two  levels  of  air  rings,  two  spent  catalyst  inlets,  and  two 
regenerated catalyst outlets. Two million cells were used to discretize 
the geometry, whose dimensions were not given. The implemented re-
action mechanism included four reactions, describing the combustion of 
C,  CO,  and  H2.  The  results  were  validated  with  experimental  data, 
showing good agreement for the pressure and temperature fields. The 
effect of oxygen enrichment on the catalyst reactivity was investigated 
and the results showed that the coke reduction rate can be improved 
from 90 % to 94.5 % with 5 % oxygen enrichment. 

Some studies use the two-fluid model to describe the gas and solid 
phases (catalyst particles) and model the gas oil droplets as individual 
particles. One example is the  study by Behjat et  al. [609] at  the Iran 
University of Science and Technology. In that study, a three-dimensional 
model of the FCC riser was developed using a six-lump kinetic model. 
Catalyst deactivation was also taken into account. The computational 
domain had a height of 11 m and a diameter of 0.14 m and was dis-
cretized  with  850,000  cells.  First,  the  continuous  phases  were  calcu-
lated,  and  secondly  the  liquid  droplets.  The  hydrodynamics  were 
validated  by  comparing  the  simulation  results  to  downsized  experi-
ments. The results revealed that the evaporation of gas oil droplets and 
the cracking reactions have a significant influence on the flow field and 
the temperature in the riser. The complete evaporation of the droplets 
was seen within the first 3.3 m of the oil spray injection. Another study 
using a similar model was published by Lopes et al. [279] at the Uni-
versity of Campinas. The authors studied the influence of the riser outlet 
design on the flow and thus process efficiency. to describe the catalytic 
cracking, a four-lump reaction model was used. The reactor, which was 
three-dimensionally modeled, had a height of 33 m and a diameter of 0.8 
m.  Three  different  outlet  configurations  were  tested,  which  can  be 
classified  into  abrupt  exits  and  smooth  exits.  A  significant  effect  was 
observed when using different riser outlets. The best results regarding 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930105F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the gasoline yield came from a T-shaped exit with a projected height of 
0.4 m. 

3.1.3.3.4. Ozone  decomposition. Although  ozone  is  toxic  above 
concentrations of 0.1 mg/m3, it can be found or generated in offices with 
photocopiers or laser printers, sterilizers, and aircraft cabins, causing a 
risk  to  human  or  animal  health.  Furthermore,  ozone  is  used  in  many 
chemical industries, meaning that the issue of ozone decomposition is of 
high relevance. Among other systems, fluidized beds can be employed to 
decompose ozone using environmentally friendly catalysts [1076]. As 
the  ozone  decomposition reaction  is  a  simple  first-order  reaction, the 
process of ozone decomposition has been studied numerically by many 
authors aiming to validate their models for further use in other appli-
cations. In some studies, ozone decomposition is also used as a repre-
sentative  reaction  to  study  mass  transfer  coefficients  or  Sherwood 
numbers. 

The  ozone  decomposition  reaction  is  described  by  the  following 

equation: 

2O3(g)→3O2(g).

(3.7) 

This is a first-order reaction and the ozone decomposition rate ro3 can 

be written as: 

ro3 = (cid:0) ko3co3,

(3.8)  

with the reaction rate constant ko3 and the molar concentration of ozone 
co3. 

At the King Mongkut’s University of Technology, Thonburi, Therd-
thianwong  et  al.  [610]  evaluated  the  catalytic  ozone  decomposition 
reaction  in  a  circulating fluidized  bed.  The influence  of  the solid  vis-
cosity on the hydrodynamics behavior was studied to improve the per-
formance  of  the  ozone  CFB  reactor.  The  calculations  were  performed 
with a 2D model with 1,100 cells, assuming isothermal conditions. Two 
different models were used to determine the solid viscosity: the constant 
solid viscosity coefficient model and the kinetic theory model. The nu-
merical results were compared to the data. The kinetic theory model, 
with  a  value  of  e=0.999,  was  found  to  agree  better  with  the  experi-
mental  data.  In  a  second  step,  the  authors  incorporated  an  ozone 
decomposition  rate  and  studied  the  effect  of  the  particle  density,  gas 
distributor design, and reactor configuration. They concluded that the 
performance of the ozone CFB reactor can be improved by increasing the 
particle density, using a non-uniform gas distributor, and adding baffles 
at the riser wall. 

At the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dong et al. [236,614] proposed 
three different methods for drag models with multi-scale mass transfer. 
The models’ validity was proven by simulating ozone decomposition in a 
CFB.  The  first  method  is  based  on  the  assumption  of  a  homogeneous 
distribution of gas and solids (Gidaspow). The second method used the 
EMMS  drag  scheme  for  hydrodynamics  and  mass  transfer.  The  third 
method used the EMMS model only to model the hydrodynamics and 
assumed that the ozone was uniformly distributed. The simulations were 
performed on a two-dimensional domain with a width of 0.254 m and a 
height of 10.85 m. A uniformly spaced grid size (8.4 mm × 36 mm) was 
used  to  discretize  the  two-dimensional  domain.  A  comparison  of  the 
experimental  data  and  simulation  results  showed  deviations  for  all 
suggested  models.  Nevertheless, 
that 
EMMS-based mass transfer has to be taken into consideration in the CFB 
simulations. 

the  authors  concluded 

At  Chulalongkorn  University,  several  studies  have  been  published 
investigating  the  mass  transfer  coefficient  and  Sherwood  number  in 
fluidized beds with ozone decomposition. For example, Chalermsinsu-
wan et al. [237,238] developed a CFD model including the EMMS model 
and  an  ozone  decomposition  reaction.  In  their  first  study  [237],  the 
authors carried out hydrodynamic studies without reactions to validate 
the EMMS drag model. A mesh with around 5,500 cells was generated 
for the riser, with a height of 14.2 m and a diameter of 0.2 m. The nu-
merical  results  were  compared  with  the  Gidaspow  drag  model  and 

experimental  data.  The  EMMS  model  reproduced  the  measured  data 
more conclusively than the Gidaspow model (see for example Fig. 3.64 
and  Fig.  3.79).  Using  the  radial  dispersion  coefficient  and  the  radial 
oscillating  velocity,  the  particle  cluster  diameters  and  thus  the  Sher-
wood number and mass transfer coefficient were determined. The au-
thors  concluded  that  the  value  of  the  Sherwood  number  was  in 
agreement with experimental data for the fluidization of fine particles. 
The authors made the hypothesis that the reason for the low Sherwood 
number  when  small  particles  (Geldart  group  A)  were  fluidized  is  the 
formation of clusters. In their second study [238], the authors included 
an ozone decomposition reaction using four different reaction rates, as 
in  their  previous  model.  It  was  found  that  the  calculated  Sherwood 
number and mass transfer  coefficient were in agreement with experi-
mental data from the literature. The results showed that the Sherwood 
number was high near the inlet section and decreased to a constant value 
with the height of the reactor. Similarly to the first study, the simulation 
predicted  lower  Sherwood  number  values.  The  authors  provided  two 
possible explanations: 1) the particle cluster formation as stated in the 
first part of the study or 2) the neglecting of the diffusional resistance to 
the particle. In another study, Prajongkan et al. [239] performed sim-
ulations based on the hydrodynamic experiment by Cao and Weinstein 
[1077].  Although  the  experiment  included  a  full-loop  CFB  system 
(containing a riser, a cyclone, a downer, and a return system), only the 
downer  was  calculated  using  a  two-dimensional  domain  with  6,000 
cells. The downer has a diameter of 0.127 m and a length of 5 m. As 
mentioned in the studies above, the aim of this work was to compute the 
mass transfer coefficients and Sherwood numbers. Again, a representa-
tive  reaction  ozone decomposition was  selected,  but five  different re-
action rate constants found in the literature were used. In contrast to the 
two studies above, only the Gidaspow drag model was applied. Valida-
tion was carried out, comparing the solid mass flux and solid volume 
fraction of the simulation and experiment. The Sherwood number was 
found  to  fall  to  minimum  values  as  the  reaction  rate  constants  and 
system  height  increased.  In  addition,  the  particle  cluster  formation 
decreased  the  Sherwood  number  values  compared  to  the  Sherwood 
number values for single particles. In a further study, Chalermsinsuwan 
and  Piumsomboon  [240]  studied  the  mass  transfer  coefficient  and 
Sherwood  number  of  FCC  particles.  The  two-  and  three-dimensional 
simulations in that study used an additive diffusional and chemical re-
action resistance concept. To describe the drag in the bubbling fluidized 
bed, a modified EMMS scheme was applied. Two different reaction rate 
constants were also used to study how they influenced the Sherwood 
number and mass transfer coefficient. The three-dimensional domains 
had a width of 0.3 m and a height of 1.28 m, while the two-dimensional 
domain had a thickness of 0.005 m. For the two-dimensional domain, 4, 
400 cells were used and in the three-dimensional domain 10 cells were 
added in the third dimension. The results showed that the mass transfer 
coefficient in the three-dimensional simulation is higher in y direction 
than in x direction. Comparing the two- and three-dimensional simula-
tions, comparable values were found for the Sherwood number in the 
x-direction. The authors, therefore, concluded that simulation is possible 
in a two-dimensional domain when the system is symmetrical. The re-
sults also revealed that the Sherwood number values are higher near the 
inlet of the reactor and are constant with increasing height. 

At  Western  University,  Kong  et  al.  [241]  modeled  the  ozone 
decomposition  in  a  CFB  and  validated  the  results  with  experimental 
data. The Syamlal-O’Brien drag model was used and the reaction was 
defined as a first-order reaction, assuming the particles were spherical. 
The  geometry  of  the  two-dimensional  domain  had  a  value  of  10 
m × 0.0381 m. A grid independence study was carried out, showing that 
a grid number of around 12,000 cells will be sufficient for the simula-
tion.  The  results  were  compared  with  experimental  data  and  the 
normalized  ozone  decompositions  along  with  the  radial  directions  at 
different heights. For higher superficial gas velocities, good agreement 
between  the  simulation  and  experiment  was  reached,  while  the  de-
viations  were  higher  for  lower  superficial  gas  velocities.  The  authors 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930106F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

reported that the ozone concentration depends on the core-annulus solid 
distribution, the superficial gas velocity, the solids circulation rate, and 
the particle size. 

At  Tianjin  University,  Li  et  al.  [242]  carried  out  two-dimensional 
simulations  of  a  downer  and  used  their  model  to  deliver  closure  for 
the turbulent mass transfer equation, which was later used to calculate 
fluidized-bed  combustion  [182,183].  A  mesh  with  29,000  cells  was 
generated  and  the  ozone  decomposition  reaction  was  modeled  as  a 
first-order reaction. A dispersed turbulence model was used and three 
simulations were performed and validated with experimental data. The 
authors  claimed  that  satisfactory  agreement  was  found  between  the 
simulations and experiments in terms of the solid volume fraction and 
ozone concentration (see Fig. 3.23). The simulations also showed that 
the  turbulent  mass  diffusivity  and  the  turbulent  Schmidt  number  are 
unevenly  distributed.  According  to  the  authors,  the  use  of  a  constant 
Schmidt number - the usual practice in previous works - is not a valid 
concern. 

three-dimensional case, while the grid resolution was 24,000 cells in the 
two-dimensional case. The EMMS model was selected to calculate the 
drag force. The results showed that the simulated axial profiles of solids 
volume  fractions  in  two-  and  three-dimensional  simulations  agree 
relatively well with measurements (see Fig. 3.24). Sherwood numbers 
also seemed to be local values in the fluidized bed, as they changed with 
the position in the reactor. As the conventional definition of Sherwood 
number does not take into account the diffusional resistance, which is 
significant  when  clusters  are  formed,  the  authors  concluded  that  the 
Sherwood number for small particles is deceptive (it shows the direct 
relation with the particle size and not the cluster size). 

3.1.3.3.5. Methanol-to-olefins 

process. The  methanol-to-olefins 
(MTO)  process  is  used  to  produce  a  mixture  of  light  olefins  such  as 
ethylene and propylene from methanol. The ratio of C2 to C3 olefins can 
be  varied  according  to  the  process  conditions.  These  light  olefins  are 
mostly used in a downstream process (e.g. polymerization, oxidation, 
and  other  reactions)  to  generate  polyolefins,  which  are  the  building 

Fig. 3.23. (a) geometry of the computational domain, and (b) axial profiles of ozone concentrations and solid volume fraction (simulations: simplified model, with 
turbulent Schmidt number Sct= 1 and the present model and experiment: the superficial velocity of the gas phase Ug= 2 and the particle circulation rate Gs= 100) 
(reproduced from reference [242], with permission of Elsevier). 

At  the  Illinois  Institute  of  Technology,  Kashyap  and  Gidaspow 
[1078] carried out experiments and two- and three-dimensional simu-
lations  of  catalyzed  fluid  cracking  catalyst  particles  with  an  ozone 
decomposition  reaction.  The  mass  transfer  coefficient,  the  Sherwood 
number, and the reaction rate were defined from thirteen experiments, 
and  simulations  were  performed  accordingly.  The  computational 
domain  had  a  width  of  0.3048  m  and  a  height  of  1.283  m.  For  the 
three-dimensional case, a depth of 0.051 m was studied. Two grid res-
olutions  of  35,000  and  10,000  cells  were  generated  for  the 

blocks  of  a  wide  range  of  products,  such  as  plastics.  Conventionally, 
naphtha thermal cracking has been the main process for propylene and 
ethylene production. The increase in the oil prices and the change to 
ethylene crackers, which are more economical than naphtha crackers, 
has  led  to  a  shortage  of  propylene.  The  MTO  process  is  a  promising 
technology for producing light olefins due to its lower CO2 emission and 
its  higher  selectivity  toward  higher  yields  of  propylene  [1079,1080]. 
The conversion of methanol into light olefins is catalyzed by zeolites, 
which  are  the  only  catalysts  used  commercially.  Depending  on  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930107F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3.24. Axial  variations  of  ozone  concentrations:  comparison  between  experiments  (cases  A  and  C),  and  simulations  (different  grid  sizes)  (reproduced  from 
reference [1078], with permission of John Wiley and Sons). 

catalysts used, the catalytic reaction is carried out in fixed or fluidized 
beds 

At  the  North  China  Electric  Power  University,  Chang  et  al.  [243] 
investigated the hydrodynamics and kinetic reactions for the methanol 
conversion in a MTO reactor. Here, the influences of different operating 
parameters on the product yield and ethylene selectivity were evaluated. 
A  hexahedral  mesh  with  a  size  of  2  mm  was  used  to  discretize  the 
three-dimensional domain, which had a height of 10 m and a diameter of 
0.2  m.  The  simplified  kinetic  reaction  scheme  consisted  of  seven  re-
actions,  describing  how  paraffin  formed  from  methanol.  The  Syamla-
l-O’Brien drag model was applied to calculate the drag force. The model 
was verified with data from the literature, showing sufficient agreement. 
The  authors  concluded  that  the  initial  methanol  content  does  not 
significantly  affect  the  methanol  conversion  with  an  initial  methanol 
content  of  more  than  70  %wt.  Higher  temperatures  increased  the 
the 
methanol 
ethylene-to-propane ratio. In addition, the optimum reaction pressure 
was found to be 1.5 × 105 Pa and the optimum gas velocity was between 
2.5 and 3 m/s. 

conversion, 

selectivity, 

ethylene 

and 

the 

At Xiamen University and Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Chen et al. 
[244] coupled the discrete-particle model and the two-fluid model to 
predict  how  intra-particle  transfer  (i.e.  the  pores  in  the  particles) 
influenced  the  flow  field.  The  discrete-particle  model  defined  the 
inter-particle  molecular  diffusion  and  the  reaction  kinetics,  while  the 
two-fluid model described the gas-solid flow. The authors reported that 
the  inter-particle  molecular  diffusion  has  to  be  taken  into  account 
whenever the reactions involved are exothermic or the influence of the 
diffusion resistance cannot be neglected. For the simulation, a common 
diameter-changing fluidized-bed reactor was selected that had already 
been studied in the literature. A two-dimensional domain with a height 
of 480 mm and a diameter at the bottom of 30 mm was generated and 
meshed  with  2,400  cells.  Experimental  data  was  used  to  validate  the 
model, showing a maximum relative error of 5.9 % for the main prod-
ucts.  However,  higher  errors  were  found  for  the  by-product.  The 
intra-particle transfer resistance was found to affect the distribution of 
species along the gas flow direction but had a negligible influence on the 
species fractions at the outlet of the reactor. 

At the Chinese Academy of Sciences, three simulation works on the 
MTO fluidized-bed system have been published. In the first publication, 
Lu et al. [245] integrated a chemical reaction engineering model into the 

simulation and used the steady-state distribution of coke content as the 
initialization  condition  to  speed  up  the  simulation.  To  that  end,  a 
continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) model was used that initialized 
the  distribution  of  the  reactants  and  products  with  their  values  at 
steady-state for the pilot-scale reactor. In reality, it takes tens of minutes 
or even hours to reach the desired level of coke content on the catalysts, 
which is not feasible for simulation with the computing power available 
today. The pilot-scale reactor has an inner diameter of 0.261 m and a 
height of 6.247 m (reaction zone height is 1.347 m). The EMMS model 
was applied, combined with a lumped reaction kinetic model describing 
seven reactions. The domain was discretized with around 350,000 cells. 
The results showed that a steady-state was reached after 40 s, reflecting 
the typical regime of a bubbling fluidized bed. The authors concluded 
that the CFD simulations predicted similar product concentrations as in 
the continuous stirred tank reactor model, but the methanol conversion 
was predicted better. In a second publication, Lu et al. [246] investi-
gated the scale-up of the MTO pilot-scale reactor. Four different geom-
etries (micro-scale, pilot-scale, demo-scale, and commercial-scale) were 
simulated  using  the  two-fluid  model  and  the  EMMS  drag  model.  The 
same approach used in [245] was followed to describe the reactions. The 
domains  were  discretized  with  around  9,200,  350,000,  370,000  and 
530,000 cells, respectively. Fig. 3.25 shows a comparison between the 
simulated and measured gas mass fractions. The numerical results agree 
well  for  the  micro-scale  and  pilot-scale  reactors  but  get  worse  as  the 
reactor size increases. One possible reason is the different fluidization 
regimes in different reactors. Another reason could be the different coke 
distribution in the larger reactors due to the complex configuration of 
the gas distributor. At this juncture it should be mentioned, as stated 
above, that a mean coke content predicted by the CSTR model was set as 
an initial value in these simulations, to speed them up. In a third pub-
lication, Zhang et al. [247] extended the CSTR model to take into ac-
count the residence time, to predict the mean value and the distribution 
of coke content. In contrast to the previous simulations, the solid phase 
was treated as a mixture of a series of species with different coke con-
tents. This was done to differentiate the catalyst particles from various 
coke  contents.  A  two-dimensional  domain  of  the  demo-scale  reactor, 
presented  in  [245],  was  generated  and  meshed  with  around  85,000 
cells. It was found that using the extended CSTR model does not affect 
the hydrodynamic predictions, but the prediction of reaction quantities 
improves considerably. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930108F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.25. Mass fractions obtained from CFD simulations and experiments (mass fractions were normalized after removing H2O and CO2) (reproduced from reference 
[246], with permission of Elsevier). 

In  another  study,  Zhao  et  al.  [248]  performed  simulations  of  a 
large-scale MTO fluidized-bed reactor. A reaction mechanism containing 
ten  reactions  was  implemented  and  the  Gidaspow  and  EMMS  drag 
models were used. The reactor, which has a height of 8.5 m, is divided 
into three zones with different diameters (0.22 m at the bottom, 1 m in 
the middle, and 1.95 m at the top). The three-dimensional domain has 
meshed with hexahedrons (0.05 m at the top and 0.02 m at the bottom). 
In  the  first  step,  simulations  were  carried  out  without  reactions  to 
evaluate the performance of the drag models, and in the second step, the 
focus was placed mainly on the reaction kinetics. The results revealed 
that  the  EMMS  model, in  contrast to  the  Gidaspow model,  predicts  a 
stable dense bed.  The reactive results were compared with data from 
experiments, showing deviations. The selectivity of ethylene and pro-
pylene were lower than in the experiments, but the selectivity of CO2 
was higher. Nevertheless, the results matched the observations in terms 
of quality. The author explained that the differences in the results were 
due to the lack of reaction kinetics in the commercial catalysts used and 
to the coke-in-catalyst effect, which not taken into account. 

3.1.3.3.6. Coating  and  granulation. The main physical mechanisms 
that  take  place  in  the  coating  process  are  similar  to  the  granulation 
process (wetting, drying, and growth). The only difference between the 
two  processes  is  that  the  increase  in  the  particle  size  in  the  coating 
process  is  considerably  lower  than  in  the  granulation  process.  In  the 
coating  process,  the  solid  particles  are  wetted  with  a  solution  that  is 
sprayed  onto  the  solid  surfaces.  This  is  then  dried  so  that  the  solids’ 
physical properties are improved by the coating material. In the gran-
ulation process, the size of solid particles is increased (i.e. creating ag-
gregates from powders). The formation of agglomerates in the coating 
process  is  undesirable.  Granulation  and  coating  processes  using 
fluidized-bed systems are well-known technologies in energy, food, and 
the  chemical  and  pharmaceutical  industries.  They  provide  suitable 
processing conditions by increasing the density and size of the particles 

as  well  as  improving  the  quality  of  the  final  products,  enhancing  the 
mechanical  resistance  of  the  particles,  and  protecting  them  from 
external  physical  agents  such  as  moisture,  excessive  heat,  and  light 
exposure.  However,  operating  challenges  (e.g.  the  agglomeration  of 
particles, changes in the heat, and mass transfer coefficients) influence 
the  stability  of  fluidization  and  can  lead  in  worst  cases  to  the  total 
collapse of the bed (de-fluidization occurs) [1081]. Both processes are 
very complex. Experimental and numerical studies on the monitoring 
and control of granulation and coating processes in fluidized beds can be 
found  in  the  literature.  Here,  these  studies  will  be  discussed  briefly 
together with drying and wetting processes, while detailed information 
on  the  growth  process  (agglomeration  process)  is  reported  in  the 
Hard-sphere model section. 

Drying  is  a  mass  transfer  process  through,  which  water  or  other 
liquid  is  removed  from  solids  by  evaporation.  The  drying  process  in-
volves the simultaneous application of a heat source for evaporation and 
a  medium  for  the  removal  of  the  moisture  produced  by  the  process. 
Based on the operating pressure, the drying process can be classified into 
three categories: 1) drying under atmospheric pressure, where heated 
air is supplied through the solids and water vapour is removed with the 
air,  (2)  vacuum  drying,  where  the  evaporation  of  water  takes  place 
rapidly  at  vacuum  pressures,  and  (3)  freeze-drying,  in  which  water 
vapour  is  sublimed  off  from  the  frozen  solid  particles.  In  contrast  to 
atmospheric pressure drying, vacuum-drying and freeze-drying involve 
higher operating costs and fixed costs. Fluidized-bed dryers (FBDs) are a 
well-known means of drying wet solid particles. The excellent heat and 
mass transfer in FBDs ensure high thermal efficiency and cost-effective, 
time-saving production. FBDs reduce the drying time by approximately 
twenty  times  compared  to  time-consuming  drying  ovens.  The  major 
disadvantages are the pressure drop, erosion of the inner surfaces, and 
the attrition  of the feed. Fluidized-bed  dryers are a  key step in many 
industrial  applications  (for  drying  raw  materials,  intermediates,  and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930109F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

finished products), e.g. in powder processing or the pharmaceutical and 
food industries. 

Wetting  describes  the  liquid’s  ability  to  maintain  contact  with  a 
surface solid, forming high viscosity and capillary-binding mechanisms 
(see the Adhesive forces with physical contact section). If a sufficient 
liquid content is present in a gas-solid flow, the interface surfaces of the 
particles will be wetted with liquid films due to the adsorption process. 
When the distance between two particles falls below a critical distance, a 
liquid  bridge  is  then  built,  resulting  in  both  adhesive  and  cohesive 
forces. While the adhesive force identifies the attractive force between 
two  particles  of  different  materials,  the  cohesive  force  refers  to  the 
attractive  forces  between  two  particles  of  the  same  substance.  The 
wettability (degree of wetting) is defined by the balance between the 
adhesive  and  cohesive  forces.  The  wetting  process  is  a  key  step  in 
fluidized-bed coating and granulation processes. First, the water-based 
binder  solution  is  sprayed  onto  the  particle  surfaces  to  increase  the 
adhesion forces so that agglomerates can be formed. Next, the water and 
other solvents are removed from the particles through a drying process 
to provide a sufficient coverage layer [1082]. In the case of granulation, 
the  solidification  process  occurs  after  the  drying  process,  resulting  in 
agglomerates (see Fig. 3.45). 

At  the  Chalmers  University  of  Technology,  Karlsson  et  al.  [249] 
simulated the Wurster bed coater using the two-fluid model. The wetting 
and drying processes were modeled at a laboratory scale and validated 
with  experimental  data.  The  test  rig  has  a  cylindrical  shape  and  is 
conical at the bottom. The cylindrical part has a height of 0.4 m and a 
diameter of 0.25 m, while the conical part has a height of 0.32 m with a 
diameter of 0.1 m at the bottom. The Wurster tube has a diameter of 0.5 
m and a height of 0.6 m. Two-dimensional simulations were performed, 
assuming an axi-symmetric flow. The mesh consisted of 841 cells. The 
moisture was assumed to be injected in a specified volume at the jet inlet 
and  the  continuous  injection  of  liquid  through  a  spray  nozzle  was 
modeled by specifying the moisture content for the solid phase when 
passing  a  region  close  to  the  liquid  inlet.  The  drying  model  obtained 
from the literature was applied to particles located outside of the wetting 
section.  The  authors  concluded  that  the  developed  model  is  in  good 
agreement  with  experimental  observations  regarding  the  fountain 
height of particles and the air temperature. Different spray rates, tem-
peratures, and moisture contents were investigated, showing that higher 
spray rates can result in lower temperatures due to higher evaporation 
rates. Furthermore, it was found that higher temperatures lead to faster 
particle drying. 

At  Shiraz  University,  Ranjbaran  and  Zare  [250]  modeled  the 
microwave-assisted fluidized-bed drying of moist particles and validated 
their  results  against  measurements.  A  model  for  the  drying  rate  was 
introduced into the model describing soybean drying. The drying model 
consists  of  a  source  term  for  the  gas  phase  that  describes  moisture 
removal  from  the  particle  surface,  the  thermal  energy  produced  by 
evaporation  of  the  moisture,  and  heat  generation  due  to  microwaves 
interacting  with  the  solid  particles.  A  two-dimensional  asymmetrical 
space was used for the simulations. This assumption was made since the 
values are symmetrical around the axis of the cylindrical bed. The Pyrex 
column that was used in the experiment has a height of 25 cm and a 
diameter of 6 cm. The mesh consisted of 9,200 cells and the Gidaspow 
drag model was applied. The results showed that the model can repro-
duce the experimental measurement. The maximum relative deviation 
was found for the temperature, with a value of less than 10 %. 

At the State University of Maring´a, da Silva et al. [442] also inves-
tigated  the  soybean  drying  process  in  a  fluidized-bed  dryer.  The  nu-
merical  results  obtained  with  the  model  were  validated  against 
experimental data. The drying kinetics were determined experimentally, 

and  the  influence  of  different  conditions  on  the  drying  process  was 
investigated. The computational domain was two-dimensional, with a 
height of 20 cm and a width of 4.435 m. Different homogeneous drag 
models were used, and different cases were simulated, varying the bed 
height, superficial air velocity, and fluidizing agent temperature (air). 
The results revealed that only the temperature has a significant influ-
ence on  the drying process since  thermal  equilibrium can be reached 
quickly. The drag model of Syamlal and O’Brien shows the best agree-
ment  with  experimental  data.  It  was  concluded  that  the  model  can 
predict the soybean drying process satisfactorily. 

At the Illinois Institute of Technology, Jang and Arastoopour [251] 
simulated three different bubbling fluidized-bed dryers (lab-scale, kilo 
scale, and 10-kilo scale) for the pharmaceutical drying of solids. A model 
for moisture transport was introduced into the two-dimensional model 
and the results were validated against the measurement. The Syamla-
l-O’Brien drag model was used to determine the drag force between the 
phases. The lab-scale geometry had a conical part at the bottom and a 
cylindrical part at the top, while the other two geometries were conical. 
The two-dimensional domain for the lab-scale had a height of 0.46 m 
and a width of 0.095 m at the top, and a width of 0.04 m at the bottom. 
The kilo-scale domain had a height of 0.56 m and a width of 0.3 m at the 
top and 0.07 m at the bottom. The 10-kilo scale had a height of 0.58 m 
and a width of 0.45 m at the height and 0.305 m at the bottom. Assuming 
symmetrical flow, only half of the domains were taken into consider-
ation.  These  were  discretized  with  2,550,  18,180  and  20,188  cells, 
respectively.  The  validation  showed  that  the  results  agreed  well  with 
experimental data. The authors concluded that the model is a useful tool 
for scale-up and design studies of pharmaceutical processes. 

3.1.3.3.7. Electric  and  magnetic. The  behavior  of  a  gas-solid  fluid-
ized bed is determined by the balance of forces acting on the particles (e. 
g. gravitational forces, gas-particle forces, and contact forces between 
particles). The application of external fields (such as magnetic or electric 
fields)  will  significantly  influence  fluidization.  The  effect,  which  the 
applied external field has on the fluidized beds depends on the intensity 
and  the orientation of  the field lines (see the  Volume forces section). 
Furthermore, the electrostatic effect that occurs between the oppositely 
charged particles has a great influence on the fluidization process. While 
particles with opposite charges attract one other, those with identical 
polarity are mutually repulsive. During the fluidization, particle-particle 
and particle-wall collisions lead to the generation of electric charges that 
result in the agglomeration of particles, the adhesion of solid particle 
layers to the walls, or even a change into a channelling bed (an unde-
sirable  phenomenon  that  occurs  when  relatively  porous  passages 
develop in the bed due to non-uniformities) [1083,1084]. Nevertheless, 
the  change  in  fluidization  properties  due  to  electric,  electrostatic, 
magnetic effects can also be used to stabilize the fluidization [1085]. In 
addition, it is also possible to use mechanical energy in the form of vi-
bration to counteract Van der Waals forces and to make certain particles 
fluidizable  at  all  [1086–1088].  A  two-fluid  simulation  of  a  vibrating 
fluidized bed is rarely carried out in the literature (see Table 3.4). 

At the Technical University of Darmstadt, Alobaid and Epple [646] 
evaluated  a  test  rig  after  a  fluidization  experiment  pairing  glass  and 
Plexiglas, determining that there were considerable electrostatic charges 
on the particles. Due to the continued particle-particle/wall collisions, 
the  particles’  electrostatic  charges  increase  gradually.  The  authors 
concluded that their CFD-DEM model is not able to simulate the cluster 
build-up when the adhesive forces, particularly the electrostatic force, 
are neglected. Therefore, the particles are distributed more evenly in the 
computational domain. It was found that for the combination of glass 
(particles)  and  Plexiglas  (wall),  the  electrostatic  force  is  a  crucial 
parameter. As a result, the tensile forces become effective, leading to 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930110F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.4 
Overview of other applications of the two-fluid model.  

Studies 

Chemical vapor deposition 

[443]  

Main observations 

• Four kinetic models for the fluidized-bed chemical vapor deposition process from 
silane were introduced into a 3D MFIX model and two hydrodynamic models were 
tested  

• Si decomposition mainly takes place in the dense bed phase and the unsaturated 

species silylene forms in bubbles and slugs  

• Validation with experimental results showed that homogeneous and heterogeneous 
chemistries derived by Coltrin, Buss, and Furusawa fitted best with experimental 
results 

[563] 

• A two-dimensional multi-scale model was developed describing the growth of sil-

icon particles  

• A population balance model is used to calculate the growth and aggregation of 

[134]  

[259] 

Fluidized-bed melt granulation 

[260]  

Oxidative coupling 

[261]   

[611]  

particles  

• Validation with experimental results was carried out  
• The results showed that the particle diameter at the exit is dependent not only on 

the void fraction but also on the silicon seed flow rate, inlet flow rates, and 
temperatures 

• Three-dimensional simulations of silicon-CVD particle growth were carried out in a 
fluidized-bed reactor, taking into consideration surface deposition, cluster scav-
enging, aggregation, and wall deposition  

• The results were validated against experimental results and the data were found to 
agree when silane surface deposition and cluster scavenging are incorporated into 
the model  

• The results indicate that the scavenging effect was responsible for particle growth 
• A three-dimensional simulation of the silane-derived silicon chemical vapor depo-

sition growth was carried out, including a population balance model  

• A reaction model for silane gaseous decomposition (homogeneous reaction) and 
silane pyrolysis (heterogeneous reaction) was introduced into the model. Two 
different homogeneous and heterogeneous models were compared  

• According to the authors, the most reasonable results were achieved by combining 

the homogeneous model by [1090] and the heterogeneous model by [1091] 
• A two-dimensional simulation of fluidized-bed spray granulation was performed, 

discussing the rate of various microscopic events  

• The granule-granule collision rate was found to fall approximately within the range 

of 10-2-10-3 s  

• The droplet-granule collision rate was found to be much faster, slowing rapidly at 

an increasing distance from the spray nozzle tip. 

• Three-dimensional simulations of several cases were performed investigating the 
relevance of the hydrodynamics, reactor geometry, and feeding policy on the 
oxidative coupling of methane.  

• The results showed that the traditional fluidized-bed reactor design for oxidative 
coupled fluidized-bed reactors could be improved by varying the reactor geometry 
and changing the oxygen feeding policy. 

• Two-dimensional modeling of oxidative coupling was carried out, investigating 
how the operating conditions and feed characteristics affected the performance.  
• Validation showed that the overall predicted selectivity toward ethylene and ethane 

and methane conversion was in agreement with experimental data.  

◦
• The results showed a selectivity peaking for C2 at a temperature of around 800 

C. 

An increasing pressure decreased the C2 selectivity. 

Vibrating fluidized beds 

[262]  

• Two-dimensional simulations of vibrating fluidized beds were performed using a 

Hydrogenation/dehydrogenation 

[599]  

new methodology to express the governing equations.  

• Validation with experimental results revealed that the model is capable of 

describing the bubble behavior in vibrating fluidized beds.  

• Some deviations were found when comparing the mean vertical velocity of bubbles. 
• Two-dimensional simulations were performed of porous cracking catalyst particles 

fluidized by a mixture of ethylene and hydrogen.  

• The model described the flow behavior and the heat transfer qualitatively well.  
• Deviations up to 20 % were found between the experimental and numerical results 

regarding the variation of conversion with gas velocity. 

[263]  

• A coupled model based on the iterative approach was developed to describe the 

catalytic hydrogenation of dimethyl oxalate.  

• The results indicate that the intra-particle transfer resistance rises with an increase 
in particle size and that species distributions become more even as the catalyst size 
decreases. 

[264]  

• Three different geometries for the hydrogenation of dimethyl oxalate (packed bed, 

two-stage fluidized bed, circulating fluidized bed) were simulated in a two- 
dimensional domain.  

• The packed-bed reactor simulation was validated. 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930111F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.4 (continued ) 

Studies 

Main observations  

• The authors concluded that temperature and component distributions were more 
uniform in the two-stage fluidized bed and circulating fluidized bed than in the 
packed bed.   

[265]  

• An experimental setup was created and simulations were carried out for a light- 

alkane (propane, iso-butane, n-butane) dehydrogenation circulating fluidized-bed 
reactor.  

• Optimum conditions for the reaction were found in the experiments.  
• The three-dimensional CFD model was validated using some of the experimental 

data, showing good agreement. 

Methanation 

[374]  

• The hydrodynamics and kinetic reactions in a fluidized-bed methanation reactor 

were modeled in two- and three-dimensional domains.  

• The results were validated against experimental data from the literature, showing 

good agreement.  

• The methane concentration was increased with a higher inventory and steam was 

added into the feedstock with low H2/CO ratios. 

[266]  

• Two- and three-dimensional simulations of a multi-scale (local-structure-dependent 

drag model) CFD model were performed.  

• The results were validated with a series of experimental data.  
• The results showed that the assumption of an isothermal flow is valid as the results 

are almost coincident with those obtained by solving the energy equations. 

Pulsating flow 

[267]  

• Two-dimensional simulations were performed of FCC cold-flow and industrial-scale 

Vaporization 

[268]  

FCC risers with a pulsating flow.  

• The results were validated using published experimental data.  
• High-amplitude and low-frequency pulses were shown to increase the conversion. 
• Two-dimensional simulations of a gas-liquid-solid polyethylene fluidized-bed 

reactor were performed.  

• The model was validated with industrial data, comparing the temperature profiles 

of the simulation and experiment.  

• A liquid vaporization model scheme was included, including a heat transfer model, 

droplet vaporization model, and population balance model. 

• The results showed that higher condensed-liquid contents led to higher bed tem-

perature gradients at the bottom and that the temperature decreased. 

Fischer-Tropsch synthesis 

[444] 

• A three-dimensional model was developed for Fischer-Tropsch synthesis in a flu-

Crystallization 

[269]  

idized bed.  

• The results were validated against experimental results gained using a fixed-bed 

reactor.  

• The results showed that the reaction temperature had the highest influence on the 

process. 

• A numerical model for struvite crystallization was developed.  
• The flow field and crystal size distribution were obtained simultaneously using PBE.  
• The results were validated with experimental data and were in good agreement.  
• The established model could be used to evaluate the performance and optimize the 

geometry of struvite crystallization. 

Hydrogen separation process in a fluidized-bed membrane reactor 

[612]  

• A three-dimensional simulation was performed of the hydrogen separation process 

in a fluidized-bed membrane reactor.  

• The results were validated with data from the literature.  
• It was found that a change of eccentric distances could weaken the resistance of 

concentration polarization layers and enhance the degree of hydrogen separation. It 
was also shown that the concentration polarization in a fluidized-bed reactor with 
internal membranes is weaker compared to an external membrane reactor. 

Fluidized-bed roaster 

[270]  

• A three-dimensional model of an industrial-scale continuous fluidized-bed roaster 

Ironmaking blast furnace 

was developed.  

• The model was validated with experimental plant data.  
• The model showed that the sulfide-sulfur content was 0.4 % when the O2 content of 

[985]  

• A three-dimensional model simulating a 5000 m3 commercial ironmaking blast 

the inlet air was increased to 25 %. 

furnace with 40 tuyeres was developed  

• The results show that layered cohesive zone and raceways significantly influence 
the spatial distributions of the flow and temperature of the gas and liquid phases  

significant  damping  of  the  particle  collisions  and  disturbances.  This 
stabilizing  effect  causes  the  early  achievement  of  a  quasi-steady  flow 
state. 

At the Iowa State University, Rokkam et al. [252,253] developed a 
first-principle electrostatic model to understand how electrostatics af-
fects  the  bulk  polymer,  polymer  fines,  and  catalyst  particles.  Every 
particle in this model had a fixed charge value independently of its size. 
A Poisson equation for the electric potential was formulated and coupled 
with  the  two-fluid  model.  First,  the  two-fluid  equations  were  solved. 

Second,  the  Poisson  equation  was  used  to  obtain  the  gradient  of  the 
electric potential. Third, the electrostatic force was obtained by solving 
the Lorentz force equation using the gradient of the electric potential. 
Fourth and finally, an electrostatic force was added to each of the solid 
phase  momentum  equations.  The  gas-solid  interaction  was  modeled 
with the Gidaspow and Syamlal-O’Brien drag models. Verification of the 
electrostatic model was done with simple test cases on a square domain, 
revealing good agreement. Finally, a pilot-plant polymerization reactor 
(without  reactions)  was  modeled  in  the  two-dimensional  domain  and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930112F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

three  different  cases  were  investigated.  In  the  first  case,  the  effect  of 
charge on the spatial distribution of polymer particles was studied. In 
the  second  case,  the  distribution  of  a  catalyst  phase  continuously 
injected into a bed of polymer particles with a mean negative charge was 
modeled. In the third case, the effect of electrostatics on entrainment 
was  investigated. The results showed that the segregation of polymer 
particles takes place and the high charges lead to de-fluidization. In a 
further study, Rokkam et al. [254] used the model developed in [252, 
253] to investigate laboratory-scale experiments that were carried out 
by  Sowinski  et  al.  [1083]. The  charge-to-mass  ratio  was  measured  in 
these  experiments  and  applied  as  an  input  for  the  CFD  electrostatic 
model. A two-dimensional mesh with a height of 1.27 m and a diameter 
of 0.0859 m was generated to represent the cylindrical column used in 
the experiments. The authors concluded that the results of the simula-
tions match the experimental data well and that the hydrodynamics and 
electrostatic segregation were also predicted well. 

At  Zhejiang  University,  Wang  et  al  [255]  studied  the  influence  of 
electrostatics on gas interchange, vortex, and heat transfer in a bubbling 
fluidized bed. A two-dimensional domain based on the experiments by 
Kuipers et al. [1089] was created with a height of 1 m and a width of 
0.57 m. The domain was discretized with 7,600 cells and the electro-
static model proposed by Rokkam et al. [252,253] was implemented. 
For the simulation, a tuned Syamlal-O’Brien drag model was used. The 
model was validated with experimental results without charge. Subse-
quently,  simulations with  electrostatic  effects  were  performed.  It  was 
found that the heat transfer coefficient is higher in the cases with higher 
charges.  Furthermore,  the  local  heat  transfer  near  the  walls  is  also 
enhanced in cases with a higher charge. The authors concluded that the 
electrostatic effect decreases the bubble-to-emulsion-phase heat transfer 
but improves local heat transfer abilities. Furthermore, the separation of 
particles  appears  more  likely  when  electrostatic  forces  are  taken  into 
consideration. In another publication from 2020, Ge et al. [256] inves-
tigated the effect of electrostatics on the riser hydrodynamics of a CFB 
for  polypropylene.  The  authors  performed  fluidization  experiments, 
measuring the charge by means of a Faraday cup and an electrometer, 
which revealed that electrostatics increase the solid holdup in the riser 
by  more than 20 %. Two-dimensional simulations of the experiments 
were performed. The domain had a width of 90 mm and a height of 2 m. 
A similar electrostatic model was implemented as in [252]. In addition, 
an axial distribution of charge density measured in the experiments was 
introduced into the model. The increase in a solid holdup in the simu-
lation  was  found  to  agree  with  the  experimental  data.  The  authors 
pointed  out  that  this  was  the  first  time  in  the  literature  that  a  CFD 
simulation coupled with the electrostatic model was quantitatively well 
verified by experimental data. They also concluded that the electrostatic 
forces might change the hydrodynamics considerably, as already sug-
gested by many other authors [646,1083]. As larger solids holdups cause 
a larger electrostatic effect, special attention should be paid to the role of 
the  electrostatic  force  during  the  industrial  design  and  operation  of 
fluidized-bed systems. 

At  Southeast  University,  Tan  et  al.  [257]  evaluated  electrostatic 
phenomena in a fluidized bed, comparing the two-fluid model and the 
CFD-DEM model. Simulations were run with both models to investigate 
the  reason  for single  bubble  deformation  in  charged  systems. For  the 
two-fluid  model,  Maxwell’s  and  Bruggeman’s  equations  were  used  to 
derive  a  scalar  equation  for  the  electric  potential  gradient,  while  the 
direction of the electrostatic force was defined by solving the elective 
potential  gradient  and  the  Lorentz’s  force  equation,  given  as  a 

magnitude  of  the  electrostatic  force.  For  the  DEM  simulation,  the 
magnitude and direction of the electrostatic force were obtained directly 
by solving Coulomb’s law. The domain was represented in both cases as 
a two-dimensional domain with a width of 24 mm and a height of 60 
mm.  The  results  showed  considerable  deviations  regarding  the  pre-
dictions of the two-fluid and DEM models. The authors describe these 
deviations to the simplifications that are assumed in both models. 

At the University of Toulouse, the group around Prof. Simonin has 
published  several  studies  on  Eulerian  modeling  of  gas-solid  fluidized 
beds  with  electrostatic  force.  The  particle-wall  and  particle-particle 
collisions  generate  electrons  transfer,  inducing  a  charge  on  particles. 
Accordingly, the surrounding gas carries an electromagnetic field, which 
leads  to  an  electromagnetic  force  (Lorentz  force).  To  investigate  the 
effect of electrostatic on gas-solid fluidized beds, including wall fouling 
due to particle accumulation on the walls, defluidization, security issues 
like explosions, Nasro-Allah et al. [982] coupled a triboelectric charging 
model with the multi-fluid model. An in-house code, so-called NEPTU-
NE_CFD, was applied and the numerical results were validated toward 
the measurement. Montilla et al. [983] used the same model, focusing 
on  the  electric  charge  transport  equation.  A  linear  model  for  the 
charge-velocity correlation was proposed to close the collision integrals 
in  the  Chapman-Enskog  equation.  It  was  found  that  the  dispersion 
phenomenon  (collisional  dispersion  and  kinetic  dispersion)  and  the 
triboconductivity effect influence the electric charge transport equation. 
In dense systems, the two effects are comparable if the particle diameter 
is equal to the dispersion characteristic length. 

At  the  University  of  Bologna,  Busciglio  et  al.  [258]  simulated  a 
magnetic-field-assisted fluidization (MSFB) system. The application of a 
magnetic field eliminates the gas bubbles, combining the advantages of 
a  fluidized  bed  with  a  low-pressure  drop  and  bubble-free  fixed-bed 
operation.  Using  equations  from  magnetohydrodynamics  (MHD),  also 
known  as  magneto-fluid  dynamics,  the  authors  developed  a  simple 
model  to  estimate  the  stabilized-to-bubbling  transition  for  a  given 
magnetic field. A two-dimensional rectangular domain was created with 
a height of 1 m and a width of 0.15 m. The grid consisted of 6,000 cells 
and  the  simulations  were  started  without  a  magnetic  field  until  a 
pseudo-steady-state  bubbling  fluidized  bed  was  reached.  The 
pseudo-steady-state  point  was  used  as  the  initial  condition  for  the 
simulation with the magnetic field. The results were not validated with 
experimental  data.  Nevertheless,  the  model  can  correctly  predict  the 
onset  of  different  stabilization  levels.  The  authors  recommended 
including the inter-particle forces (e.g. contact force) in future simula-
tions to improve the numerical results. 

3.1.3.3.8. Other  applications. A  large  number  of  two-fluid  simula-
tions of other fluidized-bed applications can be found in the literature. 
Table 3.4 lists some studies. 

3.2. Hard-sphere model 

This section will focus on the application of the hard-sphere model 
within the framework of discrete-particle model simulations. First, there 
will be a general overview of the development history of the hard-sphere 
model and its adaptation in gas-solid flow simulations in fluidized-bed 
systems  found  in  the  chemical  and  energy  processes.  Subsequently, 
there  will  be  an  analysis  of  state-of-knowledge  studies  on  the  hard- 
sphere  model’s  application  in  non-reactive  simulations,  including  the 
agglomeration of solid particles, the breakup of agglomerates, particle 
deposition  on  surrounding  walls,  and  collision  outcomes  of  liquid 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930113F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

droplets in turbulent disperse two-phase flows. Recent studies will be 
reviewed  on  the  treatment  of  the  agglomerate  structure  after  an 
agglomeration process or breakup (or fragmentation) due to interaction 
with  the  turbulent  flow  field.  This  section  ends  with  a  summary  of 
studies  on  reactive  CFD-DPM  simulations  using  the  hard-sphere 
approach. 

3.2.1. Development status and research findings 

The  hard-sphere  model,  dating  back  to  the  late  1950s,  was  first 
introduced by Alder and Wainwright [1092], who studied phase tran-
sitions in molecular systems. Many years later, in 1985, Campbell and 
Brennen [771] used the hard-sphere approach to investigate granular 
dynamics  based  on  discrete-particle  simulations.  In  subsequent  years, 
increasing  attention  was  paid  to  the  simulation  of  a  wide  range  of 
granular  flow  systems  using  the  hard-sphere  model,  motivated  by  an 
increase in computing power that allowed such simulations to be per-
formed  within  a  reasonable  CPU  time.  In  1996,  Hoomans  et  al.  [83] 
developed the first two-dimensional “event-driven” hard-sphere model 
for binary, quasi-instantaneous collisions (i.e. not multiple collisions at 
the same instant). In this event-driven model, Hoomans et al. assumed 
that impulsive forces acted on quasi-rigid spherical particles (no defor-
mation of the collision pair during the impact). This is believed to be 
realistic for the particle-particle collisions taking place in fluidized-bed 
systems  involving  coarse  particles  larger  than  100  μm  (i.e.  particle 
groups B and D based  on Geldart’s classification, see Fig. 1.2). Later, 
Crowe  et  al.  [739]  extended  the  event-driven  hard-sphere  model  by 
Hoomans  et  al.  [83]  to  take  into  account  three-dimensional  collision 
dynamics. In this hard-sphere model, the friction between the particles 
during the collision is assumed to obey Coulomb’s law of friction. In the 
context of the present review, the model by Crowe et al. [739] is referred 
to  as  the  “standard  hard-sphere  model”,  since  the  cohesive  forces 
(among other forces) are not taken into account during the impact, while 
the  model  that  takes  into  account  the  cohesive  forces  is  termed  the 
“hard-sphere model”. In 1999, Ouyang and Li [892,893] and Helland 
et  al.  [894]  also  developed  an  alternative  “time-driven”  hard-sphere 
model,  which  is  typically  applied  within  the  framework  of  the 
soft-sphere model to save computation time. In contrast to the “standard 
hard-sphere model” and the “hard-sphere model”, which use an adap-
tive particle time step (see Particle time step section), a constant small 
particle time step (similar to the soft-sphere model) is applied to take 
into account the velocity changes, and the collision is assumed to occur 
at most once during that time step. 

The hard-sphere model assumes that the collision partners are line-
arly displaced within the simulation time step and that a collision occurs 
if the collision partners meet at one point. This means that the distance 
between the centers of mass of the two particles is equal to the sum of the 
radii of the collision pair for a particle-particle collision or the particle 
radius during a particle-wall collision. As previously mentioned in the 
Collision treatment models section, the collisions detected using either 
the  stochastic  model  (among  others:  Oesterle  and  Petitjean  [758], 
Sommerfeld  [1093])  or  the  deterministic model  (among  others: Chen 
et al. [1094], Breuer and Alletto [668]) can be treated by adopting the 
hard-sphere model [12,83,669,739]. Note that the deterministic detec-
tion  of  inter-particle  collisions  requires  only  purely  kinematic  condi-
tions,  whereas 
in  the  stochastic  approach  the  probability  of 
inter-particle  collisions  is  modeled  relying  on  certain  assumptions.  In 
comparison to stochastic collision detection models, the main drawback 
of  deterministic  collision  detection  models  is  the  high  computational 
effort, making them impractical in CFD simulations of real-life facilities 
involving disperse two-phase flows. 

Many  authors  have  extensively  used  the  hard-sphere  model  to 
simulate cold gas-solid flows in fluidized-bed systems and compared the 
simulation  results  with  measurement  data,  with  the  two-fluid  model, 
and with the soft-sphere model [12,83,628,772,783,1095–1097]. It was 
shown that despite the detailed information on the hydrodynamics of 
particulate flows offered by the soft-sphere model, it is computationally 
more expensive than the hard-sphere model when employed to simulate 
dilute  gas-particle  flows  with  higher  particle  velocities  (the  typical 
number of particle-particle collisions is between 106 and 109). The main 
reason for this observation is that the deterministic collision treatment 
with the soft-sphere model requires relatively smaller particle time steps 
to  ensure  the  simulation  is  suitably  accurate  (avoiding  unphysical 
penetration) and thus the computational time increases sharply [12,50, 
643,772]. For dense gas-solid flows with lower particle velocities (e.g. 
fluidized-bed  systems),  where  the  typical  number  of  particle-particle 
collisions is extremely high, the soft-sphere model is much more effi-
cient than the hard-sphere model, which cannot approximate the mul-
tiple collisions of one particle with other collision partners. Accordingly, 
very small adaptive particle time steps are required by the hard-sphere 
model to resolve all collisions, resulting in a considerable computational 
effort (see the Particle time step section). 

Despite  the significant  progress achieved in  research in  recent de-
cades on numerical aspects of the hard-sphere model, most simulations 
applied  to  gas-solid  flows  in  fluidized-bed  systems  are  based  in  their 
early stages on two-dimensional and quasi-two-dimensional models, or 
recently on simplified three-dimensional models at lab-scale. A review 
of the literature on the hard-sphere model reveals that most of the 2D 
simulations  were  carried  out  with  structured  regular  grids  in  the 
computational domain (among others: Hoomans et al. [83], Chiesa et al. 
[1098], Huilin et al. [829]). It is important to note that the simplification 
using  two-dimensional  models  implies  a  restriction  of  the  degree  of 
freedom (DOF) of the binary collision, which is naturally scattered in the 
three-dimensional  domain,  as  encountered  in  most  real-life  facilities 
including turbulent multiphase flows. For example, Goldschmidt et al. 
[683,684]  applied  the  3D-CFD-DPM  approach  with  the  hard-sphere 
model to simulate a quasi-2D gas-fluidized bed. The numerical results 
obtained  were  compared  to  the  results  of  the  two-fluid  model  and 
against  experiments  for  different  fluidization  conditions.  It  was 
concluded that the results predicted by the hard-sphere model are more 
accurate than those of the two-fluid model in terms of bed expansions 
and bubble patterns. The authors reported that the main reason for this 
deviation is that particle rotation is not taken into account in the closure 
equations  of  the  two-fluid  model.  Real  applications  of  chemical  and 
energy process engineering include complex geometries, thus it is not 
possible to generate a structured mesh for the CFD simulation. For this 
reason, research was recently carried out on the application of the 3D 
hard-sphere model based on the unstructured mesh. Wu et al. [364,365] 
developed  a  generic,  cost-efficient  hard-sphere  model  within  the 
framework  of  CFD-DPM  simulations  in  complex  3D  multiphase  flow 
configurations.  The  authors  incorporated  the  standard  hard-sphere 
model  into  the  commercial  CFD  code  ANSYS-FLUENT  based  on  a 
three-dimensional  unstructured  mesh  and  developed  a  multifaceted 
numerical  strategy  to  ensure  efficient  collision  treatment.  This  model 
was used to simulate the hydrodynamic behavior of the gas-solid flow in 
the fluidized bed. The results showed that the model can reproduce key 
flow characteristics such as bubbling, spouting, and particle clustering. 
In  the  studies  mentioned  above,  among  others,  it  is  assumed  that 
instantaneous binary collisions take place between spherical particles. 
The reason for this simplification is, on the one hand, to detect and treat 
collisions using state-of-the-art models with a low computational cost. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930114F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

On the other hand, most drag models are developed assuming the par-
ticles  to  be  spherical.  However,  most  particulate  flows  involve 
non-spherical particles; using spherical particles thus leads to inaccurate 
predictions in comparison with real conditions. The first contribution to 
this field of research, dating back to 2016, was proposed by Wang et al. 
[1099] taking the above considerations into account in the context of 
the  hard-sphere  model.  The  authors  carried  out  simulations  in  a 
bubbling  fluidized  bed  with  non-spherical  particles  using  the 
hard-sphere  model  to  investigate  particle  shape  as  a  crucial  factor 
affecting the predictions. 

that 

As  mention  previously,  strong  cohesive  forces  without  physical 
contact,  such  as  the  van  der  Waals  force,  acting  during  inter-particle 
collisions of tiny particles lead to the difficulty in fluidizing such parti-
cles compared to large particles [60]. However, the cohesive forces are 
of great importance for particle agglomeration, which occurs in turbu-
lent  particle-laden  flows  (among  others:  Ho  and  Sommerfeld  [658], 
Kosinski and Hoffmann [773], Balakin et al. [1100], Breuer and Almo-
hammed [666], Liu et al. [1101], Almohammed and Breuer [666]). The 
reason  for  this  observation  is  that  if  the  cohesive  forces  between  the 
collision partners are strong enough, these particles stick together after 
the  collision  and  form  a  larger  particle  (or  agglomerate).  In  1985, 
the  agglomeration  of 
Chaouki  et  al.  [1102],  observed 
micro-particles (i.e. particles in group C according to Geldart’s classifi-
cation) had a positive effect on the fluidization regime In fluidized-bed 
systems. It was concluded that such tiny particles may form agglomer-
ates at a minimum superficial velocity higher than 0.04 m/s, and the 
new  system  fluidizes  smoothly  and  homogeneously  regardless  of  the 
initial temperature considered. This observation has been the topic of 
various experimental studies on agglomeration in fluidized-bed systems 
[1101,1103].  Another  example  of  the  positive  effect  of  particle 
agglomeration in chemical process engineering was reported by Ober-
mair et al. [1104]. They found that the particle agglomeration enhances 
the separation efficiency of the solid in the cyclone separators. On the 
other  hand,  the  agglomeration  of  cohesive  powders  (dp<10  μm)  may 
have negative consequences on conveyors (feeding and dosing systems). 
Problems  observed  by  Tomas  [1105]  were  attributed  to  avalanching 
effects and oscillating mass flow rates. In 2009, the first extension of the 
standard  hard-sphere  model  was  achieved  by  Kosinski  and  Hoffmann 
[1106],  taking  into  account  the  adhesive  van  der  Waals  force  during 
binary  particle-wall  collisions.  Furthermore,  the  authors  proposed  a 
deposition criterion by defining a critical normal velocity, below which 
the particle sticks to the wall after the collision. The year after, Kosinski 
and  Hoffmann  further  extended  the  standard  hard-sphere  model  by 
incorporating  the  cohesive  impulse  due  to  the  van  der  Waals  force 
during particle-particle collisions and defining the first agglomeration 
conditions [773,1107]. In both papers, the authors showed the effect of 
adhesion/cohesion  during  the  impact  on  the  collision  dynamics,  but 
unfortunately, the results were not validated. Balakin et al. [1100] used 
the model by Kosinski and Hoffmann [773] to explore the agglomeration 
rate (collision efficiency) in a two-dimensional turbulent shear flow and 
studied  the  effect  of  various  parameters  on  the  predictions.  The  nu-
merical  results  were  compared  with  a  theoretical  model  for  the 
agglomeration rate in shear flows. In recent years, significant advances 
have been achieved by the research group around Prof. Breuer to extend 
the standard hard-sphere model and its application to a wide range of 
important phenomena encountered in turbulent two-phase flows with 
large numbers of solid particles, liquid droplets or micro-bubbles (see 
the  Non-reactive  simulations  section).  Among  the  many  leading  con-
tributions,  the  improvements  include  the  application  of  standard 

a 

collision 

composite 

outcome  model 

hard-sphere  models  in  four-way  coupled  CFD-DPM  simulations  using 
LES technique [668,669], an extended hard-sphere model to take into 
account the agglomeration of dry, electrostatically neutral particles and 
particle-wall adhesion with deposition [84,666]. An important contri-
bution  was  also  made  by  Almohammed  and  Breuer  [671],  who 
developed 
for 
surface-tension-dominated droplets in a gaseous environment based on 
the  hard-sphere  model,  taking  droplet-droplet  collisions  and  droplet 
coalescence into account. A recent extension of the hard-sphere model 
was  achieved  by  Breuer  and  Khalifa  [675,676]  by  investigating  the 
breakup of compact dry powder agglomerates. Also, Breuer and Hoppe 
[672-674] developed a deterministic coalescence and breakup model for 
micro-bubbles  based  on  the  hard-sphere  model.  Most  predictions  ob-
tained  using  the  extended  hard-sphere  models  were  compared  with 
either numerical results or theoretical correlations and validated based 
on  well-known  experimental  data.  The  following  sections will  review 
relevant published studies, shown in Table 3.5, on the development of 
the CFD-DPM with the hard-sphere model and its application to various 
processes (e.g. mixing/segregation, agglomeration, breakup, deposition, 
coalescence and dying processes). 

3.2.2. Non-reactive simulations 

A state-of-the-knowledge review of works on the hard-sphere model 
reveals that a whole host of published papers focus on the simulation of 
non-reactive gas-solid flows, subjected at the early development stage to 
2D and quasi-2D simulations and, recently, to 3D simulations. In many 
studies,  the  simulation  results  are  also  compared  with  the  two-fluid 
model  and/or  validated  against  experiments.  However,  the  particle 
transport  and  collision  dynamics  in  most  real-life  turbulent  particle- 
laden  flows,  encountered  in  a  wide  range  of  industrial  applications, 
involve challenging phenomena including agglomeration, breakup, and 
deposition of particles as well as collision, coalescence, and breakup of 
liquid  droplets  and  micro-bubbles.  Therefore,  extensive  efforts  have 
been made by researchers to gain a fundamental understanding of such 
phenomena, adopting the hard-sphere approach. In the last two decades, 
various studies have been published focusing on these topics; these will 
be reviewed in the next subsections. It is important to mention that most 
discrete  particle  simulations  with  the  hard-sphere  model  assume  that 
particles are spherical; mainly to simplify collision detection and treat-
ment and to reduce the computational cost. 

3.2.2.1. Fluidized-bed systems. In contrast to the coupled CFD-DPM with 
the soft-sphere model (DEM model), which can be considered as a stan-
dard simulation approach for fluidized-bed systems, a limited number of 
studies in the literature use the hard-sphere model. This is because of the 
long-term  multiple  collisions  occurring  in  nearly  stagnant  zones  with 
extremely low particle velocities, which cannot be handled by the hard- 
sphere  model.  Using  the  hard-sphere  model  in  these  regions  becomes 
impractical  due  to  the  extremely  high  computational  cost  required  to 
detect all collisions. However, the computational cost of the hard-sphere 
model is more or less similar to the soft-sphere model (DEM model) in 
regions with high particle velocities (e.g. spout region). There, the soft- 
sphere model requires small time steps, implying a much higher CPU time. 
The earliest contribution using the standard hard-sphere model for 
fluidized-bed simulations dates back to Hoomans et al. [83] in 1996s. In 
that study, the authors performed coupled CFD-DPM simulations with 
the standard hard-sphere model to investigate the effect of gas-particle 
and particle-particle interactions on the bubble formation at different 
fluidization conditions in a two-dimensional fluidized bed (0.15 × 0.5 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930115Structure- 
dependent 
drag models 

Volume forces 
(gravitational, 
static 
buoyancy 
force, electric 
or magnetic 
fields) 

Aerodynamic 
surface forces 
(e.g. virtual 
mass, Basset, 
Saffman, 
Magnus force) 

Heat and mass 
transfer (e.g. 
convection, 
conduction, 
radiation) 

Non-spherical 
particles 

[663,1113]  

[1099,1114,1115]  

F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.5 
A review of the CFD-DPM with the hard-sphere model, applied to chemical and energy processes.  

Sub-models/applications 

Studies 

Main observations 

Sub-models 

Homogeneous 
drag models 

[83,84,365,659,660,663,666-669,671,675, 
676,678-680,773,1100,1106,1108–1112]  

Non-specified 

[84,666,667,670,671,679]  

• All simulation studies with the hard-sphere model found in the literature use homogeneous 

drag models  

• Studies are required that apply heterogeneous drag models within the framework of the hard- 

sphere model  

• Further investigations are required on homogeneous and heterogeneous drag models that take 

into account non-spherical particles 

• The gravitational force is included in most simulations with the hard-sphere model  
• The buoyancy force is usually taken into consideration in particle-laden simulations with tiny 

particles and/or with a small particle-to-fluid density ratio 

[84,666,667,669,671-674,679]  

• Aerodynamic surface forces (e.g. virtual mass, Basset and Saffman forces) are taken into 

consideration in most of the hard-sphere model studies with micro-sized particles  

• In most simulations on fluidized-bed systems, the aerodynamic surface is usually not taken 

into account due to its subordinate importance on the hydrodynamics, except for some special 
cases 

• A small number of studies in the literature have focused on reactive simulations with the hard- 
sphere model in fluidized-bed systems. However, in most publications on reactive flows, heat 
transfer has been broadly discussed (e.g. fluidized-bed spray granulation and spray drying). 
Radiative heat transfer modeling has been neglected  

• Advanced models are required to explore the complex phenomena in relative multiphase flows 
• The application of the hard-sphere model in most studies available in the literature is limited 
to spherical particles with constant diameters and the same material properties. The calcu-
lation of volume and surface forces of non-spherical particles with different material prop-
erties needs further investigation  

• Studies addressing the application of the hard-sphere models using non-spherical particles 

were reported very rarely 

• The hard-sphere model was applied to simulate a wide range of technical processes, including 
challenging phenomena. Most studies were based on simplified models to enable the costly 
simulation (e.g. quasi 2D, spherical particles, neglecting various sub-models, etc.)  

• The mixing and segregation processes were intensively investigated within the framework of 
the hard-sphere model. Most studies simplify the process by investigating the hydrodynamic 
behavior of the cold gas-solid flow using monodisperse spherical particles with the same 
material properties and neglecting the chemical reaction mechanisms  

• There are only a few studies on drying and coating processes, or generally on reactive flows, 

despite the commercial importance of spray coating  

• A large body of literature on the agglomeration of dry, cohesive particles using the hard-sphere 
model has been amassed in recent years, constituting a great improvement. Agglomeration 
due to liquid bridging and high temperature is rarely addressed in the literature  

• The agglomerate structure is mostly described based on a simplified approach consistent with 

the assumptions of the hard-sphere model  

• A significant body of literature focuses on the collision outcomes of surface-tension-dominated 
droplets using stochastic collision detection. A few studies are found on the collision dynamics 
such as droplets using composite models with deterministic collision detection within the 
framework of the hard-sphere model  

• There are only a few studies with the hard-sphere model on particle deposition, agglomerate 

Applications  Mixing/ 

segregation 
process 

Drying 
technology 

[365,628,657,683-685,772,783,829, 
1095–1098,1116–1118]  

[366,367,663] 

Particle 
agglomeration 

[84,368,656,659,660,663,666,667,670,678, 
679,773,1100,1107,1110] 

[675-677,681,1119] 

[84,666,667,680,1106] 

[84,663,671,1120–1122] 

Agglomerate 
breakup 

Particle-wall 
adhesion 
(deposition) 

Droplet 
collision / 
coalescence 
Coalescence / 
breakup of 
micro-bubbles 

[672–674]  

breakup, and micro-bubbles 

m2) (see Fig. 3.26). The authors used the experimental setup developed 
by Tsuji et al. [763], in which 2,400 spherical particles with an average 
diameter of 4 mm were distributed uniformly in the 2D fluidized bed. It 
was  concluded  that  the  accuracy  of  the  numerical  results  using  the 
hard-sphere model strongly depends on the values of the coefficients of 
normal restitution en and friction μdyn. The developed hard-sphere model 
was also used to simulate 40,000 spherical particles with a diameter of 
0.85 mm and the numerical results were compared with the experiment 
by Nieuwland [1123], showing reasonable agreement. Later on, Hoo-
mans et al. [657] carried out coupled RANS-DPM simulations using the 
developed  hard-sphere  model in [83]  to explore the  segregation  phe-
nomenon  in  a  two-dimensional  fluidized  bed  consisting  of  spherical 
particles of different sizes. 

After  the  successful  works  by  Hoomans  et  al.  [83,657],  various 
studies were published on the application of the hard-sphere model to 
different types of fluidized-bed systems. However, at an early stage of 

development, 2D or pseudo-2D simulations were performed as a crucial 
approach  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  computational  cost  (among 
others: Li and Kuipers [1095], Goldschmidt et al. [1116], Li and Kuipers 
[1096], Chiesa et al. [1098], Huilin et al. [1117], Li and Kuipers [1097], 
Deen et al. [685], Huilin et al. [829], Wu and Zhan [1118]). Most studies 
were compared to the predictions of the two-fluid model and/or vali-
dated with measurements. For example, Chiesa et al. [1098] carried out 
CFD-DPM  simulations  with  the  hard-sphere  model  to  simulate  the 
bubble formation in a 2D fluidized bed and compare its prediction with 
the  numerical  results  of  the  two-fluid  model and  experimental obser-
vations. It was found that in comparison with experimental results, the 
discrete-particle approach using the hard-sphere model leads to much 
more  accurate  predictions  than  the  two-fluid  model.  However,  the 
computational time required for the hard-sphere simulations was about 
four  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  in  the  two-fluid  model.  On  the 
other  hand,  Deen  et  al.  [685]  coupled  the  lattice  Boltzmann  method 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930116F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.26. Snapshots of particle distribution in a 2D fluidized bed using coefficients of restitution (en = 0.9) and friction (μdyn = 0.3): (a) single orifice with a diameter 
of 10 mm and jet velocity of 10 umf  and (b) homogeneous inflow velocity of (ug = 1.75 umf) (reproduced from reference [83], with permission of Elsevier). 

(LBM) and the discrete-particle approach using the hard-sphere model to 
simulate spouted, single-bubble, and bubbling fluidized beds, the aim 
being to assess the performance of the fluidized bed. In that study, the 
authors focused on the vital role of the drag models, which describe the 
gas-particle integration to obtain a correct prediction of bubble forma-
tion  and  thus  mixing  and  segregation  in  the  fluidized  beds.  They 
concluded  that  applying  the  LBM-based  drag  model  leads  to  a  more 
accurate prediction of the bubble formation than the conventional drag 
models by, for example, Ergun [1124] and Wen and Yu [793]. 

As  a  result  of  the  continuous development  of  hardware  (high-per-
formance computing (HPC)) and software (parallel simulation on multi- 
CPUs),  three-dimensional  CFD-DPM  simulations  with  the  hard-sphere 
model  have  been  widely  performed  over  the  last  two  decades.  Rele-
vant contributions to this field have been published by many authors 
(among  others:  Goldschmidt  et  al.  [683],  Goldschmidt  et  al.  [1116], 
Goldschmidt et al. [684], He et al. [1125], Wu et al. [364], Wu et al. 
[365],  Wang  et  al.  [1126]  and  Wang  et  al.  [1099]).  In  2004,  Gold-
schmidt et al. [684] used the hard-sphere model to study the hydrody-
namic  behavior  of  gas-solid  flows  in  3D  spouted  fluidized  beds.  The 
results  were  validated  against  experiments  and  compared  with  the 
predictions  of  the  two-fluid  model  relying  on  the  kinetic  theory  of 
granular flow (KTGF). The authors found that the results of DPM sim-
ulations  using  the  hard-sphere  model  agreed  well  with  experiments 
when  an  effective  restitution  coefficient  was  applied,  whereas  the 
two-fluid  model  predictions  only  agreed  to  a  limited  extent  with  the 
experiments,  mainly  as  particle  rotation  was  disregarded  in  the 
two-fluid model. 

The  research  engaged  in  DPM  simulations  with  the  hard-sphere 
model was mostly carried out using a simplified gas-solid flow config-
uration  (structured  mesh),  which  allows  the  volumetric  void  fraction 
and the tracking and treatment of the collisions in the computational 
domain  to  be  estimated  efficiently  in  comparison  with  unstructured 
mesh. However, real gas-solid fluidized-bed systems consist of complex 
geometries  and  the  structured  mesh  cannot  be  used  to  represent  the 

computational domain. For this reason, in 2009, Wu et al. [365] pro-
posed a cost-efficient analytical approach for accurately estimating the 
volumetric void fraction in the context of three-dimensional DPM sim-
ulations with the hard-sphere model using unstructured meshes. In this 
model,  the  volumetric  void  fraction  is  determined  based  on  various 
geometrical  parameters,  taking  into  account  the  frequently  occurring 
case where the particles are not entirely located within one grid cell of 
the unstructured mesh regardless of its shape (wedged, tetrahedral, or 
hexahedral) (see the Volumetric void fraction section). In another study 
in the same year, the authors implemented the cost-efficient analytical 
approach  for  volumetric  void  fraction  calculation  in  the  commercial 
CFD  program  “ANSYS-FLUENT”  [364].  Then,  a  CFD-DPM  simulation 
was carried out using the standard hard-sphere model and based on the 
three-dimensional unstructured mesh. As shown in Fig. 3.27, the pre-
dictions made using the approach, including the main bed characteris-
tics  (i.e.  bubbling,  spouting,  and  particle  clustering)  were  validated 
based on the numerical results of the soft-sphere model and experiments 
by Zhao et al. [1127] and Liu et al. [1128]. 

In  the above-mentioned  studies  (and  others)  on CFD-DPM  simula-
tions in fluidized-bed systems using the hard-sphere model, the particles 
are assumed to be spherical to simplify the modeling of the aerodynamic 
forces  acting  on  the  particles,  as  well  as  the  collision  detection  and 
treatment. In industrial fluidized-bed systems, however, this is mostly 
not the case; rather, the particles are non-spherical and have a particle 
size  distribution.  Recently,  Wang  et  al.  [1099]  provided  the  first 
contribution on the modeling and simulation of non-spherical particles 
within the framework of the hard-sphere model. For this purpose, the 
authors  applied  the  multi-element  method  to  greatly  simplify  the 
detection  and  the  subsequent  treatment  of  collisions  taking  place  be-
tween non-spherical particles. In this method, the non-spherical parti-
cles are divided into sub-spheres and a collision is assumed to occur only 
between two sub-spheres of different particles. Furthermore, the authors 
extended  the  collision  model  based  on  a  modified  Routh-Poisson 
method.  As  depicted  in  Fig.  3.28,  the  simulation  results  using  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930117F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.27. (a) test rig, (b) snapshots of the simulated particle distribution in the fluidized bed (hard-sphere model), (c) experimental and simulated profiles of particle 
vertical velocities in the spout (vertical profile along spout axis), and (d, e, f) experimental and simulated profiles (hard-sphere and soft-sphere models) of particle 
vertical velocities at various bed levels (reproduced from references [364,1127,1128], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930118F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.28. Snapshots of particle distribution in a bubbling fluidized bed with non-spherical particles (usp = 0.9), and validation of the axial velocity using spherical 
and non-spherical particles (reproduced from reference [1099], with permission of Elsevier). 

developed model are in good agreement with the experiments of Müller 
et al. [1129]. 

All in all, several studies have applied the CFD-DEM with the hard- 
sphere  model  to  fluidized-bed  systems.  Nevertheless,  in  recent  de-
cades, significant efforts have been made to extend and use the hard- 
sphere model to simulate challenging phenomena (e.g. the agglomera-
tion  process  and  droplet  coalescence)  encountered  in  fluidized-bed 
systems and turbulent particle-laden flows. These are explained next. 

3.2.2.2. Agglomeration  and  breakup. The  agglomeration  process  in 
micro-particles  (particle  diameter  smaller  than  30  μm)  leads  to  the 
growth  of  these  particles  over  time  and  plays  an  important  role  in 
numerous technical and industrial applications. In contrast to this phe-
nomenon, the interaction between the gas phase and the agglomerates, 
collisions  between  the  agglomerates  themselves  and  other  primary 
particles, or the impacts of agglomerates at other system boundaries (e. 
g. walls) lead to a reduction in size (or fragmentation) of the agglom-
erates (agglomerate breakup). The following will offer a critical review 
of advances in the modeling and simulation of particle agglomeration, 
agglomerate structure, and agglomerate breakup within the framework 
of the discrete-particle model with the hard-sphere approach. 

3.2.2.2.1. Particle  agglomeration. In  the  early  1970s,  Geldart  [60] 
claimed  that  the  fluidization  process  of  group  C  powders  (i.e. 
micro-sized particles) is difficult. Such fine particles are characterized by 
strong cohesive forces without physical contact (e.g. electrostatic and 
the  van  der  Waals  forces),  which  are  of  great  relevance  in  many 
fluidized-bed systems. According to various experimental observations 
on particle agglomeration in fluidized beds, it has become a fact that 
cohesive particles may be fluidized in the form of agglomerates (among 
others: Chaouki et al. [1102], Yao et al. [1103], and Liu et al. [1101]). 
Taking  the  cohesive  forces  during  a  particle-particle  collision  (first 
prerequisite)  into  account,  the  collision  partners  either  agglomerate, 
forming a larger particle referred  to as an “agglomerate”, or rebound 
after the collision. In line with Leva [112], the minimum fluidization 
velocity for an agglomerate of the mean diameter dag and a density ρag is 
given by the relation: 

umf = 0.00923

d1.82
ag

(cid:0)

ρag (cid:0) ρf
ρ0.06
μ0.88
f
f

)0.94

.

(3.9) 

In general, the agglomeration of solid particles occurs due to various 
mechanisms: solid bridging (e.g. sintering, chemical reaction, and dry-
ing), adhesion (e.g. highly viscous binders), surface tension (e.g. liquid 
bridging) [55], and attractive forces (e.g. van der Waals, electrostatic 
and  magnetic  forces)  [1130,1131].  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the 
cohesive  forces  leading  to  particle  agglomeration  are  based  on  flow 
systems.  For  example,  the  liquid  bridging  force  is  the  predominant 

cohesive force in the granulation process with water content, whereas 
the van der Waals force occurs in fluidized-bed systems made up of dry 
particles  with  dried  air  or  nitrogen  [1132].  Furthermore,  the 
particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  during  the  fluidization 
process may lead to oppositely charged particle surfaces, increasing the 
probability of particle agglomeration. 

Among others, Liu et al. [1101] conducted recent experiments on the 
agglomeration process of dry SiO2 particles with diameters between 0.3 
μm and 20 μm and a density of 2,560 kg/m3 in a cylindrical riser with a 
diameter of 50 mm and height of 2,237 mm (initial bed height of 230 
mm).  The  growth  process  of  superfine  particles  due  to  the  cohesive 
forces was also found to enhance the fluidization process. The minimum 
fluidization velocity based on the formed agglomerates of different sizes 
and shapes was about 3.4 cm/s (see Fig. 3.29 (a)). Fig. 3.29 (b) shows the 
probability distribution function of the agglomerate classes, where the 
minimum  agglomerate  diameter  was  133  μm  and  the  averaged 
agglomerate  voidage  was  0.966,  defined  based  on  the  density  of  the 
agglomerate and the primary particle density by the relation εag = 1 (cid:0)
(ρag
).  Under  different  fluidization  conditions,  the  agglomeration 
process is expected to exert an appreciable influence on the gas phase in 
the  fluidized-bed  system  (i.e.  the  interaction  between  the  formed  ag-
glomerates  and  the  gas,  see  the  Turbulence  modulation  section).  The 
multi-scale agglomerates, which collected at the bottom of the bed in the 
experiment by Liu et al. [1101] are set out in Fig. 3.29 (c, d, and e). It 
was  observed  that  the  nearly  spherical  agglomerates  are  uniformly 
distributed in the gas phase during fluidization. As expected, the small 
agglomerates tend to exist in the upper part of the fluidized bed, while 
large  agglomerates  are  mainly  observed  at  the  lower  part  of  the  bed 
(segregation takes place). 

/ρp

3.2.2.2.2. Agglomeration  models. In  the  period  between  1980  and 
1989, the fluidization process of cohesive particles due to agglomeration 
was  investigated  extensively  (among  others:  Chaouki  et  al.  [1102], 
Brooks et al. [1133], and Morooka et al. [1134]). Later on, in the 1990s, 
special attention was paid to the mechanisms of agglomerate formation 
and  breakup.  In  the  last  two  decades,  the  focus  has  been  on  particle 
agglomeration  in  gas-solid  flows  based  on  numerical  simulations.  In 
most  publications,  the  agglomeration  process  is  modeled  using  the 
hard-sphere model in three main steps: (i) detection of potential colli-
sion  pairs  (ii)  decision  whether  the  collision  partners  agglomerate  or 
rebound  after  the  impact,  and  (iii)  treatment  of  the  structure  and  ki-
netics  of  the  formed  agglomerate  or  the  kinetics  of  collision  partners 
without  agglomeration  [84,656,666,670,773].  The  collision  detection 
models  were  previously  described  in  the  Collision  detection  models 
section, while three modeling techniques for particle agglomeration can 
be  found  in  the  literature:  (i)  energy-based,  (ii)  force-based,  and  (iii) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930119F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.29. Effect of particle agglomeration on fluidization process: (a) schematic representation of the flow regime of the agglomerate fluidization, (b) probability 
distribution function of the agglomerate volumetric fraction, and (c, d and e) different sizes of the resulting agglomerates (reproduced from reference [1101], with 
permission of Elsevier). 

momentum-based  agglomeration  models.  At  the  early  stage  of  devel-
opment, dry and electrostatically neutral particles were assumed for the 
sake  of  simplicity  [666].  Later  on,  other  agglomeration  mechanisms 
were investigated, especially with the presence of the liquid bridge. So 
far,  only  a  few  scientific  studies  have  been  published  examining  the 
agglomeration of solid particles in fluidized-bed simulations relying on 
the discrete-particle model with the hard-sphere model, despite its huge 
potential for describing the collision dynamics. A state-of-the-art review 
of the agglomeration models, applied to fluidized-bed systems, among 
others, will be given next.  

1)  Energy-based agglomeration model 

The earliest ideas on the energy-based agglomeration model (EAM) 
date back to L¨offler and Muhr [1135] and Hiller [1136]. Assuming a 
frictionless head-on briny collision, as depicted in Fig. 3.30, in 1972 the 
authors introduced a simplified criterion for the agglomeration of par-
ticles based on the energy balance between kinetic energy, dissipated 
energy, and van der Waals energy [1137,1138]. Hiller [1136] suggested 
that there is a critical relative velocity between the two colliding par-
ticles  given  by  Eq.  (3.10),  below  which  the  collision  partners  stick 
together, forming a new larger particle (or agglomerate), while higher 
relative velocities imply rebound: 

Fig. 3.30. Contact surface due to frictionless head-on binary collision (repro-
duced from reference [670], with permission of Elsevier). 

[(

u→(0)

i

(cid:0) u→(0)

j

)

]

⋅ n→

ij

crit

= (cid:0)

H
πsij

1
didj

ρid3
6pρiρj

i + ρjd3
j
(cid:0)
di + dj

)

{ (

)

(

1 (cid:0) (en)2
en

)}1/2

,

(3.10)  

where the minimum distance between the particles during the impact is 
on  a  nanometre  scale  and  is  typically  assumed  to  be  constant 
(cid:0) 10m). The symbol p denotes the maximum contact pressure, 
(sij = 2 × 10
leading to plastic deformation (more details in [670]). The minus sign in 

(cid:0)

→(0)
u
j

→(0)
i

Eq. (3.10) is required since inter-particle collision (see Fig. 3.30) takes 
ij]〈0).  L¨offler  and  Muhr  [1135]  and  Hiller 
place  if  ([( u
[1136] applied this simplified agglomeration model to study how the 
agglomeration of particles and droplets affected separation in filtration 
systems. 

→
)⋅ n

A review of the literature on the criterion of the agglomeration of 
cohesive particles in fluidized-bed systems shows that various models 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930120F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2Ekin,crit/ ̂mij

have  been  proposed.  In  1988,  Morooka  et  al.  [1134]  formulated  a 
relation for the size of the agglomerate of Si3N4  powders based on the 
conservation  of  the  energy  by  laminar  shear  on  the  agglomerate,  the 
kinetic energy of the agglomerate, and the energy required to disrupt 
this agglomerate. It was found that the range of the mean diameters of 
the agglomerates is between 330 μm and 380 μm. Moseley and O’Brien 
[1139] also developed a criterion for particle agglomeration due to the 
binary  head-on  collision  of  elastic  particles  with  surface  adhesion, 
relying on the energy balance. In this model, it was assumed that the 
collision partners stick (or agglomerate) if the relative velocity between 
the  particles  before  the  impact  does  not  exceed  a  critical  value 

=

un
, determined based on the critical kinetic energy 
ij,crit
Ekin,crit  and the reduced mass  ̂mij  (see the Hard-sphere model section). 
Horio  and  Iwadate  [1140,1141]  estimated  the  agglomerate  size  by 
assuming  there  was  a  state  of  equilibrium  between  the  energy  of  the 
collision force and the energy of the cohesive force for Geldart group C 
powders.  They  compared  the  predictions  of  the  derived  formulation 
against  experimental  data.  In  the  1980s  and  1990s,  the  energy-based 
model was only used when comparing the model predictions to mea-
surements based on simplified analysis (e.g. agglomerate size). In the 
early  months  of  2002,  Ho  and  Sommerfeld  [658]  first  integrated  the 
agglomeration model by Hiller [1136] into coupled RANS-DPM simu-
lations  with  the  stochastic  collision  detection  model  by  Sommerfeld 
[1093].  The  authors  applied  the  agglomeration  model  in  a  dilute 
two-phase turbulent flow, assuming a homogeneous isotropic turbulent 
field and neglecting the turbulence modulation due to the solid phase. 
Later on, this simplified  EAM was extensively used in various studies 
[659-665]. For example, Ho and Sommerfeld [659,660] found that in a 
turbulent  gas  cyclone,  the  agglomeration  of  small  particles  with  di-
ameters up to about 2.5 μm enhances the separation efficiency, whereas 
larger particles tend to rebound after the impact. Njobuenwu and Fair-
weather  [1110]  used  the  energy-based  agglomeration  condition  and 
performed  four-way  coupled  simulations  in  turbulent  particle-laden 
flows  with  different  Reynold  numbers,  particle  concentrations,  and 
simulation parameters. They found that inter-particle collisions and thus 
agglomeration  processes  depended  strongly  on  the  Reynolds  number, 
whereas higher global volume fractions had a minor influence on the 
agglomeration rate. 

In the studies mentioned before, among others, frictionless head-on 
collisions  were  assumed.  Accordingly,  the  particle  rotation  is  not 
taken into account, creating rather crude constrictions not justified by 
real conditions. Furthermore, it was not clear how the authors modeled 
the effect of the cohesion on the kinetics of the collision partners without 
agglomeration. With the aim of minimizing these drawbacks, Jürgens 
[678]  extended  the  energy-based  model  by  Hiller  [1136]  to  include 

oblique collisions by taking into consideration the friction between the 
collision  pair  at  the  contact  point,  leading  to  a  slightly  improved 
agglomeration  condition.  The  author  focused  on  the  kinetics  of  the 
collision  partners  without  agglomeration  and  applied  his  extended 
model to study the agglomeration process, based on coupled LES-DPM 
simulations  with  the  hard-sphere  model  in  particle-laden  turbulent 
pipe  and  channel  flows  for  different  mass  loadings.  In  2014,  Alletto 
[679] further extended Jürgens’ agglomeration model by incorporating 
the  rotational  kinetic  energy of  the  collision  partners  into  the  energy 
balance and thus into the “generalized” agglomeration conditions. The 
kinetics  of  collision  partners  without  agglomeration  for  sticking  and 
sliding  collisions  was  also  modeled  based  on  different  assumptions. 
Alletto applied his model to a downward particle-laden turbulent pipe 
flow  at  low  Reynolds  numbers,  yielding  reasonable  results.  However, 
the  results  of  the  extended  models  developed  by  Alletto  and  Jürgens 
[678,679] were not validated or even compared to the original model by 
Hiller  [1136].  Recently,  Almohammed  and  Breuer  [670]  and  Almo-
hammed  [84]  improved  the  energy-based  agglomeration  model  by 
Alletto [679], leading to more accurate agglomeration conditions and 
accurately  modeling  the  kinetics  of  the  collision  partners  without 
agglomeration.  A  detailed  description  of  the  development  history, 
extension,  and  derivation  of  common  energy-based  agglomeration 
models  can  be  found  in  the  work  of  Almohammed  [84].  This  work 
applied  the  newly  extended  EAM  and  a  deterministic  collision  model 
based on coupled LES-DPM simulations with the hard-sphere model in a 
(cid:0) 1) (see Fig. 3.31) 
simple shear flow with a constant shear rate (˙γ = 71 s
laden with 75,000 primary particles with a diameter of 25 μm. The re-
sults  obtained  from  the  four-way  coupled  simulation  were  validated 
based on a theoretical model by van de Ven and Mason [1142], showing 
reasonable agreement (see Fig. 3.32).  

2)  Force-based agglomeration model 

In  the  context  of  force-based  agglomeration  models  (FAMs),  the 
earliest contribution to the research came from Chaouki et al. [1102] in 
1985.  They  proposed  a  simplified  model  for  agglomerate  size,  which 
assumed  that  the  difference  between  the  gravitational  and  buoyancy 
forces  acting  on  the  agglomerate  equals  the  van  der  Waals  force 
attracting  its  primary  particles.  In  1998,  Iwadate  and  Horio  [1143] 
derived a mathematical model to predict agglomerate size in a fluidized 
bed,  relying  on  the  balance  between  the  bed  expansion  force  due  to 
bubbles and the cohesive rupture force of the agglomerate. They found 
that the bed compaction force in bubbling fluidized beds was not strong 
enough to break formed agglomerates. The agglomeration criterion by 
Iwadate and Horio [1143] was successfully validated based on experi-
mental  results.  Zhou  and  Li  [1132]  also  proposed  a  model  for  the 

Fig. 3.31. Snapshot of (a) shear flow, (b) injected particles at the beginning of the simulation, colored by the dimensionless particle velocity in the streamwise 
direction ,(up /Uw) and (c) the distribution of agglomerates formed at the end of the simulation, colored by the diameters of the agglomerates dag (μm) predicted by 
the MAM model [666] (reproduced from reference [84], with permission of authors). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930121F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.32. Comparison between the predictions of the MAM model [666] and the EAM model [670]: (a) time history of the agglomeration rate (αagg = Nagg /Ncol)
predicted by the MAM and EAM models against the theoretical value given by Eq. (3.12) using the diameter of primary particles dp or the arithmetic mean diameter 
dpof all primary particles and agglomerates; and (b) number of agglomerates of the same type (2 = two particles, 3 = three particles, etc.) at the end of the simulation 
(reproduced from references [666,670], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

agglomeration condition of two dry, equally-sized agglomerates, based 
on  a  balance  of  forces  (drag,  collision,  gravitational,  buoyancy,  and 
cohesive van der Waals forces) acting on the agglomerate in a fluidized 
bed. This model assumed that a binary agglomerate-agglomerate colli-
sion leads to rebound, agglomeration, or breakup after initial agglom-
eration. The authors conducted experiments in a fluidized bed with an 
inner diameter of 33 mm and a height of 1 m (initial bed height was 
between 120 mm and 130 mm). The diameters of the SiC, TiO2, and SiO2 
powders  (white  carbon),  which  were  dried  before  the  experiments, 
ranged between 0.6 μm and 4.6 μm. They found that the agglomerate 
sizes estimated using the proposed model agreed more closely with the 
measured values than the results obtained by Morooka et al. [1134] and 
Horio and Iwadate [1140,1141]. In most models mentioned above, it is 
assumed  that  the  primary  particles  are  monodisperse  and  thus  the 
formed agglomerates include only equal-sized particles. Although this 
assumption might be useful in, for example, granulation processes, it is 
not the case in most fluidized-bed applications when taking agglomer-
ation into account. Zhou and Li [1144] extended their previous model to 
take into account two different diameters of dry cohesive particles (or 
agglomerates)  in  a  fluidized  bed.  Based  on  the  force  balance,  they 
derived  a  criterion  for  rebound,  agglomeration,  or  breakup  after  the 
impact.  Specifically,  the  authors  obtained  a  quadratic  equation  and 
solved  it  analytically.  The  drag  force  was  found  to  be  two  orders  of 
magnitude less than the collision force and thus it was neglected. The 
agglomeration criterion proposed suggested that the agglomeration of 
cohesive  particles  in  the  fluidization  process  is  enhanced  if  collisions 
occur  between  large  and  small  agglomerates.  The  predictions  of  the 
model developed by Zhou and Li [1144] showed reasonable agreement 
with  experimental  data. 
the 
above-mentioned  force-based  agglomeration models were not used  in 
the  context  of  CFD-DPM  simulations  or  profoundly  validated.  Their 
applications were restricted to simplified analysis of agglomerate size in 
fluidized-bed systems.  

is  worth  mentioning 

that 

It 

3)  Momentum-based agglomeration model 

The third approach for modeling particle agglomeration is referred 
to as the momentum-based agglomeration model (MAM). According to 
Breuer  and  Almohammed  [666],  among  others,  this  technique  is  the 
common choice incorporated into the discrete-particle model using the 
impulse-based  hard-sphere  model,  in  which  the  particle  motion  is 
described  based  on  momentum  conservation equations  (i.e.  Newton’s 

second law), as previously presented in the Hard-sphere model section. 
In the last two decades, significant efforts have been made to develop 
appropriate  momentum-based  agglomeration  models  within  the 
framework of the discrete-particle model with the hard-sphere model. In 
2004, Weber et al. [1145] first proposed a square-well potential model 
as a  simplified MAM by assuming that the cohesive  forces arise from 
impulsive  events.  Specifically,  the  collision  partners  undergo  an 
instantaneous cohesive force of the dirac-delta type when they approach 
each other (compression phase) or depart from each other (restitution 
phase). For a normal restitution coefficient en, the authors stated that the 
collision partners agglomerate (i.e. capture-cohesive interaction) if the 
relative velocity between them is too small to overwhelm the cohesive 
well. Otherwise, an escaping-cohesive interaction occurs and the parti-
cles rebound. The effect of the cohesion is taken into consideration in 
this agglomeration model by the effective normal restitution coefficient 
̃en, given by Weber et al. [1145]: 

⎧
⎨

̃en =

(en)2 (cid:0)

⎩

mp

[
4
[(

1 (cid:0) (en)2]
u→(0)
(cid:0) u→(0)

i

j

Dsw
)

⋅ n→

ij

⎫
⎬

1/2

,

]2

⎭

(3.11)  

where Dsw stands for the depth of the square well. Note that in the case of 
fully  elastic  collision  (en = 1)  the  above  relation  reduces  to  (̃en = en), 
implying  that the  effect of the  cohesion  vanishes, which  is  consistent 
with the energy-based models, as explained above. The main drawbacks 
of this model are: (i) the depth and the width of the square well have to 
be  pre-defined  according  to  the  global  volume  fraction  and  (ii)  the 
relation is derived by assuming frictionless collision (i.e. particle rota-
tion  is  not  taken  into  account).  Later  on,  Weber  and  Hrenya  [1146] 
developed a mapping method to estimate the material-specific Hamaker 
constants,  which  are  equivalent  to  the  square-well  parameters.  The 
developed square-well model was used in fluidized-bed simulations and 
the results obtained showed that the characteristics of the bed (mixing 
level, particle distribution, and minimum fluidization velocity) can be 
predicted, but the full bed fluidization was not observed due to the high 
levels  of  cohesion.  After  four  years,  Kosinski  and  Hoffmann  [773] 
introduced the first momentum-based agglomeration model within the 
framework  of  the  standard  hard-sphere  model  by  incorporating  the 
cohesive impulse into the momentum conservation equations. Assuming 
a frictionless and a fully elastic collision, the collision time was derived 
based on a common relation (among others: Hertz [775] and Johnson 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930122F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1147]). In addition, the no-slip condition used to identify the collision 
type (i.e. sticking or sliding) takes the effect of cohesion into account. 
Kosinski and Hoffmann [773] used this agglomeration model to study 
agglomeration in a two-dimensional laminar channel flow, but the re-
sults were not validated or even compared to the predictions of other 
models. Balakin et al. [1100] also adopted this agglomeration model to 
study  how  various  simulation  parameters  affected  the  agglomeration 
rate  (or  collision  efficiency)  in  a  two-dimensional  shear  flow  and 
compared  the  results  with  a  simplified  theoretical  model.  Later  on, 
Kosinski  and  Hoffmann  [1107]  extended  the  model  by  combining 
dissipative  forces  based  on  the  DEM  model  [1148]  and  the 
Johnson-Kendall-Roberts  model  [1149]  to  derive  a  relation  for  the 
cohesive  impulse.  The  predictions  of  the  extended  model  were  not 
validated  or  even  compared  to  the  results  obtained  by  Kosinski  and 
Hoffmann  [773]  to  show  the  impact  of  the  extension  on  the  results. 
Recently,  Breuer  and  Almohammed  [666]  further  extended  the 
momentum-based  agglomeration  model  by  Kosinski  and  Hoffmann 
[773]  by  splitting  up  the  collision  into  a  compression  phase  and  a 
restitution phase, estimating their time intervals by solving the ordinary 
differential  equation  of  the  overlap  of  the  collision  partners  in  the 
normal direction using MATLAB, enabling the cohesive impulse to be 
determined.  Furthermore,  Breuer  and  Almohammed  [666]  distin-
guished  between  the  effect  of  the  cohesive  force  in  the  normal  and 
tangential direction of the collision and took into account the effect of 
cohesion on the collision type and the post-collision treatment without 
agglomeration.  Almohammed  [84]  validated  the  extended  MAM  in  a 
simple  shear flow with a constant  shear rate (˙γ = Uw /δ = 71 s(cid:0) 1) (see 
Fig.  3.31  (a))  and  a  Reynolds  number  (Re = Uwδ /νf  = 28,400)  laden 
with 75,000 primary particles with a diameter of 25 μm (see Fig. 3.31 
(b)). The results obtained from the four-way coupled simulation were 
compared  to  the  predictions  of  the  energy-based  model  by  Almo-
hammed and Breuer [670], and validated based on a theoretical model 
by van de Ven and Mason [1142]. Fig. 3.32 (a) shows the agglomeration 
rate αagg, which is defined as the total number of particle-particle colli-
sions  (leading  to  agglomeration,  i.e.  agglomeration  processes)  to  the 
total number of collisions predicted by the MAM and EAM models, in 
comparison with the theoretical agglomeration rate αagg,th [1142]: 

(

αagg,th = λ

8H
36π μf ˙γd3
p

)0.18

.

(3.12) 

Here, λ is a dimensionless constant depending on the diameter of the 
primary  particle.  In  comparison  to  the  theoretical  model,  the  MAM 
model is seen to lead to more accurate precisions than the EAM model. 
Breuer and Almohammed [666] also concluded that the MAM model is 
superior to the EAM model as fewer empirical parameters are required. 
Fig. 3.32 (c) shows the local distribution for the resulting agglomerates, 
which  are  mostly  two-particle  and  three-particle  agglomerates,  as 
depicted in Fig. 3.32 (b). 

In  four-way  coupled  LES-DPM  simulations  with  the  hard-sphere 
approach,  Almohammed  [84]  applied  the  extended  MAM  and  EAM 
models in a turbulent-laden channel flow at a Reynolds number of 11, 
900  and  investigated  how  various  parameters  (diameter  of  primary 
particles, mass loading, restitution, and friction coefficients, turbulent 
dispersion  models,  wall  roughness,  two-way  coupling,  lift  force,  and 
agglomerate  structure  models)  affected  the  agglomeration  process.  In 
these studies, six million primary particles with diameters of 4 μm and 
12 μm were used. According to the author, the agglomeration rates were 
relatively low (about 0.68 % and 0.02 %, respectively), leading to ag-
glomerates including up to about 5 primary particles. Recently, Breuer 
and Khalifa [675,676] used the momentum-based agglomeration model 
by Breuer and Almohammed [666] as a basis for their work. The authors 
studied  the  breakup  process  of  the  agglomerates  in  a  particle-laden 
turbulent flow in a square glass duct with a hydraulic diameter of 4.3 
mm  and  Reynolds  numbers  of  about  8,700  and  69,600  based  on  the 
experiments by Weiler [1150]. 

In addition to the agglomeration of dry solid particles, considerable 
efforts  have  been  undertaken  in  the  last  two  decades  to  understand 
agglomeration due to the presence of a liquid bridge (e.g. coating the 
colliding solid particles), among others: Ennis et al.[1151], Kang et al. 
[1152], Cryer [1153], He [1154], Liu et al. [1155], Tan et al.[1156], Li 
et al. [1157], Turchiuli et al. [1158], Mosely [1159]. The agglomeration 
process is affected by the viscous dissipation force (especially in the case 
of  highly viscous liquids) as  well  as the  surface  tension and  capillary 
forces  due  to  the  liquid  bridge.  Recently,  Khadilkar  et  al.  [1131] 
reviewed  common  mathematical  models  for  this  agglomeration  phe-
nomenon in gas-particle fluidized-bed systems. 

3.2.2.2.3. Agglomerate  structure  models. As  mentioned  previously, 
spherical particles are assumed within the framework of the hard-sphere 
model. Thus, the characterization of the agglomerate morphology as a 
sphere with an effective size dag and porosity of (εag = 1 (cid:0) (ρag/ρp)) is the 
most appropriate choice to allow the further tracking of spherical ag-
glomerates  (i.e.  determination  of  the  fluid  dynamic  forces),  collision 
detection  (i.e.  interaction  between  particle  and  agglomerate  and  be-
tween  the  agglomerates themselves)  and  post-collision  treatment (i.e. 
rebound, agglomeration or breakup). A detailed review on the modeling 
of the agglomerate structure reveals that various terms are found in the 
literature  (among  others:  Ho  and  Sommerfeld  [658],  Blei  [663], 
Kosinski  and  Hoffmann  [773],  Balakin  et  al.  [1100],  Alletto  [679], 
Almohammed [84]). In the present review paper, a naming convention 
based  on  the  frequently  quoted  terms  for  the  agglomerate  structure 
models is proposed and should be employed as the standard for this field 
of  research.  Broadly  speaking,  two  approaches  (see  Fig.  3.33)  have 
mainly been reported in the literature to describe the structure of ag-
glomerates  in  practically  relevant  particle-laden  flows:  (i)  two-sphere 
and (ii) multi-sphere structure models. 

In  the  two-sphere  agglomerate  structure  models,  the  agglomerate, 
which is formed is made up of only two spheres (i.e. two primary par-
ticles,  a  primary  particle,  and  an  agglomerate  or  two  agglomerates) 
sticking together without any change in the shape. Thus, these models 
are intuitively consistent with the hard-sphere model (i.e. binary colli-
sions),  leading  to simple  relations  for  the  kinetics  of  the  agglomerate 
(see  the  Hard-sphere  model  section).  According  to  Breuer  and  Almo-
hammed [666], the simplest model for the agglomerate structure is the 
volume-equivalent  sphere  model  (VSM),  in  which  the  agglomerate  is 
modeled as a volume-equivalent sphere with a density equal to that of 
the primary particles (ρag = ρp). If the agglomerate porosity is (εag = 0) 
(non-porous  agglomerate),  the  interstitial  space  (voidage  or  porosity) 
between the agglomerated primary particles is not taken into account. 
Applying the mass conservation principle, the diameter of the arising 
). This agglomerate 
agglomerate can be calculated as (dag =

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
+ d3
d3
p,j
p,i

√

3

structure  model  has  been  applied  in  various  studies  using  the 
hard-sphere model within the framework of the energy-based agglom-
eration  model  (among  others:  Ho  and  Sommerfeld  [658-661],  Blei 
[663], Alletto [679], Njobuenwu and Fairweather [1110], Sommerfeld 
and  Stübing  [656])  and  the  momentum-based  agglomeration  model 
(among  others:  Kosinski  and  Hoffmann  [773,1107],  Balakin  et  al. 
[1100],  Almohammed  [84]).  To  avoid  the  drawback  of  the  VSM  (it 
neglects the agglomerate porosity), two agglomerate structure models, 
presented in Fig. 3.33, were recently introduced by Breuer and Almo-
hammed  [666]  for  a  more  general  description  of  the  agglomerate 
structure: ((i) the inertia-equivalent sphere model and (ii) the porous 
sphere  model).  In  the  inertia-equivalent  sphere  model  (ISM),  the 
two-sphere agglomerate is replaced by a spherical shell with a radius of 
gyration (Rg = Icm
/mag), where the moment of inertia of the agglom-
p
erate about the center of mass Icm
is calculated relying on the parallel 
p 
axis theorem (Icm
). By setting the moment of 
+ mja2
= Ii + Ij + mia2
p
j
i
inertia  of  the  spherical  shell  equal  to  the  moment  of  inertia  of  the 
spherical solid agglomerate, the agglomerate diameter can be expressed 
as  (dag =
Rg),  which  is  larger  than  the  agglomerate  diameter 

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
20/3

√

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930123F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.33. Schematic representation of agglomerate structure models (reproduced from references [84,656,676], with permission of authors and Elsevier).  

determined  by  the  VSM.  The  agglomerate  density  is  then  calculated 
based on the conservation of mass, leading to (ρag < ρp) mimicking the 
agglomerate porosity (εag = 1 (cid:0) (ρag/ρp)), which is now less than unity. 
However, the VSM and the ISM ensure the conservation of the mass and 
angular  momentum,  without  conserving  the  kinetic  energy.  To 

overcome this shortcoming, Almohammed [84] developed the porous 
sphere model (PSM) by converting the two-sphere agglomerate into a 
porous  sphere  (see  Fig.  3.33).  The  author  determined  the  density, 
diameter and three angular velocity components of the porous sphere (i. 
e. agglomerate) by solving a 5x5 system of equations, which are the mass 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930124F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

equation, the kinetic energy conservation equation, and three equations 
for  angular  momentum  components.  Taking  the  fact  that  a  real 
agglomerate  assembly  is  made  up  of  many  primary  particles,  the 
agglomerate structure can be described using the multi-sphere structure 
models  classified  into  two  categories:  (i)  predefined  structure  models 
and (ii) predicted structure models, as shown in Fig. 3.33. Assuming that 
the agglomerate consists of only monodisperse primary particles, Breuer 
and  Almohammed  [666]  developed  the  closely-packed  sphere  model 
(CSM), in which the porosity of the agglomerate is prescribed based on 
the  number  of  monodisperse  particles.  Here,  the  formed  spherical 
agglomerate is assumed to enclose only monodisperse primary particles 
(see Fig. 3.33). To take into account the interstitial space between the 
particles, the authors assumed that monodisperse primary particles are 
packed into a cube of the volume Vcupe and defined the packing fraction 
(0  < fpack  < 1)  given  by  (fpack = Vp,tot/Vcupe)  so  that  the  agglomerate 
porosity reads (εag = 1 (cid:0)
fpack). In this model, the agglomerate density is 
calculated based on the packing fraction and the density of the primary 
particle  (ρag = fpackρp),  leading  to  (ρag  < ρp),  and  the  agglomerate 
diameter is determined based on the mass conservation. In comparison 
to the VSM, the agglomerate density in the ISM and CSM is (ρag  < ρp), 
leading to larger agglomerate diameters than the VSM. Later on, Breuer 
and Khalifa [676] extended the determination of the packing fraction in 
the context of the closely-packed sphere model by performing a Monte 
Carlo (MC) simulation for a compact agglomerate involving np  mono-
disperse primary particles. This model results in a random loose packing 
i=1Vp,i /Vag), 
with the intermediate values of packing fraction (f MC
pack
where the total volume occupied by the agglomerate Vag is the volume of 
the  convex  hull  enclosing  the  formed  agglomerate,  calculated  using 
MATLAB.  Afterward,  the  cohesive  force  between  the  particles  of  the 
compact  agglomerate  was  taken  into  account,  leading  to  the  packing 
fraction fpack  of the agglomerate required in the closely-packed sphere 
model: 

∑np

=

fpack = f MC
pack

[
1 (cid:0) exp

(
(cid:0) m R(cid:0) n

f

)]
,

(3.13)  

ijρpd2

with constants m and n that are set to 6.727 and 0.223, respectively. The 
ratio (Rf = H /(4πs2
p g)) identifies the magnitude of the van der Waals 
force to the magnitude of the gravitational force. The extension of the 
CSM  leads  to  a  noticeably  lower  packing  fraction  and  thus  a  higher 
agglomerate  porosity,  which  is  more  realistic  when  considering  the 
agglomerate breakup (see the Agglomerate breakup section). Further-
more,  the  extended  CSM  includes  an  estimation  of  the  coordination 
number  required  to  calculate  the  strength  of  agglomerates.  Almo-
hammed [84] carried out four-way coupled LES-DPM simulations with 
the  hard-sphere  model  using  the  extended  MAM  model  [666]  in  a 
turbulent-laden channel flows (with a Reynolds number of 11,900, six 

million primary particles with a diameter of 12 μm) in order to study the 
effect which different two-sphere agglomerate structure models had on 
the agglomeration process. Fig. 3.34 (a) shows that the CSM predicts the 
largest agglomerates, followed by the PSM, ISM, and VSM, respectively. 
However, the agglomerate structure model was only observed to have a 
slight effect on the agglomeration rate, as shown in Fig. 3.34 (b). 

The development of the sophisticated agglomerate structure models, 
denoted hereafter by the predicted structure model (see Fig. 3.33), was 
initiated  by  a  need  to  enable  more  details  on  the  morphology  of  ag-
glomerates (e.g. sphericity, porosity, and fractal dimension) to be pre-
dicted, including monodisperse or polydisperse primary particles, which 
are  often  encountered  in  technical  processes  such  as  fluidized-bed 
agglomeration  and  spray  drying.  So  far,  two  predicted  agglomerate 
structure  models  have  been  developed  in  the  context  of  the  point- 
particle  approach  using  the  stochastic  collision  detection  model:  (i) 
the  sequential  agglomerate  model  and  (ii)  the  fractal  agglomerate 
model. Within the framework of both sophisticated agglomerate struc-
ture models, the history of the position of primary particles included in 
the  agglomerate  and  other  properties  for  each  contact  (agglomerate 
diameter and porosity, cohesive van der Waals force) are stored in a tree 
structure (or a multiple linked list), in relation to a reference particle. 
The information is then used during the simulation to decide whether 
the agglomerate of the breakup is possible, which of course leads to a 
much higher computational time than the predefined structure model 
and the two-sphere structure models. 

3

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
6Vag/π

In the sequential agglomerate model (SAM) developed by Lipowsky 
and  Sommerfeld  [1160]  and  depicted  in  Fig.  3.33,  a  two-particle 
agglomerate is assumed. After a successful agglomeration process, this 
leads  to  a  spherical  agglomerate  with  a  volume-equivalent  diameter 
determined by (dag =
) with (Vag = Vi + Vj + Vhull) (i.e. the vol-
ume  of  the  two  agglomerating  particles  and  the  void  volume  of  the 
convex hull enveloping them). Thus, the agglomerate diameter using the 
SAM is larger than that determined based on the classical VSM, since the 
SAM  takes  into  account  the  agglomerate  porosity,  defined  as 
(εag = Vhull/Vag = 1 (cid:0) (ρag/ρp)). The volume of the convex hull is deter-
mined using an analytical expression (details can be found in [1161]). 
By analogy to the previous agglomerate structure models, the “spher-
ical”  agglomerate  within  the  framework  of  the  SAM  is  used  for  the 
particle tracking within the framework of the discrete-particle model, 
but at the same time as a complex structure, including several primary 
particles at the inter-particle collision level. As previously mentioned, 
the  stochastic  collision  detection  by  Sommerfeld  is  used.  A  random 
choice  is  made  as  to  where  the  primary  particle  adheres  on  the  free 
surface area of the agglomerate (dark orange or dark grey in Fig. 3.33) 
and this information is continuously summarized [656]. Lipowsky and 
Sommerfeld [1160,1161] applied the sequential agglomerate model in 
discrete-particle  simulations  using  the  hard-sphere  model  with 

Fig. 3.34. Effect of the agglomerate structure model on (a) the average number of primary particles included in an agglomerate (Napp /Nag), where Napp  and Nag 
denote the accumulated numbers of agglomerated primary particles and formed agglomerates; and (b) the agglomeration rate (αagg = Nagg /Ncol) (reproduced from 
reference [84], with permission of authors). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930125F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

stochastic  collision  detection  to  study  the  effect  of  agglomeration  on 
particle separation in a gas cyclone. 

Meanwhile,  the  fractal  agglomerate  model  (FAM)  was  originally 
developed by Stübing [1162]. It is classified as the most sophisticated 
model, in which the entire agglomerate structure is estimated based on 
statistical approaches. As in the SAM, the positions of each new primary 
particle involved in the agglomerate are stored in relation to a reference 
particle (particle colored red in Fig. 3.33) and carried throughout the 
flow  field,  leading  to  a  realistic  agglomerate  structure.  The  main  dif-
ference between the sequential and fractal agglomerate models is the 
calculation  of  the  convex  hull  and  thus  the  agglomerate  porosity, 
diameter,  and  density,  among  other  properties  characterizing  the 
agglomerate.  In  the  fractal  agglomerate  model,  it  was  assumed  that 
inter-particle  collision  occurs  only  between  primary  particles  or  be-
tween  primary  particles  and  existing  agglomerates.  As  depicted  in 
Fig. 3.33, the agglomerate porosity is defined as the void volume to the 
volume  occupied  by  the  agglomerate  (volume  of  the  convex  hull 
enveloping the agglomerate), leading to (εag = 1 (cid:0) (Vp,tot/Vhull)), which 
is determined based on the works by Dietzel and Sommerfeld [1163] and 
Ernst  et  al.  [1164].  Note  that  despite  the  realistic  prediction  of  the 
agglomerate structure, the fractal agglomerate model is very costly due 
to the storage of the agglomeration history and the determination of the 
volume of the convex hull. In this model, the agglomerate diameter dag 
(i.e.  the  enveloping  sphere)  is  defined  as  the  largest  extension  of  the 
formed agglomerate, in terms of its center of mass [656]. The number of 
primary particles included in the fractal agglomerate is given by: 

np = kf

)Df

,

(

Rg
Rp

(3.14)  

where the fractal dimension Df indicates the distribution of spatial mass 
of  the  primary  particles  and  ranges  between  1  (straight  line)  and  3 
(spherical  solid  body).  The factor kf  is  the  fractal pre-factor, approxi-
mated by Vanni [1165] as (kf = 0.414Df (cid:0) 0.211) for a fractal dimension 
(1.5 < Df < 2.75). The symbol Rg stands for the radius of gyration (see 
Fig. 3.33), defined by Sommerfeld and Stübing [656] as follows: 

√

∑np

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
⃒
⃒
2
⃒
⃒
1
⃒ r→
⃒
⃒
⃒
np

r→

ag (cid:0)

p,i

.

i=1

Rg =

(3.15) 

Fig. 3.35 shows the fractal agglomerates formed after 5 s using the 

mono- and polydisperse primary particles. 

3.2.2.2.4. Agglomerate  breakup. The  reduction  in  the  agglomerate 
size  (or  breakup)  in  wall-bounded  turbulent  flows  occurs  for  several 
reasons including the interaction between the turbulent flow field and 
agglomerates,  collisions  between  agglomerates  themselves,  or  with 
primary  particles,  and  the  impacts  of  agglomerates  at  other  system 
boundaries  such  as  walls.  Recently,  Breuer  and  Khalifa  [675,676] 
reviewed the advances in agglomerate breakup due to the first breakage 

mechanism (i.e. interaction with the flow field). The second and third 
mechanisms for the breakup of solid particles are still at the early stage 
of  development,  thus  significant  efforts  are  required  in  this  area  of 
research. As a result of the complex morphology and structural hetero-
geneity of the agglomerates made up from solid particles, the challenges 
facing  the  modeling  of  the  agglomerate  breakup  process  include  the 
accurate description of the fluid dynamic forces acting on an agglom-
erate  and  the  inter-particle  cohesive  forces  between  the  particles, 
keeping the formed agglomerate intact. 

In the context of the numerical modeling of two-phase flows with 
non-resolved particles, the breakage of agglomerated solid particles has 
been repeatedly investigated in the literature using the two-fluid model 
(TFM), based on the population balance equation with breakup kernels 
(among  others:  Kusters  [1166],  B¨abler  et  al.  [1167],  Ammar  et  al. 
[1168]) or the discrete-particle model (DPM), treating agglomerates as 
clusters of discrete particles interconnected by inter-particle forces and 
moments of  force  (among others:  Breuer and  Khalifa  [675-677],  Njo-
buenwu and Fairweather [1119]). Within the framework of the TFM, the 
problem is considerably simplified by treating the particulate phase as a 
second fluid, and the  breakup is  predicted using predefined breakage 
kernels (i.e. breakup rate formulas), which can be included in the pop-
ulation balance equation. However, these are known to be problematic 
when incorporating fitting parameters based on empirical data. In the 
context of DPM simulations, the detachment of particles directly follows 
the particles’  equations of motion, forming the agglomerate by taking 
into account the external forces and moments of force (e.g. fluid forces) 
and  the  internal  ones  (e.g.  inter-particle  contact).  The  inter-particle 
forces  and  moments  of  force  are  computed  either  by  means  of  the 
discrete  element  method  (among  others:  Higashitani  et  al.  [1169], 
Eggersdorfer et  al.  [1170])  or by  assuming that the  agglomerates are 
rigid bodies. The latter approach enables the calculation of the forces 
and moments of force at the contact points between primary particles by 
solving the system of equations, comprising the equations of motion of 
the rigid agglomerate and the constituent particles. However, one major 
challenge  for such  methods is  the  physical determination of the  fluid 
forces  acting  on  each  particle  included  in  the  agglomerate.  Since  the 
fluid-particle  interface  is  not  resolved,  the  application  of  the 
point-particle approximation can be associated with a large error due to 
the existence of neighboring particles (also called the shadow effect). 
This  is  because  the  forces  acting  on  point-particles  are  computed  by 
assuming  there  are  no  disturbances  in  the  surrounding  flow  field. 
Although efforts have recently been made to overcome this issue, the 
high  computational  demands  renders  the  procedure  unfeasible  for 
simulating systems with an extremely high number of particles.  

1)  Fluid dynamic and mechanical stresses 

Fig. 3.35. Agglomerate structure of dry primary particles formed after 5 s using the fractal porous sphere model: (a) monodisperse primary particles with a diameter 
of  12  mm (np = 28, dag = 51.6 mm  and εag = 0.8),  and (b) polydisperse  primary particles  with  dp = 2 (cid:0) 20 mm  (np = 51,  dag = 68 mm  and εag = 0.83),  where  the 
agglomerate diameter is assumed to equal the gyration diameter (reproduced from reference [656], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930126F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Research  on  the  breakup  of  agglomerates  due  to  fluid  dynamic 
stresses has been conducted by several authors based on theoretical 
and  experimental  investigations.  The  earliest  contribution  to  this 
field of research dates back to Rumpf [1171] in 1962. In the last four 
decades, significant efforts have been made in this research field by 
other  authors  (among  others:  Tomas  [1105],  Tomi  and  Bagster 
[1172], Sonntag and Russel [1173], Weiler (2008) [1150], Zaccone 
et  al.  [1174]).  According  to  Breuer  and  Khalifa  [675],  one  major 
mechanism  for  the  agglomerate  breakup  is  the  interaction  of  this 
agglomerate with the continuous flow field. A distinction has usually 
been  made  between  three  kinds  of  fluid  stresses  in  the  literature, 
focusing on heavy particles in turbulent flows:   

• Turbulent stresses: In turbulent two-phase flows, random velocity 
fluctuations  lead  to  pressure  differences.  The  velocity  gradients 
across the agglomerate are referred to as turbulent stresses, and 
deform or even rupture the agglomerate (among others: Thomas 
[1175],  Kusters  [1166],  Mühle  [1176],  Yeung  et  al.  [1177], 
Ammar et al. [1168], Saha et al. [1178]). 

• Drag stresses: These stresses result from the relative velocity be-
tween the agglomerate and the continuous flow, and may lead to 
erosion, implying that one or a small number of primary particles 
involved in the agglomerate detach from this agglomerate (among 
others: Tomi and Bagster [1172], Weiler [1150,1179], Saha et al. 
[1178]). 

• Rotary  stresses:  In  two-phase  shear  flows,  the  agglomerates  un-
dergo rotations, which may lead to agglomerate backup, especially 
at  high  angular  velocities.  It  worth  noting  that  this  breakup 
mechanism can also be attributed to the high agglomerate rotation 
due to collisions among agglomerates, between agglomerates and 
primary particles, or with surrounding walls [675,676].    

process.  Following  Breuer  and  Almohammed  [666]  in  their  particle 
agglomeration study, the realistic structures of the agglomerates are not 
stored or tracked along their trajectories. Instead, the necessary values 
for  the  agglomerate  structure  (e.g.  the  packing  fraction  fpack  and  the 
coordination number kc) are called up from look-up tables as a function 
of  the  number  of  particles  involved  in  the  agglomerate  (see  the 
Agglomerate  structure  models  section).  This  leads  to  an  enormous 
reduction  in  the  computational  costs  associated  with  tracking  the 
agglomerate structure. However, due to the absence of the agglomerate 
structure, the internal stresses (i.e. the forces and torques on each con-
tact)  are  not  available.  Therefore,  the  prediction  of  breakage  for  the 
idealized  spherical  agglomerates  requires  additional  modeling  for  the 
breakage criterion and the post-breakup behavior. The latter includes 
models  for  the  size  distribution  and  the  kinetics  of  the  generated 
fragments. 

The general assumption employed in the work of Breuer and Khalifa 
[676] is that the agglomerate breakup starts when the magnitude of the 
applied fluid stresses (i.e. the turbulent stress σturb, the drag stress σdrag , 
and the rotary stress σrotary) passes a certain threshold, denoted hereafter 
as the agglomerate strength Sag. It is worth noting that since the different 
stresses may act in different directions, it makes less sense to combine 
them by simply summing their magnitudes. Therefore, in the proposed 
model, only the largest stress is taken into account when examining the 
possibility of a breakup [676]. Accordingly, the general breakup con-
dition reads: 

(cid:0)
max

σturb, σdrag, σrotary

)

≥ Sag.

(3.16) 

The  agglomerate  strength  is  determined  based  on  the  model  by 

Rumpf [1171] as follows: 

Sag = kc

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) εag

) Fvan
ij
πd2
p

.

(3.17) 

2)  Breakup models 

Most agglomerate breakup models within the framework of the DPM 
model are based on a simple criterion. It is assumed that the breakup 
process occurs due to interaction with the continuous flow field if the 
fluid  dynamic  stresses  exceed  a  certain  threshold.  So  far,  only  a  few 
studies exist on agglomerate breakup within the framework of the hard- 
sphere model. In the first study of its kind, Breuer and Khalifa [675,676] 
have  recently  proposed  an  agglomerate  breakup  model  standing  be-
tween the two limits described previously. The principle of this breakup 
model is based on the discrete-particle approach using the hard-sphere 
model,  in  which  the  compact  agglomerate  is  idealized  as  a  sphere 
with a reduced density (ρag  < ρp), whose constituent primary particles 
have  an  associated  equivalent  diameter,  as  depicted  in  Fig.  3.36.  In 
fluidized-bed  systems,  among  other  applications,  the  assumption  of 
compact  agglomerates  is  reasonable  in,  for  example,  the  granulation 

Here, (ϵag = 1 (cid:0)

fpack) is the agglomerate porosity and Fvan
ij 

stands for 
the magnitude of the van der Waals force between two monodisperse 
primary particles with a diameter dp. If the breakup criterion (see Eq. 
(3.16)) is satisfied, it is assumed that the agglomerate is split into two 
fragments  and  the  post-treatment  of  the  sizes  and  kinetics  of  these 
fragments depends on the breakup mechanism, as explained next. 

The  stress  mechanisms  appearing  in  Eq.  (3.16)  are  modeled  as 

follows: 

• Turbulent  stress  mechanism:  Turbulent  stress  stems  from  the  in-
teractions between agglomerates and turbulent eddies of equivalent 
sizes. The expression for computing this stress is generally given by: 

σturb ∼ ρf Δu

(cid:0)

)2,

dag

(3.18)  

where  Δu(dag)  is  the  longitudinal  root  mean  square  (RMS)  of  the 
velocity difference over a distance equal to the agglomerate diameter 

Fig. 3.36. A spherical compact agglomerate in a uniform fluid flow (reproduced from reference [675], with permission of Elsevier).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930127F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.6 
The  root-mean-square  velocity  difference  and  the  resulting  turbulent  stresses  based  on  the  eddy  sub-range  of  turbulence  (taken  from  reference  [676]  based  on 
reference [1181]).  

Subrange 
Viscous 

Transition (laminar preferred) 

Transition (turbulent preferred) 

Inertial 

Agglomerate size dag 
dag < 3ηK 

3ηK ≤ dag < 7ηK 

7ηK ≤ dag < 58ηK 

dag > 58ηK 

and its values summarized in Table 3.6 for different regimes based on 
Kolmogorov’s length ηK. Note that in the viscous sub-range, the ag-
glomerates would experience shearing and therefore, in this partic-
ular case, the general expression in Eq. (3.18) is replaced by: 

σturb = μf

(cid:0)

Δv

dag

dag

)

,

(3.19)  

√

̅̅̅
2

where Δv(dag) stands for the lateral root-mean-square velocity dif-
ference and is related to the longitudinal difference by the expression 
(Δv(dag) =
Δu(dag)), based on Kusters [1166]. If the breakup is 
achieved by this mechanism, agglomerates are assumed to be split 
into two fragments of an equal or near-equal number of particles. The 
densities of the fragments are computed depending on fpack, obtained 
from  the  look-up  table  based  on  the  number  of  particles  in  each 
fragment, and the diameter of each fragment is obtained, employing 
mass  conservation.  Finally,  the  velocities  of  the  fragments  after 
splitting  are  estimated.  As  the  sum  of  the  diameters  of  the  two 
fragments is larger than the diameter of the original agglomerate, the 
velocity fluctuations, as predicted from Table 3.6, are larger on the 
two-fragment structure than on the original spherical agglomerate. 
Using  an  energy  balance,  the  difference  between  the  pre-  and 
post-breakage  turbulent  kinetic  energies  is  estimated.  This  is 
assumed to be spent in raising a relative velocity between the two 
fragments in a frame of reference moving with the agglomerate. The 
direction of separation is set according to experimental observations 
by Saha [1180] for this kind of breakage along the axis of the most 
extensional  eigenvector  of  the  rate  of  the  strain  tensor,  computed 
locally at the position of the agglomerate.  

• Drag stress mechanism: The drag stress is determined by evaluating 
the difference between the inertial and drag forces evolving within 
planes inside a fixed agglomerate suddenly released into a uniform 
flow. Tomi and Bagster [1172] derived an expression for the drag 
stress acting on a plane, given by the base of a spherical cap within 
the  spherical  agglomerate,  as  depicted  schematically  in  Fig.  3.36 
(dashed black line): 
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→
⃒

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒αcosθcosψ = σmax

turb cosθcosψ,

f (cid:0) u→

σdrag =

ag

(3.20)  

3μf
dag

p

→
f  and  u

→
where  u
ag  are the velocity of the fluid at the position of the 
agglomerate and the velocity of the agglomerate, respectively. The 
symbol (α = 1 +0.15Re0.687
) is the drag correction factor, as given by 
Schiller and Naumann [800] and incorporated into the drag stress 
formula in the literature (e.g. Weiler et al. [1179], Saha et al. [1178]) 
to extend its validity to include turbulent flows. The angles θ and ψ, 
shown  in  Fig.  3.36,  indicate  the  size  of  the  spherical  cap  and  its 
location  in  relation to  the  axis  parallel  to  the  slip  velocity vector, 
respectively. Eq. (3.20) suggests that the maximum drag stress occurs 
if (θ = ψ = 0) (i.e. at a plane normal to the relative velocity). Breuer 
and Khalifa [676] argue that the agglomerate breakage refers to the 
separation of primary particles. Accordingly, the acting stress must 
be sufficient to split at least one primary particle. The latter state-
ment is referred to as the second breakup condition, which has to be 

)1/2

)1/2

/

νf

/

νf

dag    

dag    

ϵ

Δu(dag) 
(1/15)1/2(cid:0)
(1/15)1/2(cid:0)
0.7ϵ3/8ν(cid:0) 1/8
(cid:0)
1.38

ϵdag

ϵ

f

d1/2
ag    
)1/3    

dag    

σturb 
(1/15)1/2μf
/

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

ϵ

/

ϵ3

0.068ρf
(cid:0)

0.49ρf
(cid:0)

1.9ρf

ϵdag

/

)1/2

ϵ

νf
)
d2
νf
ag    
)1/4

dag    

νf
)2/3     

satisfied in addition to the general condition given in Eq. (3.16) to 
allow  the  breakup  in  the  case  of  the  drag  stress  mechanism.  The 
number of particles eroded under a certain stress condition can be 
obtained  by  finding  the  largest  angle,  which  still  leads  to  a  stress 
magnitude (see Eq. (3.20)) larger than the strength of the agglom-
erate. When this angle is obtained, the volume of the spherical cap 
Vcap can be computed, and thus the number of particles represented 
by the cap are determined employing the mass conservation. If more 
than one particle is eroded at once, these are assumed to split as one 
unit  for  simplicity.  This  means  that  the  size  of  the  resulting  two 
fragments after breakup is known. Since the drag force acts in the 
direction of the relative velocity, the smaller fragment is assumed to 
detach in that direction, whereas the velocity of the larger fragment 
is assumed for simplicity not to be affected by the breakage process. 
The magnitude of the relative velocity between the two fragments is 
determined using an energy balance stating that part of the trans-
lational kinetic energy of the agglomerate is dissipated during the 
breakup process, and the remaining part raises the relative velocity 
between the fragments. 

• Rotary stress mechanism: The rotary stress is attributed to the cen-
trifugal forces developing within elastic spherical agglomerates that 
are rotating around their axis. Employing elasticity theory, a formula 
is delivered to compute the rotary stress as follows: 

σrotary =

2νag + 3
5νag + 7

ρagω2

agR2
ag,

(3.21)  

where ωag, Rag  and νag  are the angular velocity, the radius, and the 
Poisson’s ratio of the agglomerate, respectively. If the breakup takes 
place by this mechanism, agglomerates are again assumed to break 
into  two  fragments  of  equal  or  near-equal  size.  To  determine  the 
angular  velocities  of  the  fragments  after  separation,  it  is  assumed 
that  part  of  the  angular  momentum  of  the  original  agglomerate 
dissipates  during  the  breakage  process,  and  the  rest  is  distributed 
over the two fragments, allowing their angular velocities to be esti-
mated. The magnitude of the dissipated momentum is obtained using 
the so-called critical angular velocity, which is the minimum angular 
velocity that leads to rotary stress, satisfying the breakage condition. 
The translational velocities of the fragment can be predicted based 
on energy arguments. It is assumed that part of the rotational energy 
of the agglomerate is dissipated during the breakup process and the 
rest is converted into translational and rotational kinetic energies for 
the two generated fragments. That results in each fragment making 
an  additional  contribution  to  the  velocity  in  the  direction  of  the 
centrifugal force, which is selected randomly in a plane normal to the 
axis of rotation. Due to the change of the center of rotation from the 
center of mass of the two-fragment structure to the center of each 
fragment, each fragment in the tangential direction (i.e. normal to 
both  the  axis  of  rotation  and  the  centrifugal  direction)  should 
contribute to the velocity. Both new contributions are superimposed 
on the velocity of the original agglomerates. 

Breuer and Khalifa [675] extended the agglomerate breakup model 
by  taking  into  consideration  the  relevant  time  scales  of  the  physical 
processes. Furthermore, the agglomerate breakup time was calculated 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930128F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

based on a time lag between two subsequent breakup processes for this 
agglomerate. The introduction of the time lag ensures that the breakup 
model is independent of the size of the time step used in the simulation, 
which prevents unphysical collisions or re-agglomeration of the arising 
fragments.  Recently,  the  authors  applied  the  breakup  model  they 
developed  in  four-way  coupled  LES-DPM  simulations  with  the 
hard-sphere model to investigate the breakup process of agglomerates in 
a  generic  dry  powder  disperser  at  two  different  Reynolds  numbers 
(Re = 8,698 and 69,584). Three different powder sizes of SiO2 primary 
particles  (0.97  μm,  2.47  μm,  and  5.08  μm)  were  used  to  form  the 
compact  agglomerates.  Detailed  analysis  of  the  different  breakup 
mechanisms was  carried out  in terms of the total number of  breakup 
events  and  its  ratio  to  the  number  of  released  agglomerates  (see 
Fig. 3.37). The predicted dispersion rate at the outlet of the disperser 
was  validated  against  experimental  measurements  by  Weiler  [1150]. 
Breuer and Khalifa [675] also found that using physically relevant time 
scales (i.e. with a time delay between successive breakup events Δtlag) 
leads to more accurate predictions in comparison with measurements, 
especially for the cases with higher Reynolds numbers. Very recently, 
within  the  framework  of  the  hard-sphere  model,  Khalifa  and  Breuer 
[681] developed an impact breakage model for nearly spherical cohe-
sive agglomerates formed due to collision with a wall. This model was 
derived by performing extensive discrete element simulations (about 15, 
000) for eight agglomerate size classes including 10 and 104 cohesive 
◦
primary particles as well as seven collision angles ranging from 7
(flat 
◦
impact) to 90
(normal impact) and different velocities reproducing the 
full breakage spectrum (i.e. from the rebound of an intact agglomerate 
to its entire disintegration). To characterize the breakage phenomena, 
the  authors  also  proposed,  based  on  an  empirical  approach,  a  new 

dimensionless  number  πimp,  which  reasonably  unified  the  results  for 
widely varying collision conditions. The deviation for some of the cases 
was attributed to the re-agglomeration of detached cohesive fragments. 

3.2.2.3. Particle-wall  adhesion  (deposition). In  wall-bounded  turbulent 
gas-solid flows, primary particles or agglomerates adhere (or stick) after 
collisions  with  the  surrounding  walls  if  the  particle-wall  adhesion  is 
strong  enough.  In  most  studies,  this  phenomenon  is  referred  to  as 
“particle  deposition”,  and  it  has  been  characterized  based  on  two 
+
dimensionless  deposition  velocity  v
d  and  the  dimensionless  particle 
relaxation time τ+

p , given by Almohammed [84] as follows: 

v+
d =

vd
uτ

,

τ+
p =

τpu2
τ
νf

,

(3.22)  

(3.23)  

where  uτ  stands  for  the  friction  velocity.  The  deposition  velocity 
(vd = Jd/Cp)  is  defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  flux  of  deposited  particles 
(Jd = Ndep
p /Adtd) on  the  deposition  surface  Ad  per  unit  of  time  to  the 
mean particle concentration (Cp = Np/Vtot) (i.e. the number of primary 
particles  Np  occupied by  the  volume  Vtot).  Investigations  into  particle 
deposition  on  smooth  or  rough  walls  have  a  long  history.  Broadly 
speaking,  the  determination  of  the  dimensionless  deposition  velocity 
reported in the literature has been achieved using: (i) empirical corre-
lations or (ii) physical models. In the following, the most cited publi-
cations in this field of research are reviewed. 

The earliest empirical model to describe the deposition velocity dates 

Fig. 3.37. Contour plots for (a) the instantaneous streamwise velocity uf/Ub, (b) the time-averaged turbulent kinetic energy 〈kf 〉/U2
b  , (c) the magnitude of the strain 
rate tensor based on mean velocities 〈|Sij|〉dh/Ub, (d) the magnitude of the vorticity vector based on mean velocities 〈| ω→
f |〉dh/Ub  for cases with higher Reynolds 
numbers, (e, f) positions of the breakup events due to drag stresses for low and high Reynolds numbers, and (g, h) positions of the breakup events due to rotary 
stresses for low and high Reynolds numbers (reproduced from reference [675], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930129F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

p

p 

(cid:0) 4(τ+
p

= 6 × 10

τp),  where  un,(0)

+
≈ 30),  beyond  which  a  slight  decrease  in  v
d 

back to Friedlander and Johnstone [1182]. In that 1957 study, a theo-
retical “diffusion free-flight”  model was proposed to predict the depo-
sition particles within a vertical channel (i.e. gravity has no effect on the 
deposition  velocity  and  Brownian  diffusion  can  be  neglected).  The 
model assumed that the particle moves toward the wall due to the tur-
bulent diffusion until it reaches a certain distance from the wall “stop-
ping distance”, beyond which the particles are pushed toward the wall 
via the free-flight mechanism. The stopping distance is given by (ℓstop =
un,(0)
is  the  component  of  the  particle  velocity  in  the 
wall-normal direction before the collision. In summary, due to its suf-
ficient inertia, the particle detaches from the turbulent eddies (see the 
Turbulence  section),  penetrates  the  viscous  sublayer,  and  eventually 
sticks (or deposits) on the surrounding wall. In the 1970s and later, the 
deposition of aerosol particles was investigated and various empirical 
correlations for the dimensionless deposition velocity were also reported 
(see  Table  3.7).  Experimental  observations  were  used  to  validate  the 
theoretical “diffusion free-flight”  model by Friedlander and Johnstone 
[1182]  and  quite good  agreement was  found. Among  others, Liu and 
Agarwal [1183] conducted experiments on the deposition of spherical 
olive oil droplets within a turbulent vertical pipe flow pipe. The authors 
suggested that for (τ+
< 10), the dimensionless deposition velocity in-
p
creases  linearly  with  the  square  of  the  dimensionless  relaxation  time 
+
)2). A similar result was obtained by Liu and Agarwal 
(v
d
[1183], who concluded that the dimensionless deposition velocity in-
creases  until  (τ+
is 
p
observed.  In  1977,  McCoy  and  Hanratty  [1184]  explored  particle 
deposition  in  a  turbulent  vertical  pipe  flow  experimentally  for 
+
(τ+
)2), i.e. a smaller 
= 0.2 (cid:0) 22.9) and found that (v
p
d
constant of proportionality than in the correlation of Liu and Agarwal 
[1183].  Furthermore,  McCoy  and  Hanratty  [1184]  stated  that  for 
(τ+
> 22.9), the dimensionless deposition velocity is insensitive to the 
p
velocity  of  the  fluid  phase  and  reaches  a  relatively  constant  value  of 
+
(v
≈ 0.17). At the beginning of the 1980s, Wood [1185] formulated an 
d
analytical  relation  for  the  dimensionless  particle  deposition  using 
+
)2) based on the Schmidt 
smooth walls (v
d
number (Sc =νf/Dp) (where Dp is the mass diffusivity of the particle) and 
τ+
p . Another correlation was proposed for rough walls with an equivalent 
+
+)),  where 
sand-grain  roughness  ks,  leading  to  (v
d
+ = ksuτ/νf). However, the author mentioned that the deposition rates 
(k
were extremely sensitive to the wall roughness, indicating the unreliable 
prediction of the proposed correlation. In 1993, Kvasnak et al. [1186] 
investigated  the  effect  of  the  gravity  force  on  the  deposition  rate  of 
spherical glass particles with (dp = 5 (cid:0) 45 μm) and five dust components 
(dp = 1 (cid:0) 10  μm)  in  a  horizontal  turbulent  channel  flow.  The  authors 
extended  the  correlation  developed  by  Wood  [1185]  by  including  an 
additional term that took into account the effect of gravity force on the 
dimensionless  deposition  velocity,  as  listed  in  Table  3.7.  Here,  the 
dimensionless  gravitational  acceleration  is  written  as  (g
τ ). 
Kvasnak et al. [1186] suggested that the larger the particle diameter, the 
higher  the  deposition  velocity.  The  measurements  of  the  deposition 
velocity were validated with the experimental results by Papavergos and 
Hedley [1187], showing good agreement. 

= 0.057Sc(cid:0) 2/3 +4.5 ×10

= f(Sc, τ+
p

= 3.25 × 10

+ = gν /u3

(cid:0) 4(τ+
p

(cid:0) 4(τ+
p

, k

Within the framework of the discrete-particle model, particle depo-

Table 3.7 
Common empirical correlations for dimensionless deposition velocity.  

References 
Liu and Agarwal [1183] 

McCoy and Hanratty [1184] 

Wood [1185] 

Kvasnak et al. [1186] 

Empirical correlation 
)2    

(

d = 6 × 10(cid:0) 4
v+

τ+
p
(

)2    

τ+
p

d = 3.25 × 10(cid:0) 4
v+

d = 0.057Sc(cid:0) 2/3 + 4.5 × 10(cid:0) 4
v+

d = 0.057Sc(cid:0) 2/3 + 4.5 × 10(cid:0) 4
v+

(
τ+
p
(
τ+
p

)2    

)2

+ g+τ+

p     

sition  has  been  investigated  from  time  to  time.  Generally,  a  uniform 
distribution of Np  primary particles has been assumed in a certain re-
+ = huτ/νf). 
gion,  whose  dimensionless  distance  from  the  wall  is  (h
Assuming a constant deposition rate (i.e. the number of deposited pri-
mary  particles  Ndep
τ /νf ),  the 
p  within  a  dimensionless  time  (t
dimensionless deposition velocity is often calculated using the following 
expression: 
(

= tu2

+
d

v+
d =

)(

)
.

h+
t+
d

Ndep
p
Np

(3.24) 

In the literature, common physical models for particle-wall adhesion 
(or deposition) have been applied, categorized here based on the levels 
of  complexity  into:  (i)  the  wetted-wall  model,  (ii)  the  energy-based 
model, and (iii) the momentum-based deposition model. 

The wetted-wall deposition model represents the simplest approach, 
positing that if a particle-wall collision occurs, the particle deposits on 
the wall when it reaches a certain distance to the closest wall. Assuming 
that the particle touches the wall, this distance is equal to the radius of 
the  spherical  particle  (i.e.  ℓ = dp/2).  In  thyis  model,  however,  the 
particle-wall collisions treated by the hard-sphere model are not taken 
into  account  for  any  restitution  coefficient,  since  the  particle  sticks 
directly to the wall. This assumption is considered the main drawback of 
this model. In recent decades, the wetted-wall model has been used as a 
standard model in various studies on particle deposition due to its simple 
implementation.  In  1989,  McLaughlin  [1188]  carried  out  DNS-DPM 
simulations using the wetted-wall model to investigate particle deposi-
tion in a vertical turbulent channel flow. The results were compared to 
the experiments by Liu and Agarwal [1183] and showed lower deposi-
tion rates for dimensionless relaxation times (τ+
< 2) and higher values 
p
for  larger  particles.  In  the  1990s,  Uijttewaal  and  Oliemans  [1108] 
applied  the  wetted-wall  model  in  coupled  DNS-DPM  and  LES-DPM 
simulations  to  study  the  deposition  of  particles  within  vertical  pipe 
flows at shear Reynolds numbers Reτ  (360, 1000, and 2100), neglecting 
particle-particle collisions. The turbulence and the Reynolds number of 
the flow were observed to have a noticeable effect on the deposition rate 
for particles with (τ+
< 100). In the case with (Reτ = 360), the authors 
p
observed  that  the  predictions  agreed  extremely  well  with  the  experi-
ments by McCoy and Hanratty [1184] and agreed reasonably well with 
those  by  Liu  and  Agarwal  [1183]  and  the  DNS-DPM  predictions  by 
McLaughlin  [1188].  Furthermore,  Uijttewaal  and  Oliemans  [1108] 
studied the effect of the inclusion of the lift and gravity forces on the 
deposition rate. It was found that taking into account the Saffman lift 
force (i.e. the particles are faster than the fluid in the direct vicinity of 
the wall) leads on the one hand to higher deposition rates, which were in 
close  agreement  with  the  predictions  of  McLaughlin  [1188].  On  the 
other hand, the inclusion of the gravity force results in a slightly higher 
deposition velocity in the case of an upward flow for (τ+
< 200), then a 
p
sharp decrease for larger particles, whereas the deposition velocity for 
downward  flows  decreases  for  particle  relaxation  times  (τ+
> 50). 
p
Wang and Squires [1109] also carried out coupled LES-DPM simulations 
using the wetted-wall deposition model in a vertical turbulent channel 
flow with particles of (2 ≤ τ+
≤ 6) and two different Reynolds numbers 
p
(11,160 and 79,400). The results were in reasonable agreement with the 
empirical  correlation  by  Liu  and  Agarwal  [1183],  but  the  predicted 
deposition velocity was lower than in the DNS-DPM results provided by 
McLaughlin [1188]. It was also concluded that the Reynolds number of 
the flow has only a slight effect on the dimensionless deposition velocity 
for  (2 ≤ τ+
≤ 6).  The  authors  also reported  that  the  subgrid-scale  ve-
p
locity  fluctuations  led  to  a  30  %  higher  dimensionless  deposition  ve-
locity,  while  no  effect  was  observed  for  larger  particles  (τ+
> 6).  In 
p
addition, Wang and Squires [1109] mentioned that, in comparison with 
experimental data, the predictions can be further improved by consid-
ering  particle-particle  collisions.  Ten  years  later,  Breuer  et  al.  [680] 
applied  the  wetted-wall  model  in  the  LES-DPM  simulation  with  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930130F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

◦
hard-sphere model to explore the deposition in a 90
bend flow with a 
Reynolds number of 1,000 (laminar flow) and 10,000 (turbulent flow) 
and  250,000  monodisperse  particles.  The  results  showed  excellent 
agreement  with  the  experiments  carried  out  by  Pui  et  al.  [1189].  In 
2006, Winkler et al. [1111] also carried out coupled LES-DPM simula-
tions  using  the  wetted-wall  model  to  study  the  effect  of  two-  and 
four-way coupling on the deposition of particles of different sizes and 
densities in a turbulent square duct flow with Reτ = 360. The results 
were  validated  based  on  the  experiments  by  McCoy  and  Hanratty 
[1184]. Two-way coupling was observed to have a negligible effect on 
the  deposition  velocity  for  the  volumetric  fraction  of  the  solid  (εp  <
(cid:0) 4), thus one-way coupling is sufficient in this case. In addition, it was 
10
shown that taking the four-way coupling into account leads to higher 
deposition rates. The authors also concluded that subgrid-scale fluctu-
ations  significantly  enhance  the  dimensionless  deposition  velocity.  In 
comparison with the experiments by McCoy and Hanratty [1184], the 
deposition rate was found to agree well for large particles, but it was two 
orders of magnitude higher for small particles. Koullapis et al. [1190] 
employed the wetted-wall model in the LES-DPM simulation to inves-
tigate  the  deposition  of  aerosol  particles  (dp = 1 (cid:0) 10  μm)  in  human 
airways for various conditions but did not validate the predictions or 
even compare them with other numerical simulations. Recently, Almo-
hammed [84] performed LES-DPM simulations in particle-laden turbu-
lent  channel  flows  and  compared  the  predictions  of  the  wetted-wall 
model  with  the  momentum-based  deposition  model  (see  Fig.  3.38), 
validating the results against the experiments carried out by Papavergos 
and Hedley [1187] and Kvasnak et al. [1186]. It is worth mentioning 
that the application of the wetted-wall model is physically reasonable 
for the deposition of particles on wetted walls (e.g. human airways) as 
examined  by,  among  others,  Breuer  et  al.  [680]  and  Koullapis  et  al. 
[1190].  However, 
including 
fluidized-bed systems, it is typically not a case justifying the need for 
advanced deposition models to allow the particles to rebound from the 
wall after a particle-wall collision if the adhesion is not strong enough to 
cause the deposition. 

industrial  applications 

in  most 

The first energy-based deposition model was proposed in 1971 by 
Dahneke  [1191]  based  on  the  energy  balance  before  and  after  a 
particle-wall  collision  including  adhesion.  In  this  simple  model,  it  is 
assumed that the particle adheres to the wall if its pre-collision velocity 
component in the wall-normal direction does not exceed a critical ve-
locity (un,(0)

), given by: 

p ≤ un,crit

p

un,crit
p =

√

[

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
]
1
2Es
(en)2 (cid:0) 1
mp

,

(3.25)  

where en  stands for the normal restitution coefficient for the particle- 
wall  collisions  and  Es  represents  the  surface  potential  energy, 
expressed as (Es = Hdp/(12δ0)), where the minimum particle-wall sepa-
(cid:0) 10m). It is worth noting that this model 
ration distance is (δ0 = 2 × 10
only defines the criterion for particle deposition, but does not take into 
account the treatment of the kinetics of the particle after the collision 
without deposition (i.e. the effect of adhesion on the rebound velocity). 
This energy-based deposition model was applied, among others, by Li 
and Ahmadi [1192], Fan and Ahmadi [1193], and Li and Ahmadi [1194] 
to predict particle deposition in turbulent channel flows (the channel 
walls  were  coated  with  gold)  using  a  Reynolds  number  of  6,657  and 
particles  made  of  silicon,  quartz,  and  gold  with  a  diameter  of 
(dp = 0.01 (cid:0) 10 μm). Assuming a normal restitution coefficient for the 
particle-wall collisions (0.5, 0.85, and 0.96), the obtained results agreed 
well with measurements by Papavergos and Hedley [1187] and Kvasnak 
[1186] and were in qualitative agreement with the theoretical correla-
tion  developed  by  Wood  [1185]  and  the  DNS-DPM  predictions  by 
McLaughlin  [1188].  It  was  also  found  that  the  gravity  force  plays  a 
significant role in the deposition rate in the case of (dp > 2  μm). On the 
other hand, a pronounced effect of particle rebound was observed for 
(dp > 10 μm), and the increase in the restitution coefficients leads to a 
lower deposition velocity. 

To  avoid  the drawbacks  of the  wetted-wall model  (e.g. that it  ne-
glects particle rebound) and the energy-based model (e.g. it assumes a 
critical  approach  velocity  and  there  is  no  post-collision  treatment), 
momentum-based particle-wall adhesion models were proposed. Here, 
the impulse-based hard-sphere model represents the most appropriate 
choice. As previously mentioned, particle-wall adhesion is not taken into 
consideration in the standard hard-sphere model (Hoomans et al. [83], 
Crowe et al. [739]). In 2009, Kosinski and Hoffmann [1106] introduced 
the  first  momentum-based  deposition  model  by  incorporating  the  ad-
hesive  impulse  into  the  standard  hard-sphere  model  for  particle-wall 
collisions. In this model, a constant van der Waals force was assumed 
to act over the surface separations from δ1 to δ0 within the compression 
phase of the collision and vice versa during the restitution phase. The 
separation distance was derived by Weber et al. [1145] by setting the 
van  der  Waals  force  equal  to  the  gravity  force,  leading  to  (δ1 =
√
).  Kosinski  and  Hoffmann  [1106]  took  the  idea  of  the 

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
H/(2πρpgd2
)

p

Fig. 3.38. Comparison of predictions of particle-wall adhesion models based on the dimensionless deposition velocity for spherical glass particles with (dp = 5 (cid:0) 45 
μm) (i.e. the empirical relation proposed by Wood [1185], the wetted-wall model, the energy-based model by Fan and Ahmadi [1193], and the momentum-based 
model  by  Almohammed  [84])  with  the  experimental  data  provided  by  Papavergos  and  Hedley  [1187]  and  Kvasnak  et  al.  [1186]  (reproduced  from  reference 
Almohammed [84], with permission of authors).. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930131F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

energy-based  model  and  defined  the  deposition  criterion  based  on  a 
magnitude of the critical normal velocity up to which the particle sticks 
on the wall after the collision: 

un,crit
p =

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
[
]
H(δ1 (cid:0) δ0)
1
(en)2 (cid:0) 1
4πρpδ1δ0

.

2
dp

(3.26) 

It  can  easily  be  proved  that  for  a  given  material  of  a  microscopic 
particle the deposition criterion defined in Eq. (3.26) by Kosinski and 
Hoffmann [1106] reduces to Eq. (3.25) of the energy-based model by 
Dahneke  [1191]  when  (δ1  ≫  δ0)  (reasonable  for  tiny  particles). 
Assuming  that  a  constant  van  der  Waals  force  acts  during  the 
particle-wall collision, Kosinski and Hoffmann [1106] derived expres-
sions for the adhesive impulses for the approach and departure phases, 
which are incorporated into the hard-sphere model. The authors applied 
their momentum-based model to a simple test, including a single particle 
impacting  a  smooth  wall,  and  studied  the  effect  of  the  particle-wall 
adhesion  on  the  collision.  The  results  were  not  validated  or  even 
compared  to  the  predictions  of  other  models.  However,  since  the 
momentum-based deposition model by Kosinski and Hoffmann [1106] 
takes into account the effect of the adhesive impulse without deposition 
(i.e. a lower wall-normal particle velocity after the collision), it is su-
perior to the energy-based model by Dahneke (1971). Similarly to their 
previous  agglomeration  model  [666],  Almohammed  and  Breuer  [84, 
666,667] recently introduced an advanced momentum-based particle--
wall adhesion model within the framework of the hard-sphere model. 
This takes into account frictional inelastic particle-wall collisions (en <
1)  including adhesion.  The  adhesive impulse  is  taken  into  account  to 
identify the collision type (i.e. sticking and sliding) and the deposition 
criterion for each collation type. The model also takes into account the 
effect of adhesion if the deposition condition is not satisfied in both the 
normal and tangential collision directions. Assuming a constant adhe-
sive force (Fvan
)) acting during the collision, the adhesive 
iwal
impulse is modeled as follows: 

= Hdp /(12s2
ij

∫Δtcom

f n,adh
ij =

Fvan

iwaldt

+

∫Δtcom+Δtres

(cid:0)

(cid:0) Fvan
iwal

)
dt

,

0
⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Compression phase

Δtcom

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
Restitution phase

(3.27)  

where Δtcom and Δtres stand for the time intervals of the compression and 
the  restitution  phase,  respectively.  These  time  intervals  were  deter-
mined by solving an ordinary differential equation of the dimensionless 
overlap of the particle in the normal direction as a function of dimen-
sionless  time  using  MATLAB.  The  developed  particle-wall  adhesion 
model was validated in the context of LES-DPM simulations in a hori-
zontal  turbulent  channel  flow  with  a  shear  Reynolds  number  of  300 
loaded with 400,000 primary particles with a diameter of (dp = 5 (cid:0) 45 
μm). The LES predictions for a single flow were validated relying on 
DNS results by Marchioli and Soldati [1195]. As shown in Fig. 3.38, the 
predictions  of  the  momentum-based  deposition  model  are  compared 
with the results of the wetted-wall, energy-based model and validated 
using the experiments provided by Papavergos and Hedley [1187] and 
Kvasnak et al. [1186] in terms of the dimensionless deposition velocity, 
given by Eq. (3.24). The momentum-based model by Almohammed and 
Breuer [84,666,667] is seen to lead to more accurate results than other 
deposition models. Based on this accurate model, the authors applied 
the  momentum-based  deposition  model  in  LES-DPM  simulations  of 
turbulent channel flows laden with one million primary particles with 
diameters  of  4  μm  and  12  μm.  They  analyzed  the  effect  of  various 
simulation settings (among others: restitution coefficient of particle-wall 
collisions,  particle  diameter,  wall  roughness)  on  the  particle-wall 
adhesion  (deposition).  The  particle  agglomeration  was  taken  into  ac-
count and the deposition of agglomerates and primary particles on the 
channel was investigated. 

3.2.2.4. Droplet  coalescence. The  phenomenon  of  droplet  coalescence 
occurs in many industrial and chemical process engineering technolo-
gies  involving  droplet-laden  turbulent  flows,  such  as  spray  drying  in 

Fig. 3.39. Binary droplet-droplet collision (reproduced from reference [84], with permission of authors).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930132F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

fluidized-bed systems and spray systems in internal combustion engines. 
The phenomenon of binary droplet collision has been extensively stud-
ied using experiments and based on theoretical and numerical models. 
This consideration is consistent with the assumption of the hard-sphere 
model (i.e. binary collisions), as previously explained. Fig. 3.39 depicts a 
schematic  representation  of  a  binary  collision  of  two  spherical  liquid 
droplets (small i and large j). The dynamics of this collision process in 
the  gas  phase  are  characterized  by  the  collision Weber  number  Wecol 
(representing the ratio of the inertial force to the surface tension force), 
the  impact  parameter  B,  and  the  droplet  size  ratio  (Δ = di/dj).  The 
collision Weber number is defined as follows: 

Wecol =

)2

(
u(0)
ij

,

ρddc
σ

(3.28)  

(0)
where ρd  is the droplet density, u
ij

=

⃒
⃒
→(0)
⃒
⃒ u
ij

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ denotes the magnitude of 

the relative velocity between the droplets, and σ stands for the interfa-
cial surface tension between the liquid droplets and the gas phase. The 
characteristic droplet diameter is set equal to (dc = di) (among others: 
Jiang  et  al.  [1196],  Qian  and  Law  [1197],  Estrade  et  al.  [1198], 
Krishnan and Loth [1199], Almohammed and Breuer [671]) or equal to 
(dc = (di + dj)/2) (among others: Jiang et al. [1196], Post and Abraham 
[1200], Wozniak [1201]). As depicted in Fig. 3.39, the impact param-
eter (B = sin ψcol) is expressed by: 

B =

2b
di + dj

=

√
√
√
√
√
√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
⎞
⎛
2
ij ⋅ n→
⎝ u→(0)
⃒
⃒
⃒ u→(0)
⃒

1 (cid:0)

⎠

ij

.

ij

(3.29) 

The  parameter  (b = 0.5(di + dj)sin ψ col)  denotes  the  projection  of 
the distance between the droplet centers at the instant of impact to the 
direction perpendicular to the relative velocity between droplets ( u
=
→(0)
). The symbol ψ col is the collision angle enclosed between the 
u
i
relative  position  vector  between  the  droplet  centers  and  the  relative 
velocity. It is worth highlighting that (B = 0) implies a head-on collision 

→(0)
j

→(0)
ij

(cid:0) u

Table 3.8 
Review of commonly cited experimental studies on binary droplet collisions.  

References 

Droplet 

Brazier-Smith et al. [1204] 

Water 

Arkhipov et al. [1206] 

Water 

Ashgriz and Poo [1203] 

Water 

Jiang et al. [1196] 

Water and n-alkane 

Gas 

Air 

Air 

Air 

Air 

and (B = 1) leads to a nearly tangential grazing collision. 

A  distinction  has  been  made  between  two  types  of  binary  droplet 
collisions in the literature: (i) surface-tension-dominated droplets and 
(ii)  viscosity-dominated  droplets  based  on  the  collision  Ohnesorge 
number Ohcol (representing the ratio of the viscous force to the inertial 
and surface-tension forces), given by: 
√

Ohcol =

√

,

(3.30)  

μd̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρdσds

=

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Wecol
Recol

where μd and dc are the dynamic viscosity and the diameter of the small 
droplet  with  the  collision  Reynolds  number  (Recol = ρdu
), 
respectively. 

(0)
ij dc /μd

agglomeration, 

In most publications (among others: Blei [663], Blei and Sommerfeld 
[1112]),  surface-tension-dominated  droplets  (i.e.  negligibly  small 
viscous  forces)  are  assumed  if  (Oh2
< 1).  In  spray  drying  and 
col
such 
example, 
for 
fluidized-bed 
surface-tension-dominated  droplets  (e.g.  suspensions or  solutions)  are 
mainly encountered in the vicinity of atomizers. The droplet collision is 
dominated by the viscous forces, i.e. for (Oh2
> 1). It is worth noting 
col
that  in  some  studies,  binary  droplet  collisions  are  also  characterized 
based on the collision capillary number Cacal (representing the ratio of 
the viscous force to surface tension force), defined according to Kuschel 
and Sommerfeld [1202] as: 

Cacol =

)
u(0)
ij = Ohcol

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
.
Wecol

(μd
σ

(3.31)  

3.2.2.4.1. Collision  regimes. Previous  studies  on  the  outcomes  of 
binary droplet collisions have a long history (see Table 3.8). Generally, it 
is known that the outcomes of such collisions depend not only on the 
kinetics and the material properties of the two droplets but also on the 
properties of the surrounding gaseous environment. As depicted sche-
matically  in  Fig.  3.40,  five  collision  outcomes  for  surface-tension- 
dominated  droplets  are  possible:  (i)  slow  coalescence,  (ii)  bouncing, 
(iii) fast coalescence, (iv) coalescence followed by reflexive separation, 
and (v) coalescence followed by stretching separation. 

Droplet diameter dd 
[μm] 

Inverse size 
ratio  
γ = 1/Δ [ (cid:0) ] 

Collision Weber number Wecol 
[ (cid:0) ] 

Qian and Law [1197] 

Water and tetradecane 

Nitrogen 

200-400 

Estrade et al. [1198] 

Ethanol 

Brenn et al.[1207] 

Propanol-2 

Chen [1210] 

Diesel and biodiesel 

Air 

Air 

Air 

80-300 

68-123 

700-1000 

Kuschel and Sommerfeld  

Water, saccharose, and polymer solution (PVP) 

Air 

380 

[1202] 

Sommerfeld and Kuschel  

Polymer solution (PVP) and sunflower oil 

Air 

400-1500 

[1211] 

Finotello et al. [1212] 

Milk concentrate, glycerol, and xanthan 
solutions 

Air 

620-770 

300-1500 

300-1200 

100-500 

150 

1-2.5 

0.0-80  

1.15-2.6 

0.1-120  

1 and 2 

5-100  

1 

1 

0-60  

0-80  

1 and 2 

5-200  

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

47-350  

5-100  

2-100  

0-100  

10-200  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930133F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.40. Schematic outcomes of the binary collision regimes of two equal-sized hydrocarbon droplets at atmospheric pressure, classified based on the collision 
Weber number Wecol  and the impact parameter B (adapted from reference [671] based on references [1197] and [740], with permission of Elsevier). 

• Regime I: slow coalescence 

The collision partners slowly approach each other, leading to a weak 
deformation of the interface between the two droplets, which implies a 
collision time long enough for the coalescence of interfaces by diffusion.  

• Regime II: bouncing 

A higher relative kinetic energy between the collision partners causes 
a  significant  surface  deformation,  but  it  is  still  not  strong  enough  to 
overcome  the  pressure  force  of  the  gas  film  enclosed  between  the 
droplets. As a result, the collision partners do not coalesce, but rather 
bounce back after the impact, thus the collision outcome is referred to as 
“bouncing”.  

• Regime III: fast coalescence: 

A fast coalescence occurs if the increase in the relative kinetic energy 
pushes out the gas film trapped between the droplet interfaces, thus the 
droplets  coalesce  forming  a  larger  droplet  (agglomerate).  Despite  the 
oscillation of the surface of the droplet, which is formed, no secondary 
breakup of the agglomerate occurs.  

• Regime IV: reflexive separation: 

A reflexive separation occurs at a high collision Weber number and 
small impact parameter B (i.e. near-head-on droplet-droplet collisions). 
Particularly, the collision partners coalesce temporarily, resulting in a 
torus-like droplet, which is then stretched until it is broken up due to the 
increase in the oscillations caused by the kinetic energy of the droplets. 
In the breakup process, the higher the collision Weber number, the more 
satellite droplets are formed.  

• Regime V: stretching separation: 

droplets is stretched during the impact (i.e. temporary coalescence) until 
the coalescent droplet breaks up due to shear forces. 

In  recent  decades,  numerous  experimental  and  theoretical  studies 
(see Table 3.8) have focused on describing the boundary curves between 
the  collision  regimes  (or  outcomes)  of  surface-tension-dominated 
droplets.  The  most  common  correlations  for  the  bounding  curves  are 
based on the collision Weber number, the impact parameter, and the size 
ratio. Although Qian and Law [1197] stated that slow coalescence oc-
curs solely at certain pressures of the gas environment, the first empir-
ical correlation for the boundary (I/II) between slow coalescence and 
bouncing was recently proposed by Krishnan and Loth [1199]. In 2015, 
the authors investigated the influence of the pressure of the surrounding 
gas and the properties of the liquid droplets on the collision outcomes. 
The authors concluded that at higher gas pressures, the probability of 
droplet bouncing at boundaries (I)/(II) and (II)/(III) increases, whereas 
other  regimes  are  insensitive  to  the  properties  of  the  gaseous 
environment. 

The boundary curve between bouncing and fast coalescence (II/III) 
has been modeled by various authors. One of the earliest contributions 
was proposed by Estrade et al. [1198], who conducted several experi-
ments  on  binary  collisions  of  ethanol  droplets  (see  Table  3.8)  and 
derived a theoretical correlation for the boundary curve (II)/(III) based 
on  the  energy  balance.  It  was  suggested  that  the  collision  partners 
bounce  off  if  the  critical  initial  kinetic  energy  (leading  to  a  limiting 
deformation) is not exceeded. For a size ratio Δ (0.5 and 1), Estrade et al. 
[1198]  validated  this  correlation  against  their  experiments  and  those 
obtained by Ashgriz and Poo [1203] and Brazier-Smith et al. [1204]. 
However,  Krishnan  and  Loth  [1199]  found  that  the  correlation  by 
Estrade  et  al.  [1198]  considerably  over-predicts  the  experimental  ob-
servations by Qian and Law [1197] for a gas pressure of about 1 bar, 
whereas  it  under-predicts  them  for  a  gas  pressure  of  about  8  bar. 
Therefore, Krishnan and Loth [1199] introduced an empirical correla-
tion for the boundary curve (II/III) between bouncing and fast coales-
cence, avoiding the drawback of the correlation suggested by Estrade 
et al. [1198], i.e. insensitivity to the pressure of the surrounding gas. 

A stretching separation of the colliding droplets can be observed for a 
high impact parameter B, implying oblique (off-center) droplet-droplet 
collision.  Thus,  the  interaction  region  between  the  surfaces  of  the 

The boundary between fast coalescence and reflexive separation (II/ 
IV) was modeled by Ashgriz and Poo [1203], who distinguished between 
reflexive  and  stretching  separation.  The  authors  conducted  extensive 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930134F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

experiments on binary droplet collision and introduced a correlation for 
the boundary curve (III/IV), assuming inviscid conditions. A reflexive 
separation was found to occur if the kinetic energy is larger than 75 % of 
the surface energy. Later on, Qian and Law [1197] derived a correlation 
for the boundary curve (III/IV) for near-head-on collisions and validated 
it  based  on  experiments  using  water  and  hydrocarbon  droplets  in 
various  gaseous  environments.  In  2015,  Krishnan  and  Loth  [1199] 
introduced an empirical correlation for the boundary (III/IV) taking into 
account the effect of droplet viscosity, based on the investigations by 
Gotaas et al. [1205] for “highly viscous” droplets (Ohcol > 0.115). The 
boundary  curve  between  fast  coalescence  and  stretching  separation 
(III/V) was first modeled by Brazier-Smith et al. [1204], who carried out 
various experiments on the coalescence of water droplets and proposed a 
theoretical correlation relying on the energy balance. Later on, Arkhipov 
et al. [1206] conducted experiments on the stability conditions for the 
collision of two water droplets and introduced a coalescence condition 
for the boundary curve (III/V) based on a critical angular momentum. 
Ashgriz and Poo [1203] also derived a criterion for the boundary (III/V), 
which results in more accurate predictions than those by Brazier-Smith 
et al. [1204] and Arkhipov et al. [1206] for all size ratios studied. Jiang 
et al. [1196] and Krishnan and Loth [1199] took into account the effect 
of  droplet  viscosity  on  the  coalescence  condition  for  the  boundary 
(III/V). An example of a detailed derivation of the aforementioned cri-
terion for all boundaries can be found in Almohammed [84]. More de-
tails  on  the  formation  of  satellite  droplets  (or  fragmentation)  in 
separation regimes can be found in works such as those by Brenn et al. 
[1207], Ko and Ryou [1208], Munnannur, and Reitz [1209], and Kim 
et al. [1122]. 

3.2.2.4.2. Collision  outcome  models. In addition to the correlations 
mentioned previously, numerical models with different levels of accu-
racy  and  complexity  have  been  introduced  in  the  context  of  various 
publications  on  binary  droplet  collision,  taking  coalescence  into  ac-
count.  For  binary  droplet-droplet  collisions  of  surface-tension- 
dominated droplets, the common models are classified into: (i) coales-
cence  models  (energy-based,  stochastic,  empirical,  and  film  drainage 
models)  and (ii) the  composite collision outcome model. At  the early 
stage of development of CFD-DPM simulations of droplet-laden flows, 
there was a focus on finding a criterion for droplet coalescence, thus only 
two  regimes  were  considered:  bouncing  and  fast  coalescence.  The 
earliest  contribution  dates  back  to  Howarth  [1213]  in  1964,  who 
introduced an energy-based droplet collision model assuming a homo-
geneous  isotropic  turbulent  flow.  Howarth  [1213]  stated  that  the 
droplets  coalesce  if  their  relative  kinetic  collision  energy  exceeds  the 
surface energy; otherwise, they will rebound, maintaining their spher-
ical shape. Almohammed [84] compared the prediction of this condition 
with the correlations proposed by Estrade et al. [1198] and Qian and 
Law [1197]. It was found that this energy-based model does not accu-
rately predict droplet coalescence even for the simplest setup of head-on 
droplet-droplet collisions. Later on, in 1981, O’Rourke [757] proposed a 
stochastic coalescence model for the boundary curve (III/V) based on 
the critical impact parameter, given by: 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(
))
,

√

(

1.0;

min

Bcrit =

4.8f (γ)
Wecol

(3.32)  

where the inverse size ratio (γ = 1/Δ) and the dimensionless function (f 
(γ) = γ3 (cid:0) 2.4γ2 + 2.7γ) were fitted by Amsden et al. [1214] based on the 
experimental  data  provided  by  Brazier-Smith  et  al.  [1204].  In  this 
model, it was assumed that the droplets coalesce if (B ≤ Bcrit) (the impact 
parameter is equal to (B =
), where ξ stands for a uniform random 
number between 0 and 1). The stochastic coalescence model has been 

√
̅̅̅
ξ

applied frequently as a standard model in CFD-DPM simulations of spray 
systems using the stochastic collision detection model (among others: 
Amsden et al. [1214], Guo et al. [1215], Koll´ar et al. [1216], Ko and 
Ryou [1208], Munnannur and Reitz [1209], Kim et al. [1122], Brenn 
[1217], Pawar et al. [1120,1121]). In 1984, Podvysotsky and Shraiber 
[1218] introduced an empirical model for the boundary between fast 
coalescence  and  stretching  separation  (III/V).  Blei  [663]  applied  this 
empirical model to  study droplet coalescence  and  used the  stochastic 
collision  model  by  Sommerfeld  [1093].  Later  on,  Chesters  [1219] 
introduced  the  film  drainage  model  and  defined  the  criterion  for  the 
boundary curve (II/III). It was assumed that the droplets coalesce if the 
contact time of collision partners exceeds the drainage time required for 
the film between the droplets to thin to a specific thickness, i.e. (tcontact ≥
tdrainage). A review of the common models for drainage and contact times 
can be found, among others, in Liao and Lucas [1220] and Lau et al. 
[1221]. It is important to note that none of the previously mentioned 
models can predict all outcomes of binary droplet-droplet collisions, and 
thus a more advanced model is required. 

The composite collision outcome model was first proposed by Post 
and Abraham [1200] based on the combination of the theoretical cor-
relations mentioned above (see the Collision regimes section) and can be 
used to predict all collision regimes. Post and Abraham [1200] applied 
the  composite  collision  model  to  investigate  the  outcomes  of 
droplet-droplet  collisions  in  diesel  sprays.  Later  on,  this  model  was 
successfully applied in various studies on spray systems (among others: 
Ko  and  Ryou  [1208],  Koll´ar  et  al.  [1216];  Kim  et  al.  [1122],  Brenn 
[1217]).  In  2009,  Kim  et  al.  [1122]  extended  the  original  composite 
model, applying deterministic parcel collision detection and introducing 
a breakup model for the droplet that takes into account satellite droplets 
and post-collision due to stretching separation. The authors carried out 
simulations  on  free  spray  and  inter-impingement  sprays.  The  results 
were  validated  against  the  measurements  in  terms  of  the  spray  tip 
penetration  and  the  mean  droplet  size  and  velocity.  Recently,  Almo-
hammed and Breuer [671] extended the composite model by Post and 
Abraham [1200], introducing (i) a condition that takes into account the 
overlapping region of the reflexive and stretching separation regimes for 
high Weber numbers and (ii) post-collision models for the four possible 
outcomes  of  binary  collisions  of  surface-tension-dominated  droplets. 
Almohammed and Breuer [671] modeled the boundary curves between 
the regimes based on Estrade et al. [1198] for bouncing, Ashgriz and Poo 
[1203]  for  reflexive  separation,  and  Brazier-Smith  et  al.  [1204]  for 
stretching  separation.  Furthermore,  the  authors  introduced  a  new  in-
jection model, which makes it possible to specify the droplet properties 
(mass, position, velocity, and diameter) released at the breakup length 
Lb, as depicted in Fig. 3.41. In this model, the droplets are released into 
the computation domain, mimicking the primary breakup (atomization 
process). 

Almohammed [84] applied the newly developed composite model in 
the  context  of  CFD-DPM  simulations  of  spray  systems  with  the 
hard-sphere model using deterministic collision detection. Particularly, 
a solid-cone non-evaporating diesel spray was simulated (nozzle diam-
eter of 0.18 mm, mean injection pressure of 324 bar), injected vertically 
into quiescent nitrogen at a back-pressure of 11 bar. The results obtained 
were compared to the theoretical model by Mirza [1222] and validated 
against the experiment carried out by Gao et al. [1223] in terms of the 
spray tip penetration Sp(t) (i.e. one of the most important characteristics 
of sprays), showing very good agreement (see Fig. 3.42). Furthermore, a 
comparative  study  was  conducted  to  study  the  effect  of  different  pa-
rameters (e.g. number distribution function, breakup length, interphase 
coupling, coalescence) on the spray tip penetration. Fig. 3.43 shows the 
local distribution of the primary and agglomerates (coalesced droplets) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930135F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3.41. Characterization  parameters  of  an  oblique  (angle  ϕ)  solid-cone  spray  with  the  angle  ψ,  injected  from  a  single-hole  nozzle  into  a  quiescent  gaseous 
environment (reproduced from reference [671], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.42. Time history of the penetration depth of diesel spray predicted by the composite collision model by Almohammed [84], validated based on the exper-
iments by Gao et al. [1223] and the empirical correlation proposed by Mirza [1222] (reproduced from reference [84], with permission of authors). 

at the end of the simulation. 

3.2.3. Reactive simulations 

Reactive  multiphase  flows  are  encountered  in  a  wide  range  of 
chemical and energy engineering technologies. Generally, using simu-
lations to acquire deep insights into the complex hydrodynamics of such 
flows (i.e. momentum, heat, and mass transfer rates between the gas and 
solid phases, chemical reaction, phase change, etc.) requires advanced 
models and high computational capacities. Contrary to CFD simulations 
with the soft-sphere model, there have been very few studies on reactive 
multiphase flows using the hard-sphere model. Although many authors 

mention  real  applications  in  their  works,  most  studies  found  in  the 
literature  on  coupled  CFD-DPM  simulations  with  the  hard-sphere 
approach are dedicated to cold two-phase flows (see the Non-reactive 
simulations section), including complex phenomena such as agglomer-
ation, breakup, deposition, and droplet coalescence, which are of great 
importance in fluidized-bed systems. Fluidized-bed spray granulation, 
depicted in Fig. 3.44, is considered the most well-known technology for 
the  production  of  coarse  granules.  In  this  process,  powders  are  first 
fluidized, then the fluidized solid particles are sprayed with fine droplets 
(of binder solution or suspension). After a drying process (e.g. hot air), 
solidification takes place, resulting in agglomerates (or solid granules). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930136F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.43. Snapshot of the local distribution of droplets at the end of the simulation: (a) primary and coalesced droplets, only coalesced droplets colored according to 
the dimensionless streamwise velocity (b) and the dimensionless diameter (c) (reproduced from reference [671], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.44. Spray agglomeration of powder particles in a fluidized-bed system (with permission from Glatt GmbH).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930137F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

fact that the agglomeration of the dry particles was neglected due to the 
cohesive force and breakup of agglomerates. The author stated that the 
model is computationally inexpensive and can thus be applied to design 
and control agglomeration in simulations of large-scale spray drying. 

3.3. Soft-sphere model 

This  section  will  review  the  existing  literature  on  the  soft-sphere 
model within the framework of the discrete-particle model, applied to 
chemical  and  energy  processes  based  on  fluidized-bed  systems.  First, 
there will be a short description of the history of the soft-sphere model, 
the status of developments, the main findings, and the limitations. Then, 
the CFD-DEM studies found in the literature (with and without chemical 
reaction) will be reviewed, with a special focus on works that include 
validation,  comparison  with  other  numerical  approaches,  and  their 
application to real systems. 

3.3.1. Development status and research findings 

The  discrete  element  method  (DEM)  was  originally  termed  the 
distinct  element  method  by  Cundall  [1225],  who  proposed  this 
approach in 1971 to investigate the large-scale movement of rocks. Later 
in  1979,  Cundall  and  Strack  [762]  developed  a  computer  program, 
“BALL”, based on the DEM model, in which the particles can overlap 
each other or penetrate the wall. This was used to numerically study the 
behavior of granular material. Depending on the penetration depth be-
tween  the  collision  partners,  the  contact  forces  that  arise  due  to 
particle-particle  or  particle-wall  collisions  are  computed  using  a  me-
chanical model consisting of a spring, a dashpot, and a friction slider. 
Due  to  the  penetration  behavior  of  both  collision  partners,  the  DEM 
model is usually described in the literature as the soft-sphere model. The 
advantages of the soft-sphere model over the hard-sphere model are that 
it  permits  multiple  particle  collisions  and  enables  other  short-range 
forces  to  be  studied  simultaneously, such  as  the  adhesive  forces  with 
and without physical contact. To that end, it is necessary first to detect 
collisions between collision partners using a specific criterion. Taking 
the  contact  criterion  as  an  example,  the  distance  between  the  center 
points  of  two  particles  should  be  smaller  than  the  sum  of  both  radii. 
Another example is the criterion of the adhesive force due to the liquid 
bridge, where the distance between the center points of two particles has 
to  be  smaller  than  the  critical  distance  of  liquid  bridge  formation.  In 
contrast  to  the  two-fluid  approach,  the  DEM  model  tracks  individual 
particles  in  the  computational  domain  and  their  properties  -  such  as 
particle chemical composition, particle density, particle diameter, par-
ticle shape - which might also change throughout the transient simula-
tion due to chemical reactions. 

Although the DEM model was originally developed by Cundall and 
Strack [762], in 1993 Tsuji et al. [763,764] presented one of the first 
successful  DEM  simulation  studies  on  the  hydrodynamic  behavior  of 
gas-solid flows in a lab-scale fluidized-bed system. They calculated the 
trajectory of each particle, taking into account the influence of the gas 
phase  on  the  solid  phase  and  vice  versa,  in  addition  to  the 
particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions.  This  approach  is  also 
known in the literature as the DDPM-DEM or CFD-DEM model. In sub-
sequent years, significant advances have been achieved in this field of 
research. From 1992, Prof. Kuipers and his team engaged in numerical 
simulations  of  gas-solid  flows  using  the  discrete-particle  model  with 
DEM.  Leading  contributions  were  published,  among  others,  by  Link 
et  al.  [783],  Deen  et  al.  [12],  Goniva  et  al.  [555],  Kriebitzsch  et  al. 
[1226], Salikov et al. [636]. Further, recent works by other researchers 
include Zhu et al. [13], Wang et al. [1227], Kruggel-Emden et al. [778], 
Zhou et al. [1228], Jajcevic et al. [115], Xu et al. [1229], Zhong et al. 
[19,946]  and  Alobaid  [75]).  Many  authors  have  also  compared  the 

Fig. 3.45. Schematic representation of the drying process.  

Here, the spraying process is stopped once the required granular size is 
achieved and the remaining liquid evaporates during the drying process 
[366], depicted schematically in Fig. 3.45. 

CFD-DPM studies on spray drying in fluidized-bed systems have been 
broadly  discussed  in  the  literature.  By  contrast,  a  limited  number  of 
publications have examined the application of the hard-sphere model. In 
this type of spray drying process, interactions occur between viscosity- 
dominated  droplets,  during  which  liquid  droplets  undergo  a  signifi-
cant change in their viscosity with the negligible effect of surface tension 
(among others: Roos [1113], Sperling [1224]). So far, only a few studies 
have focused on modeling the complex physics of the outcomes of such 
droplet collisions. One of the earliest models within the framework of 
the hard-sphere model dates back to Blei [663] in 2006. The authors 
proposed a simplified model based on the penetration depth due to a 
binary collision of two viscous droplets and the fraction of the kinetic 
energy dissipated during that impact. It was assumed that the droplets 
may either coalesce forming a new spherical droplet, agglomerate, or 
separate without  any changes in their sizes from before the collision. 
This model has been applied in many studies, such as those by Blei and 
Sommerfeld [1112] and Sommerfeld and Stübing [656]. 

Mezhericher  [366,367]  developed  a  theoretical  model  for  the  ki-
netics of the drying process (see Fig. 3.45) of binary collisions in a spray 
dryer in the context of the hard-sphere model. This model used a sto-
chastic collision detection model as it was consistent with the stochastic 
nature  of  sprays  with  a  huge  number  of  droplets.  The  model  was 
implemented in the commercial software “ANSYS-FLUENT” and applied 
to 2D axisymmetric and 3D transient simulations in a pilot-plant spray 
dryer,  taking  droplet-droplet  and  particle-particle  collisions  into  ac-
count.  Compared  to  the  droplet-droplet  collision  model  available  in 
ANSYS-FLUENT, the predictions of this model (i.e. droplet-droplet and 
particle-particle collisions) led to a narrow zone of simultaneous heat 
and mass transfer toward the central region of the spray dryer, as visible 
in Fig. 3.46. 

Recently,  Jubaer  [368]  introduced  a  cost-efficient  model  for  coa-
lescence and agglomeration within the discrete-particle model based on 
a  stochastic  collision  detection  model  by  O’Rourke  [757].  The  new 
model was implemented in the commercial software “ANSYS-FLUENT” 
using the user-defined functions (UDFs) and applied to CFD-DPM sim-
ulations  of  the  spray  drying  of  skim  milk  on  two  distinct  scales.  The 
results on the final particle size distributions and agglomerate structures 
agreed well with the experiments. The deviations were attributed to the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930138F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.46. Snapshots of contours of particle concentration after 30 s using (a) the collision model and (b) the model built into ANSYS-FLUENT; and (c) difference 
between the predictions of the two models (reproduced from references [366,367], with permission of Elsevier). 

simulation results of the DEM model with measurements and with the 
results of the two-fluid model and the hybrid model, among others, in 
the works of Chiesa et al. [1098], Adamczyk et al. [308], Alobaid [641, 
642], Stroh et al. [117], Nikolopoulos et al. [81], Moliner et al. [346] 
and Lungu et al. [420]. The DEM model shows better agreement with 
experimental data compared to other numerical approaches. However, 
these studies prove that the DEM simulation is computationally expen-
sive when tracking hundreds of thousands of particles in gas-solid flows 
due to the high computational effort required to detect particle-particle 
and particle-wall collisions. For example, the simulation of a lab-scale 
fluidized-bed system with 20 kg of monodisperse sand (average parti-
cle diameter of 150 µm) comprises around 4.4 billion particles, which 
exceed the hardware capacities of modern high-performance computing 

clusters. In 2004, it became possible to handle ten thousand particles in a 
real-time  simulation  [113].  Since  the  processor  clock  did  not  signifi-
cantly rise, but the transistor density strongly increased, today gas-solid 
systems  in  the  order  of  several  tens  of  thousands  of  particles  can  be 
handled  with  CPUs.  The  graphical  processing  unit  (GPU)  can  signifi-
cantly accelerate the simulations, enabling the real-time simulation of 
250,000 particles. Nevertheless, the number of tracked particles is still 
extremely  low,  even  for  lab-scale  applications.  That  is  why  the  DEM 
model, despite its advantages, is  not used to simulate dense gas-solid 
flows  at  a  large  scale  as  frequently  as  the  two-fluid  model  or  hybrid 
model.  In  the  last  decade  (starting  from  2010),  the  so-called  coarse--
grained  parcel  model  has  risen  in  importance.  Also  known  as  the 
coarse-grained particle or parcel model, this involves many real-sized 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930139F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

particles  being  lumped  into  a  representative  numerical  particle. 
Through this simplification, a reduction in the computational cost for 
is  achieved,  allowing  even 
the  collision  detection  of  parcels 
semi-industrial-scale particulate systems to be simulated in a compara-
ble  time  frame  to  the  two-fluid  model  [86].  The  step  up  to 
industrial-scale applications is still rather large, hindered by the tech-
nical feasibility of high-performance computers. 

A review of the literature on the DEM model reveals that a significant 
number of published papers are related to cold gas-solid flows, focusing 
at the early stage of development on 2D and quasi-2D simulations and 
recently  on  3D  simulations  at  the  lab-scale.  Although  many  authors 
mention  real  applications  in  their  works, non-reactive  gas-solid  flows 
with  spherical  particles  are  assumed  in  most  DEM  simulations.  This 
simplification  is  usually  accompanied  by  the  neglecting  of  a  certain 
number of volume and surface forces, as well as the momentum of forces 
that act on the particles (among others: Tsuji et al. [763], G¨otz [107], 
Link [772], Van Buijtenen et al. [1230], Alobaid [75] and Mahmoodi 
et al. [1231]). While the gravitational volume force is always taken into 
consideration, the static buoyancy force is disregarded due to the low 
density of the fluidization gas used (e.g. air, oxygen, steam, or carbon 
dioxide). Furthermore, the electric and magnetic volume forces are not 
taken into consideration in the DEM simulations, although the hydro-
dynamic  behavior  of  fluidized-bed  systems  with  imposed  electric  or 
magnetic fields has been studied qualitatively in experiments. This may 
be due to the lower number of applications, or to reduce the computa-
tional  cost.  However,  studies  on  electric  and  magnetic  volume  forces 
have been performed from time to time (among other papers recently 
published: Wang et al. [412], Liu et al. [639], Wang et al. [1232], and Li 
et al. [1233]). 

The drag force makes up a considerable part of all works on DEM and 
remains one of the major challenges faced in simulations of gas-solid 
flows.  Numerous  DEM  studies  have  been  carried  out  using  several 
conventional  drag  models,  such  as  those  developed  by  Wen  and  Yu, 
Syamlal and O’Brien, and Gidaspow. As these conventional drag models 
have been proven to overestimate the momentum transfer between the 
gas and solid phases [815], several modifications have been made. For 
example, a three-zone or a four-zone drag model calculates the inter-
phase momentum transfer coefficient by selecting universal drag laws 
for  each  zone  to  match  the  experimental  data  [823].  Advanced  drag 
models based on flow structures have also been developed, such as the 
energy minimization multi-scale (EMMS) model or the drag model as 
described  by  Kuipers,  showing  more  accurate  results  regarding  the 
modeling  of  circulating  fluidized-bed  systems  [86,334,455,461,1227, 
1234]. Other aerodynamic surface forces (e.g. virtual mass, Basset and 
Saffman forces) are disregarded because of their subordinate importance 
except  for  some  specific  cases  (for  example:  [50,634,1235]).  In 
fluidized-bed systems, the virtual mass and Basset forces will only have a 
minor impact on the hydrodynamic behavior of gas-solid flows for many 
reasons: i) the relative acceleration or deceleration rate is low, ii) the 
time of this acceleration/deceleration change is much smaller than the 
Stokes  relaxation  time  and  iii)  the  gas-to-solid  density  ratio  is  small. 
Since the DEM model is almost applied to simulate the cold gas-solid 
flows, the aerodynamic surface forces due to temperature and concen-
tration gradients are also omitted. The aerodynamic surface forces due 
to  non-uniform  distributions  of  velocity  and  pressure  (Saffman  and 
pressure gradient forces) are generally ignored to avoid the additional 
computational effort. The Magnus force is also neglected since the mo-
mentum balance of particles is not solved and thus the particles do not 
rotate in most simulation cases found in the literature on DEM. How-
ever,  the behavior  of gas-solid flows in fluidized-bed systems  is char-
acterized by higher pressure and velocity gradients compared to dilute 
flows, which in turn motivates the authors to take these aerodynamic 
forces  into  account  in  the  future.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the 
aforementioned aerodynamic surface forces significantly increase when 
the solid density decreases and the diameters of the particles increase. 
The contact forces are of particular relevance in fluidization systems 

and are therefore taken into account in all DEM simulations. The contact 
force is determined using the Voigt-Kelvin model, which describes the 
viscoelastic and time-dependent behavior of collision. Part of the kinetic 
energy is irreversibly dissipated in the form of deformation energy and 
can be taken into consideration by employing restitution coefficients. At 
higher collision velocities or for a particle with non-spherical shapes, the 
restitution coefficients decrease and thus cannot be considered constant 
[1236].  However,  the  restitution  coefficients  are  set  as  constant  in 
previous DEM studies due to the relatively low particle velocities and the 
assumption  of  spherical  particles.  Although  the  non-linear  contact 
models  show  an  accurate  distribution  of  the  contact  force  curve,  the 
linear contact model, which consists of a linear spring model and a linear 
visco-elastic damping element, has frequently been applied [107,778]. 
This  is  a  valid  concern  in  most  applications.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
calculation of the macroscopic parameters of the collision is important 
and not the specific distribution curve of contact forces. On the other 
hand, the non-linear contact models involve additional computational 
effort. Previous numerical studies on the DEM model show that a vari-
ation in the stiffness coefficient  over several orders  of magnitude has 
only a minor influence on the results obtained. A stiffness coefficient of 
800 N/m is recommended by Tsuji et al. [763] and used by many au-
thors. Di Renzo et al. [777] found that the proposed value of 800 N/m 
for the applied material properties and the simulation parameters causes 
unrealistic penetrations between the collision partners. The application 
of realistic stiffness coefficients (in the range of 105-109 N/m) required a 
very small particle time step, resulting in an extremely high computa-
tional effort [69,644]. If the stiffness coefficient is decreased (at a con-
stant particle time step), larger penetration depths can occur between 
the collision partners. When the collided particles are at a high relative 
velocity, there is a risk of unrealistic penetrations arising between the 
collided particles. For particle-wall collisions, the worst case is a com-
plete penetration, since the particles leave  the computational domain 
and are accordingly no longer available for the subsequent time steps. 
Despite  this  fact,  many studies  in  the  literature  (including  some pub-
lished recently), ignore the recommendation by Di Renzo et al. [777] 
(see the Particle time step section). 

Finer particles are characterized by strong adhesive forces without 
physical contact, such as the van der Waals force and the electrostatic 
force, making these particles difficult to fluidize compared to large-size 
particles. In contrast to the van der Waals force, the electrostatic force 
that occurs between the oppositely charged surfaces plays an important 
role  in  fluidized-bed  systems  [1237].  During  the  fluidization,  the 
particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  may  lead  to  the  particle 
surfaces  being  charged.  Here,  the  particles  tend  to  agglomerate  with 
each other and/or with the walls [646]. In the literature on DEM, the 
effect of the adhesive forces without physical contact is rarely investi-
gated  (among  others:  Hassani  et  al.  [1238],  Yang  et  al.  [1239],  and 
Okhovat-Alavian  et  al.  [1240]).  This  is  since  these  forces  are  of  rele-
vance for micro-size particles. Accordingly, the number of fine particles 
per volume unit is enormous, which in turn makes the DEM simulation 
of  fluidized-bed  systems  with  finer  particles  extremely  expensive. 
Furthermore,  the  electrostatic  effect  significantly  decreases  at  higher 
temperatures, and parameters such as particle sizes are not used in most 
fluidized-bed applications. 

At a high moisture level, the adhesive force due to liquid bridging 
can  have  a  particularly  significant  influence  on  the  hydrodynamic 
behavior of gas-solid flows in fluidized-bed systems. The simulation of 
this adhesive force with and without the liquid transport process due to 
liquid bridge separation has been widely discussed in the literature on 
DEM (among others: Mikami et al. [626], Kuwagi et al. [1241], Tsuji 
[1242], Shi and McCarthy [1243], Anand et al. [1244] and Sutkar et al. 
[1245]). Here, the Mikami model [626] shows a satisfactory result and a 
relatively  low  computational  effort.  The  adhesive  force  due  to  solid 
bridging  requires  significantly  more  computational  time  compared  to 
the adhesive force due to liquid bridging and thus received less attention 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930140F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

in  the  DEM  simulations,  which  are  mostly  applied  to  cold  gas-solid 
flows.  Nevertheless,  important  works  on  the  adhesive  force  due  to 
solid bridging in fluidized-bed systems can be found in the literature on 
DEM  (among  others:  Mikami  et  al.  [627],  Knight  et  al.  [1246]  and 
Kuwagi et al. [746]). 

In  the  DEM  simulations  of  fluidized-bed  systems,  the  moments  of 
force acting on particles are limited to one type, namely the moment of 
force due to gas-particle interaction or the moment of force due to the 
tangential contact force (among others: Deen et al. [12], Van Buijtenen 
et al. [1230], Buist et al. [1247] and Yang et al. [1248]). The moment of 
force  due  to  asymmetrical  normal  traction  distribution  is  generally 
neglected. However, the consideration of the moment of force due to 
gas-particle interaction is crucial, since the resulting moment of force 
can significantly influence the translational velocities of particles and 
thus the simulation accuracy. This is because the Magnus force in the 
force balance is a function of the particle angular velocity. 

Notwithstanding the great efforts and progress made in recent years 
in  the  discrete-particle  model  with  DEM,  basic  flow  properties  (e.g. 
segregation,  agglomeration,  and  attrition)  are  still  not  taken  into 
consideration sufficiently. Furthermore, real particulate systems include 
particles of different chemical compositions, densities, shapes, and sizes 
(e.g. wood pellets or wood chips) that may change during the transient 
simulation due to chemical reactions. Most DEM studies in the literature 
are restricted to circular particles in 2D cases, or spherical particles in 3D 
cases, which are of constant diameter (monodisperse) and have the same 
material properties (among others: Link et al. [783], Link [772], Sutkar 
et  al.  [417],  Stroh  et  al.  [117]  and  Mahmoodi  et  al.  [1231]).  The 
fluidization behavior of particles with complex geometries and different 
material  properties  is  significantly  more  complicated  than  that  of 
spherical particles. Furthermore, the heat and mass transfer rates largely 
depend  on  particle  geometry  [1249].  Relatively  big  particles  imply 
larger  temperature  gradients  and  have  longer  residence  times.  The 
particle shape also has a certain influence, for example, on the pyrolysis 
process: ellipsoidal particles with the same volume of spherical particles 
need more time to complete the pyrolysis. While the released volatile 
components and gases dominate during the pyrolysis process in the case 
of spherical particles, the remaining pyrolysis products dominate in the 
case of particles with an ellipsoid shape [954,955]. Despite this, limited 
numbers  of  CFD-DEM  studies  on  fluidized-bed  systems  with 
non-spherical  particles  can  be  found  in  the  literature  (among  others: 
Zhong et al. [946], Pozzobon et al. [1250], Ren et al. [634], Ma and 
Zhao [632], Oschmann [1251] and Farivar et al. [458]). According to 
Zhu et al. [13,736], two approximation methods for non-spherical par-
ticles are of relevance. In the first approach (composite-particle method 
(CPM)),  the  particle  with  complex  geometry  can  be  constructed  as  a 
cluster  of  circles  or  spheres.  In  the  second  approach  (single-particle 
method (SPM)), the predefined particle geometry is described by poly-
nomial functions. The advantage of the CPM approach is that the me-
chanical behavior of spherical particles has been actively investigated in 
the  literature.  In  many  cases,  spherical  models  for  calculating 
gas-particle  and  particle-particle  interactions  can  be  used.  Owing  to 
these  advantages,  several  publications  are  found  in  the  literature  on 
DEM,  dealing  with  non-spherical  particles  using  the  CPM  method 
(among others: Lu et al. [1252], Kruggel-Emden and Vollmari [1253], 
Oschmann  et  al.  [1254],  Vollmari  et  al.  [1255],  Wiese  et  al.  [354], 
Scherer  et  al.  [356],  Bambauer  et  al.  [355],  Ma  and  Zhao  [632], 
Oschmann and Kruggel-Emden [1256] and Pozzobon et al. [1250]). The 
focus of these works is on investigating the mixing behavior of mono-
disperse and polydisperse particles with different shapes, and on heat 
transfer  between  the  gas  and  solid  phases.  In  addition  to  the  mathe-
matical functions for describing the particle geometry, the SPM method 
also requires the expansion of the closure models that are required to 
determine the volume and surface forces, as well as the momentum of 
forces.  Since  the  computational  complexity  increases  sharply  as  the 
order of polynomial function is raised, this approach is generally applied 
to  simple  geometries  such  as  cylindrical  or  ellipsoidal  particles  [946, 

1257]. 

The  challenges  for  the  simulation  of  chemical  and  energy  process 
systems (the current state of research) are to combine the gas flow and 
the homogeneous reactions with the motions of particles with complex 
geometries and heterogeneous reactions, taking into consideration the 
temperature distribution inside the particles as well as the momentum, 
heat and mass transfer rates between the gas and solid phases. However, 
work has only just begun on the chemical reaction mechanism in the 
discrete-particle model with DEM. Most works found in the literature are 
dedicated to heat transfer between the gas and solid phases. Few studies 
are also found on the gasification or combustion process of solid fuels 
(including  biomass  or  coal),  while  CO2  capture  technologies  and 
metallurgical or mining processes are much less frequent. In 2003 and 
2004, Zhou et al. [1258–1260] published one of the first works in this 
field of research. In their study, a coal combustion model is combined 
with a  DEM code in order  to study the  behavior of  reactive gas-solid 
flows  in  a  2D  bubbling fluidized  bed.  They  investigated  how  the  bed 
temperature and inlet gas velocity influenced the flow structure of the 
gas-solid system and its properties. Since 2006, the group around Prof. 
Scherer  has  been  working  on  the  simulation  of  biomass  and  waste 
combustion in a grate firing system by hooking an in-house DEM code 
with  a  chemical  reaction  mechanism  in  the  commercial  CFD  code 
“ANSYS-FLUENT” (among others: Oevermann et al. [414], Simsek et al. 
[358],  Wiese  et  al.  [354],  Scherer  et  al.  [356]  and  Bambauer  et  al. 
[355]).  The numerical  results show  satisfactory  agreement with  mea-
surements,  even  though  the  model  has  faced  few  challenges,  making 
assumptions such as spherical particles and constant temperature dis-
tribution inside the particles. In 2009, Oevermann et al. [414] presented 
one of the first DEM studies on the wood gasification process in a 2D 
fluidized-bed system. This study was followed in 2013 by the work of 
Alobaid  [50],  who  developed  an  in-house  CFD/DEM  code,  known  as 
“DEMEST”, for the numerical simulation of biomass conversion in flu-
idized beds. Here, gas-particle interactions are studied using new pro-
cedures,  known  as  the  offset  method  and  the  two-grid  method.  This 
improves the simulation accuracy by up to one order of magnitude and 
allows the fluid grid resolution to be varied independently of the particle 
size. Within the last seven years, there has been only a moderate increase 
in  DEM  studies  on  reactive  gas-solid  flows  in  fluidized-bed  systems. 
Current  works  by  Wu  et  al.  [361],  Zhuang  et  al.  [360],  Sutkar  et  al. 
[1245], Li et al. [650], Alobaid [75], Zhao and Lu [587], and Stroh [86] 
are mentioned here as an example. 

Relevant published studies, shown in Table 3.9, on the development 
of  the  CFD-DEM  model  and  its  application  to  various  processes  (e.g. 
mixing, heat transfer, drying, and combustion) will be analyzed in the 
following sections. 

3.3.2. Non-reactive simulations 

3.3.2.1. Two-dimensional applications. After the DEM model was intro-
duced by Cundall and Strack [117], less than five years was required for 
the first start-up. The earliest contributions to this field of research date 
back  to  1983.  However,  at  the  early  stage  of  development,  the  2D 
simulation  was  a  crucial  approach  for  satisfying  the  requirements  of 
computational  cost.  Walton  [1346]  developed  a  two-dimensional  dis-
crete-particle  computer  model  similar  to  the  model  by  Cundall  and 
Strack [117] to examine particle-particle and particle-wall surface fric-
tion.  Experiments  with  oil  shale  rubble  verified  that  the  simulation 
model was able to predict particle motion. The results showed slower 
segregation in the two-dimensional simulations with spherical particles 
than  in  the  3D  experiments.  Hawkins  [1347]  developed  an  in-house 
code to investigate the material properties of granular flow using the 
DEM  model  by  Cundall  and  Strack.  The  particles  are  modeled  as 
two-dimensional  rigid  disks  with  realistic  coefficients  of  friction  and 
restitution under the assumption of stochastic boundaries to eliminate 
wall effects, enabling the simulation of uniform flow. In 1986, Gidaspow 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930141F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.9 
A review of the CFD-DPM with the soft-sphere model, applied to chemical and energy processes.  

Sub-models/applications 

Studies 

Main observations 

Sub-models 

Homogeneous drag models 

Structure-dependent drag models 

[50,107,117,335,347,631, 
641-643,763,764,1098, 
1261–1263]  

[81,86,334,455,460,461,1227, 
1234] 

Volume forces (gravitational, static buoyancy force, electric 
or magnetic fields) 

[50,81,334,355,412,630,632, 
638,639,772,1227,1264,1265]  

Aerodynamic surface forces (e.g. virtual mass, Basset, 
Saffman, Magnus force) 

[50,634,645] 

Adhesive forces without physical contact (van der Waals 
force, electrostatic force) 

[1238–1240,1266,1267] [584, 
1239,1268] 

Adhesive forces with physical contact (solid bridge, liquid 
bridge) 

[359,398,625-627,629,630,745, 
746,1241,1243–1246,1265,1267, 
1269–1280] 

Moments of force (due to gas-particle interaction, due to 
short-range forces between particles) 

[12,115,342,555,1230,1247, 
1248,1281,1282]  

Chemical reaction (homogeneous and heterogeneous), heat 
and mass transfer (e.g. convection, conduction, radiation) 
(heterogeneous chemical reactions, particle-particle/wall 
collisions) 

[872,873,1283–1288] [452,647, 
648,650,652,1243,1251,1254, 
1256,1282,1283,1288–1292]  

Spherical particles 

[107,117,347,362,417,630,631, 
636,643,645,772,783,1231,1245, 
1262,1293] 

• Homogeneous drag models overestimate the momentum 
transfer between the gas and solid phases, leading to 
unrealistic predictions  

• Heterogeneous drag models (structure-dependent drag 

models) take into account the sub-scale structures and show 
better agreement with measurements  

• Most of the CFD-DEM studies found in the literature are 

applied to homogeneous drag models  

• Drag models (homogeneous and heterogeneous) that take 

into account non-spherical particles need further 
investigation 

• The gravitational volume force was part of all CFD-DEM 

simulations, while the static buoyancy force and the electric 
and magnetic volume forces were usually not taken into 
consideration  

• Aerodynamic surface forces (e.g. virtual mass, Basset and 

Saffman forces) were not taken into consideration in most of 
the CFD-DEM studies because of their subordinate impor-
tance on the process investigated, except for some specific 
cases  

• The contact forces were taken into account in all CFD-DEM 
simulations Although the non-linear contact models show an 
accurate distribution of contact force curve, the linear con-
tact model has frequently been applied  

• CFD-DEM studies investigating the effect of adhesive forces 
without physical contact, such as the van der Waals force and 
the electrostatic force, were reported very rarely  

• A significant body of literature has been found regarding the 

modeling of the adhesive force due to liquid bridging. 
However, the high-temperature adhesive force due to solid 
bridging received much less attention in the CFD-DEM 
simulations  

• Most CFD-DEM studies in the literature were limited to 

spherical particles, which are of constant diameter and have 
the same material properties The calculation of volume and 
surface forces of non-spherical particles with different ma-
terial properties needs further investigation 

• The moments of force acting on particles were neglected in 

most of the CFD-DEM works found in the literature  

• Where these were taken into consideration in the CFD-DEM 
simulations, only the moment of force due to gas-particle 
interaction or the moment of force due to tangential contact 
force were mentioned. The moment of force due to asym-
metrical normal traction distribution was disregarded in all 
CFD-DEM works applied to fluidized-bed systems  

• The moments of force acting on non-spherical particles with 
different material properties need further investigation 

• The modeling of heat transfer in the fluidized-bed systems 
was broadly discussed in the literature on CFD-DEM, espe-
cially heat transfer due to particle-particle and particle-wall 
contacts (heat transfer due to conduction) as well as that due 
to convection between the two phases. Radiative heat 
transfer modeling is generally neglected, or simplified ap-
proaches are used  

• The modeling of the mass transfer receives much less 
attention compared to heat transfer modeling. This is 
probably due to the complexity of the problem and the case- 
dependency of the balance equations of both phases on the 
simulated process  

• The homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical reactions 
involved depend on the process under investigation. CFD- 
DEM simulations that include chemical reactions are per-
formed much less frequently than heat transfer modeling  
• Heat and mass transfer modeling with chemical reactions of 
non-spherical particles is almost not found in the literature 
on CFD-DEM, therefore additional works are required in this 
field of research 

• In most CFD-DEM studies found in the literature, the poly-
disperse particles with complex geometries and different 
material properties were simplified to monodisperse parti-
cles with the same material properties 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930142F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.9 (continued ) 

Sub-models/applications 

Studies 

Main observations  

Non-spherical particles 

Applications  Mixing/segregation process 

Drying process 

Wetting process 

Coating process 

Combustion 

Gasification/pyrolysis process 

CO2 capture technologies (e.g. carbonate and chemical 
looping processes) 
Other chemical and metallurgical processes (e.g. 
crystallization, methanation, cyclone separator, ironmaking 
blast furnace, lime shaft kiln, fluid catalytic cracking, 
methanol-to-olefins in a fluidized-bed, tube erosion in a 
fluidized bed, coalescence and breakup processes 
polymerization, reduction of ores, directly-irradiated 
fluidized bed reactor, pulsed-fluidized bed, pressurized 
fluidized bed, vibrated fluidized bed, particle-driven solar 
power receivers, and particle image velocimetry 
measurements) 

[1,395,458,632,634,784,946, 
957,1250,1251,1281,1294–1296] 

[393,632,633,635,1266,1267, 
1270,1275,1276,1278, 
1297–1306]  

[349-352,629,649,654, 
1307–1311] 

[359,398,629,630,1244,1265, 
1270–1277,1312,1313] 

[404,1271–1273,1314,1315] 

[50,69,86,354,358,360,361,399, 
417,587,650,1258–1260, 
1316–1320] 

[16,353,356,362,414-417,419, 
465,577,587,1251,1321>–1326] 

[86,464] 

[303,342,355,357,360,361,363, 
397,580,622,1221,1325, 
1327–1345]  

• CFD-DEM studies on fluidized-bed systems with non- 

spherical particles can be found, but not as often as the 
studies on spherical particles 

• CFD-DEM simulations applied to various industrial processes 
can be found in the literature Although some of these studies 
present a full-scale modeling concept, several simplifications 
are considered to enable the costly simulation (e.g. quasi 2D, 
spherical particles, neglecting various sub-models)  
• The mixing and segregation processes were intensively 

investigated within the framework of the CFD-DEM model. 
Most of the works study binary systems consisting of spher-
ical particles with the same material properties, while non- 
spherical particles are less frequently discussed  

• A considerable amount of research work has been carried out 

on wetting and drying processes, including the use of 
different heat and mass transfer models. However, the 
consideration of non-spherical particles is still at the early 
stage of the investigation  

• A limited number of CFD-DEM simulations on particle 

coating can be found in the literature despite the commercial 
importance of spray coating. The heat and mass transfer 
models should be taken into consideration in the process 
since heat is generally used to fix the coating material on the 
particle surface. Very few studies address the coating process 
for non-spherical particles  

• CFD-DEM simulations applied to the combustion or 

gasification process are a major challenge. The simulation 
should combine the gas flow and the homogeneous reactions 
with the motions of particles and heterogeneous reactions, 
taking into consideration the temperature distribution inside 
the particles as well as the momentum and the heat and mass 
transfer rates between the gas and solid phases. Therefore, 
few studies on the gasification or combustion process of solid 
fuels are found in the literature  

• There are almost no CFD-DEM studies in the literature 

applied to CO2 capture technologies. All studies simplify the 
process by investigating the hydrodynamic behavior of the 
cold gas-solid flow without taking into account the chemical 
reaction mechanism. One of the few works in this field of 
research was presented by Stroh et al. [86], who used the 
CFD-DEM model to simulate the carbonate-looping process. 
According to the authors, the challenges for the research 
arise from the complex hydrodynamics in fluidized beds and 
the accurate prediction of reactive gas-solid mixtures  
• The body of research into CFD-DEM simulations applied to 
metallurgical, calcination and crystallization processes, etc. 
has been greatly improved in recent years  

• Artificial images, obtained from the CFD-DEM simulations 
can be used to reconstruct 2D-3D solid fraction corrections, 
which is required to transform the solids velocity into a solid 
flux 

[9] prepared a valuable review of the hydrodynamic models of fluid-
ization  systems,  showing  that  the  variation  in  the  volumetric  void 
fractions, pressure, and gas and solid velocities as a function of position 
and  time  can  be  predicted  numerically.  The  review  pointed  out  that 
these  numerical  models  should  help  improve  the  performance  of 
chemical plants that have been  performing below their design expec-
tations for the last 20 years. Although the work of Hawkins [1347] in 
1983  was  related  to  gas-solid  flow,  the  DEM  model  by  Cundall  and 
Strack was not mentioned in this review. This is most probably because 
the  DEM model was  not applied to fluidization systems  but was only 
known to simulate the solid phase (e.g. rock and soil). As an example, 
the  numerical  study  by  Uemura  and  Hakuno  [1348]  in  1987  investi-
gated soil behavior when a deep foundation penetrated the ground. The 
dynamic  analyses  are  performed  using  Cundall  and  Strack’s  particle 
assembly simulation. The ground/soil was modeled with 3,400 particles 
uniformly distributed between 0.5 m and 5 m, as shown schematically in 
Fig.  3.47.  The  authors  introduced  a  restitution  coefficient  into  the 
model,  taking  into  consideration  the  energy  dissipation  during  the 
collision by using the dashpot term. 

A numerical study on the hydrodynamic behavior of gas-solid flow in 
a  horizontal  channel  was  carried  out  in  1987  by  Tsuji  et  al.  [1350], 
followed by another study in 1992 [1351]. The fluid motion was solved 
using the finite-difference method while simultaneously determining the 
particle  trajectories  based  on  the  DEM  model  by  Cundall  and  Strack. 
Good  agreement  was  obtained  between  the  simulation  and  measure-
ments. Due to the limitations of computer performance, a low number of 
tracked particles with relatively larger diameters (10 mm) were taken 
into consideration. The first attempt at the hydrodynamic modeling of 
fluidization systems using the DEM model by Cundall and Strack was 
also made  by  Tsuji et  al.  [763] in  1993. A  two-dimensional gas-solid 
fluidized-bed  system  was  simulated, 
into  consideration 
gas-particle  and  particle-particle  interactions  (see  Fig.  3.48).  The 
calculated  pressure  fluctuations  were  compared  with  measurements, 
showing  good  agreement.  After  that,  Tsuji  [764]  presented  a  review 
paper on the discrete particle simulation of gas-solid flows (from dilute 
to  dense  flows),  including  examples  of  particle  mixing  in  a  rotating 
drum, particle discharge from a cylindrical hopper, gas-solid flow in a 
vertical channel and dense particle transport in a horizontal pipe and a 

taking 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930143F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3.47. Penetration  of  deep  foundation  into  the  ground:  (a)  distribution  of  particles,  (b)  velocity  of  the  particle,  and  (c)  normal  force  between  particles 
(reproduced from reference [1348,1349], with permission of Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.48. Snapshots of the spatial distribution of solid (bulk gas velocity of 2.6 m/s) (reproduced from reference [763], with permission of Elsevier).  

two-dimensional  fluidized  bed  with  three  jets.  The  particle  systems 
investigated  contained  particle  counts  below  10,000  and  particle  di-
ameters between 2 mm and 4 mm. 

Since the successful works by Tsuji et al. [763,764], the number of 
manuscripts dealing with the fluidized-bed simulation using the DEM 

model has increased sharply. Xu and Yu modeled the gas-solid flow in a 
fluidized  bed  by  a  combination  of  the  discrete-particle  method  and 
computational  fluid  dynamics  [1352].  For  the  simulation,  2,400 
spherical particles with an average diameter of 4 mm were calculated in 
the  dimensions 
a  pseudo-2D  central 

jet  fluidized  bed  with 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930144F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

0.9 × 0.15 × 0.004 m3. According to the authors, the CFD-DEM model 
they developed can provide detailed dynamic information at different 
levels, from the processing equipment to the individual particle. Mikami 
et  al.  [626]  developed  a  numerical  simulation  model  to  study  the 
fluidization  behavior  of  dry  and  wet  cohesive  powder 
in  a 
two-dimensional  fluidized-bed  system  with  14,000  spherical  particles 
(diameter of 1 mm, density of 2,650 kg/m3, moisture content of 0.27 wt. 
%, and gas velocity of 1.2 m/s). The adhesive force due to the liquid 
bridge between particles and between a particle and the wall was taken 
into consideration in the model. The results showed that the fluidization 
of wet powder forms agglomerates. Furthermore, the fluctuations in the 
pressure drop and the minimum fluidizing velocity were lower for dry 
particles  than  for  wet  powder.  A  numerical  study  was  performed  by 
Rong et al. [1353] to analyze the behavior of the gas-solid flow in a 2D 
fluidized  bed  with  immersed  tubes.  The  fluidized  bed  was  0.18  m  in 
width and 0.42 m in height, the tube diameter was 30 mm, and the bed 
material  consisted  of  spherical  glass  beads  (20,000)  with  a  mean 
diameter of 1.02 mm and a density of 2,520 kg/m3. The particle-tube 
interactions  and  the  bubble  behavior  around  the  tube  were  success-
fully  obtained  for  different  fluidization  velocities  and  tube  arrange-
ments.  The  simulated  results  were  in  good  agreement  with  the 
experimental data shown in the literature. Rhodes et al. [625] applied 
the DEM model to study how cohesive particles affected the character-
istic behavior of a gas-fluidized bed. The simulations were carried out 
using a two-dimensional fluidized-bed system with a height of 0.2 m and 
a width of 0.08 m. The 4,000 particles used had a diameter of 1 mm and 
densities in the range of 1,590 kg/m3 to 2,650 kg/m3. In another study, 
Pandit  et  al.  [1279]  examined  the  hydrodynamic  behavior  of  a 
fluidized-bed system of spherical particles, whose size and density place 
them in Group A of Geldart’s classification. Simulations with different 
numbers of particles up to 106,400 particles were performed with and 
without taking into account the adhesive force. A minor change in the 
fluidization behavior was observed until the adhesive force was equiv-
alent in magnitude to several times the single-particle weight. Link et al. 
[772,783] presented DEM simulation studies on gas-liquid-solid flow in 
a  spouted  fluidized  bed.  A  pseudo-2D  fluidized  bed  measuring 
2 × 0.15 × 0.027 m3 was used to minimize the number of particles. The 
work by Link et al. [772,783] was extended by Sutkar et al. [715,1245] 
to  investigate  the  hydrodynamics  of  gas-solid  spouted,  fluidized  beds 

with  draught plates  and  liquid  injection.  The  result  indicates that for 
glass particles under dry and wet conditions, the time-averaged particle 
velocities are similar to quasi-steady-state behavior. Compared to dry 
systems, lower particle velocities were observed for the wet systems in 
both  the  spout  and  annulus.  G¨otz  [107]  developed  a  parallel  DEM 
simulation  code,  in  which  the  computational  domain  is  divided  into 
several decompositions and each sub-block is allocated one processor. 
Based on the model developed by G¨otz, Alobaid et al. [646] extended the 
program to include the numerical simulation of gas-solid flow in a flu-
idized  bed.  The  particle-particle,  particle-wall,  and  gas-particle  in-
teractions  are  modeled  by  tracking  all  individual  particles.  The  solid 
phase consists of approximately 36,500 spherical glass beads with an 
average diameter of 2.5 cm and a density of 2,500 kg/m3. To validate 
the  model,  a  pseudo-2D  fluidized  bed 
rig  measuring 
0.5 × 0.15 × 0.02 m3  was used. Air at different mass flow rates (0.005 
kg/s and 0.006 kg/s) was supplied from the bottom through the cen-
trally placed nozzle. The results showed that the DEM model can accu-
rately predict the hydrodynamic behavior of the gas-solid flow in the 
fluidized bed. The simulated spatial distribution of solid, the bed height 
and  the  equivalent  bubble  diameter  agree  very  well  with  the  experi-
ments (see Fig. 3.49). In further studies, Alobaid [641,642] introduced a 
particle  grid,  in  which  the  physical  values  of  the  solid  phase  are 
computed, in addition to the fluid grid. The suggested procedure, also 
known  as  the two-grid  method, allows  the  fluid  grid  resolution  to  be 
varied independently of the particle size and consequently improves the 
calculation  accuracy.  Furthermore,  gas-particle  interaction  is  studied 
using  a  new  procedure  known  as  the  offset  method.  The  proposed 
approach is highly precise in determining the interaction values, thus 
improving the simulation accuracy by up to one order of magnitude. 

test 

The radial and axial mixing processes of particles with and without 
cohesive forces in a two-dimensional fluidized bed (0.42 m in height and 
0.096 m in width) were investigated by Fan et al. [1267]. The mixing 
degree was identified using the Ashton index. The authors found that the 
particles mixing with cohesive force were different from those without 
cohesive force and the cohesive force weakens the mixing process. When 
the gas superficial velocity is increased, the bubbling and bubble coa-
lescence become more frequent, which in turn leads to the rapid mixing 
of particles in both cases (with and without cohesive forces). Further-
more, the radial and axial mixing rates are high at the beginning and 

Fig. 3.49. Snapshots of the spatial distribution of solid (mass flow rate 0.006 kg/s; time range between 0 and 225 ms): (a) experiment, (b) DEM model (legend: 
vertical particle velocity) (reproduced from reference [646], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930145F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.50. Snapshots for the axial mixing process (a), and radial mixing process (b) of particles (with inter-particle cohesive forces, even air distribution and ug = 2 
umf) (reproduced from reference [1267], with permission of Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.51. CFD/DEM summations for mixing process of four solids in (a) a gas-fluidized bed, and (b) a supercritical water-fluidized bed (10,000 spherical particles 
with a diameter of 0.5 mm and a density of 2,580 kg/m3, ug = 2.5 umf) (adapted from reference [393], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930146F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

then  decrease  with  time.  The  axial  mixing  process  is  induced  by  the 
bubble wake and has a short mixing time. By contrast, the radial mixing 
process mainly depends on convective mixing caused by bubbles and has 
a long mixing time (see Fig. 3.50). 

Lu et al. [393] presented a study comparing the gas-fluidized bed and 
the  supercritical  water-fluidized  bed  in  terms  of  flow  structures  and 
bubble dynamics. The supercritical water-fluidized bed, a new reactor 
concept, is generally applied to produce hydrogen from biomass or coal. 
The results showed that the hydrodynamic behavior of the bubbles in 
the supercritical water-fluidized beds significantly differs from that of 
gas-fluidized  beds.  The  authors  reported  that  a  better  fluidization 
quality (better mixing process) induced by the bubble dynamics can be 
achieved using the supercritical water-fluidized bed (see Fig. 3.51). 

Lu et al. [461] investigated how different numerical parameters such 
as  the  grid  resolution,  the  drag  models  (homogeneous  and  heteroge-
neous),  and  the  parcel  size  affected  the  hydrodynamic  behavior  of 
gas-solid flows in a bubbling fluidized bed (see Fig. 3.52). To validate 
the model, a pseudo-2D bed was applied with a height of 1.0 m, a width 
of 0.28 m, and a thickness of 0.025 m. The numerical results indicate 
that the selected drag model has a significant influence on bubble sizes 
and solid distributions. Compared to the homogeneous drag model, the 
heterogeneous drag models take into account the sub-scale structures, 
meaning  that  the  void  fraction  in  the  bubbling  fluidized  bed  can  be 
captured  better  even  using  coarser  grids  and  larger  parcel  sizes.  The 
refinement of the grid will reduce the parcel size and can improve the 

simulation results, but this approach is accompanied by a considerable 
increase  in  the computational  cost.  The authors  reported that  a  large 
parcel size and a coarse grid can be used along with the heterogeneous 
drag model to obtain accurate simulation results for large-scale fluid-
ized-bed systems. 

Ma  et  al.  [632]  investigated  the  fluidization  behavior  of  binary 
mixtures with different ratios of rod-like particles to spherical particles 
using  the  CFD-DEM  model.  A  fluidized-bed  test  rig  measuring 
1 × 0.2 × 0.03 m3  was applied to validate the model, showing that the 
behavior of the bed can be reproduced fairly well with the CFD-DEM 
simulation  (see  Fig.  3.53).  The  study  indicates  that  the  minimum 
fluidization velocity rises when the volume fraction of rod-like particles 
increases  in  the  binary  mixture.  In  contrast  to  the  single-component 
systems, more time is required for the formation of the particle inter-
nal recirculation in the binary mixture systems. Increasing the superfi-
cial  velocities  and/or  decreasing  the  volume  fraction  of  the  rod-like 
particles  in  the  mixture  accelerates  the  mixing  quality  in  the  binary 
granular systems. Based on the CFD-DEM model validated in their pre-
vious study [632], in recent studies, Ma et al. [633,1281] evaluated the 
fluidization behavior of only rod-like particles and disk-like particles in 
a  fluidized  bed  with  and  without  a  horizontal  immersed  tube.  The 
fluidized-bed test rig presented in the previous work was modified by 
inserting a horizontal immersed tube with a diameter of 0.06 m into the 
bed.  According  to  the  authors,  the  CFD-DEM  model  can  be  applied 
successfully  to  investigate the  fluidization  behavior  of  gas-solid flows 

Fig. 3.52. (a) particle distribution colored by the vertical velocity at a time of 15.0 s using different drag models with a grid resolution of 30dp × 17dp × 15dp, and (b) 
parcels distribution colored by the vertical velocity at a time of 15.0 s using different parcel sizes with a grid resolution of 30dp × 17dp × 15dp  (reproduced from 
reference [461], with permission of Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.53. Fluidization behavior of rod-like particles and spherical particles at gas superficial velocities of 2 m/s and different volume fractions of rod-like particles 
(adapted from reference [632], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930147F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.54. Fluidization behavior of rod-like particles in complex geometries. (adapted from reference [633], with permission of Elsevier).  

with non-spherical particles in complex geometries (Fig. 3.54). 

Progress in recent years was achieved by supplying a pulsed gas mass 
flow rate to the fluidized bed, the so-called pulsed-fluidized bed (PFB). 
This procedure that belongs to a class of assisted fluidization methods 
improves the fluidization of particles with PSD, increases the particle- 
mixing rate, and prevents agglomeration (i.e. breaking the bridges be-
tween  particles).  Wu  et  al.  [1354]  investigated  the  dynamic  bubble 
patterns in a quasi-2D pulsed-fluidized bed using the CFD-DEM model. 
The  developed  model  was  validated  toward  experiments,  showing 
quantitative agreement. Similarly, Namdarkedenji et al. [1355] inves-
tigated the influence of the flow type (uniform and pulsed flows) on the 
fluidization  behavior  of  a  gas-solid  fluidized  bed  using  the  CFD-DEM 
model. A uniform and three pulsed flows (sinusoidal, rectangular and 
relocating) were injected through three nozzles located at the bottom of 
the  bed.  It  was  found  that  the  minimum  fluidization  velocity  of  the 
pulsed-fluidized  bed  was  decreased  by  up  to  33  %  compared  to  the 
uniform  one.  Here,  the  pressure  drop  and  interaction  force  were 
decreased, while the bed expansion and particles average velocity were 
increased.  Furthermore,  it  was  shown  that  the  effect  of  the  pulsation 
frequency on the minimum fluidization velocity was less than the pul-
sation amplitude. The authors claimed that the pulsation decreases, on 
the one hand, the interaction force between the gas and solid phases, 
while increases, on the other hand, the contact force between particles. 
The frequency has a minor effect on the interaction force between the 
gas and solid phases but significantly affects the particle contact force. 
Further  study  on  quasi-2D  pulsed-fluidized  beds  was  carried  out  by 
Oliveira et al. [1335]. Here, a CFD-DEM model was used to investigate 
the behavior of a pseudo-2D pulsed-fluidized bed, consisting of Geldart 
B particles. The study focused on the response of the bed to variations in 
the mean gas velocity and the amplitude of oscillations. The results show 
that a regime transition takes place when the amplitude of oscillation is 
varied under constant mean gas velocity. 

Wang et al. [1356] investigated the effects of different drag models 
(Di  Felice  and  Gidaspow  drag  models)  and  different  collision  models 
(hard-sphere  and  soft-sphere  models)  on  the  gas-solid  behavior  in  a 
pseudo-2D  bubbling  fluidized  bed  (0.12 × 0.044 × 0.01  m3)  under 
different  superficial  gas  velocities  (see  Fig.  3.55).  To  validate  the 
simulation results, the experimental work conducted by Müller et al. was 
applied [820]. It was found that the Di Felice drag model shows a better 
agreement with the experimental data than the Gidaspow drag model. 
Furthermore,  the  hard-sphere  and  soft-sphere  models  reproduce  very 
well  the  measured  particle  velocity  profiles.  The  hard-sphere  model 
causes more vigorous interphase momentum transfer and more frequent 
collision events. The rotational velocity obtained from the hard-sphere 
model is smaller than that from the soft-sphere one, but the rotational 
velocity fluctuation is much stronger. 

Finally, it worth mentioning that the pseudo-2D CFD-DEM simula-
tions represent a crucial approach for converting the velocity data ob-
tained from particle image velocimetry measurements to the solid flux 
that provides the most important information for the solid motion in gas- 
solid fluidized beds. The particle image velocimetry (PIV) is a proven 
technology  for  the  measurement  of  solid  motion  in  gas-solid  flows, 
showing  many  advantages  such  as  non-intrusiveness  and  low  costs 
compared to other experimental techniques (e.g. electrical capacitance 
tomography and X-ray tomography). After capturing successive images 
with the high-speed camera, a cross-correlation analysis on each image 
pair is applied to reconstruct the velocity field of the solids. Two com-
mon  approaches  can  be  used  to  obtain  the  2D  void  fraction:  1)  to 
distinguish between the emulsion phase and the bubble phase in the bed 
[1357] or 2) to correlate the average pixel intensity in an area with the 
local void fraction in that area [1358]. Both of these methods have their 
own limitations. For instance, the fluidization behavior of the Geldart D 
particles does not form discrete distinguishable bubbles, while the sec-
ond  method  can  produce  unsatisfactory  results  when  the  contrast 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930148F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.55. Comparison of time-averaged particle vertical velocity at two-bed heights (z = 10 mm and 20 mm) under different drag models (a and b), and different 
collision models (c and d) (adapted from reference [1356], experiments from reference [820], with permission of Elsevier). 

between particles and background is relatively low. In a next step, the 
2D void fraction is converted to the physical 3D void fraction based on 
the method described by De Jong et al. [1332] and Van Buijtenen et al. 
[1359]. In this method, a 2D-3D correlation is required to convert the 
intensity of images (2D solids fraction) into a 3D solids fraction, which is 
required to transform the solids velocity into a solid flux. Since the true 
solids fraction is not known, it is not possible experimentally to find the 
2D-3D  correlation.  Artificial  images,  specifically  obtained  from  the 
CFD-DEM simulations can be used to reconstruct the 2D-3D solid frac-
tion correction [1333] [1332]. 

Further works published on the application of the CFD-DEM model to 
2D and pseudo-2D fluidized-bed systems include Abbaspour et al. [957], 
Ren  et  al.  [634],  Peng  et  al.  [784],  Zhou  et  al.  [1262])  (see  also 
Table 3.9). 

the  era  of 

3.3.2.2. Three-dimensional  applications. In 
increasing 
computational hardware performances, the parallel simulation on multi- 
CPUs/GPUs, and the introduction of the coarse-grained parcel model, 
3D  simulations have  recently been  reported  more frequently  than 2D 
simulations in the literature on DEM. Many authors have evaluated the 
effects of 2D or 3D modeling on the obtained results such as the pressure 
drop, the air velocity, and the solid distribution. Kawaguchi et al. [1360] 
carried out CFD-DEM simulations on a fluidized-bed system, in which 
the particle motion is restricted by parallel front and rear walls. Two 
different  types  of  model  were  simulated:  a  pseudo-2D  fluidized  bed 
measuring  1 × 0.15 × 0.004  m3  and  a  3D  fluidized  bed  measuring 
1 × 0.15 × 0.022  m3.  According  to  the  authors,  the  differences  in  the 
solid motions in the 2D and 3D beds are prominent at the beginning of 
the fluidization process. During fluidization, flow patterns such as the 
period  of  bubble  formation  agree  in  both  simulations,  except  for  the 
motion of particles near the comers of the bed. The particles near the 
corners move in the 2D model but do not move in the 3D model and the 
experiment. Saidi et al. [1361] analyzed the hydrodynamic behavior of 
gas-solid flows in rectangular spouted, fluidized-bed systems of different 
thicknesses (ranging from pseudo-2D to 3D) using the CFD-DEM model. 
The effect was investigated by varying the apparatus thickness from 30, 

60, to 90 mm and the number of particles from 49,000, 98,000 to 147, 
000. The results showed that the gas flow fields calculated in the  3D 
cases have a narrower peak with a higher magnitude of central particle 
flux compared to the pseudo-2D cases, consistent with measurements. 
Furthermore,  higher  air  velocities  and  lower  particle  fluxes  near  the 
front and back walls than in the center were observed for the 3D cases. 
According to the authors, the walls have a considerable impact on the 
hydrodynamic  behavior  of  gas-solid  flows  and  this  effect  becomes 
insignificant once the thickness increases. 

Professor Kuipers and his coworkers have a major contribution to the 
understanding  of  the  physical  nature  of  fluidization,  especially  the 
fluidization  of  Geldart  A  particles.  For  example,  Wang  et  al.  [1362] 
performed  a  detailed  comparison  between  TFM  and  DEM  models, 
including  the  pressure  drop,  the  axial  and  radial  solid  concentration 
profiles, and the circulation patterns of solids. Mu et al. [1363] proposed 
a scaling method for the simulation of circulating fluidized beds using 
the CFD-DEM model. The scaling method was validated by performing 
simulations of a pseudo-2D circulating fluidized bed riser. The authors 
claimed that not only the hydrodynamic scaling of gas and solid prop-
erties  must  be  taken  into  consideration,  but  also  scaling  of  the  di-
mensions for the interphase mapping is required. 

Kuwagi  et  al.  [1241]  investigated  different  fluidized-bed  systems 
with  dry  and  wet  particles  to  examine  how  tangential  lubrication  in-
fluences the gas-solid flow behavior. To validate the model, experiments 
were performed using 45,000 glass beads with a diameter of 200 mm in 
the three-dimensional test rig. Due to the lubrication effect, the particles 
moved more actively in the whole bed region and became less adhesive 
to the wall, but the pressure fluctuation did not change much. Salikov 
[636]  presented  a  combined  experimental  and  numerical  study  to 
investigate  how  the  gas  mass  flow  rate  affected  the  hydrodynamic 
behavior and stability of a prismatic spouted bed with two horizontal 
gas inlets. In the experiment, the flow regimes were identified by the 
temporal fluctuations in the pressure, recorded utilizing the frequency 
domain and chaotic properties  such as the correlation dimension and 
Kolmogorov entropy. More than 235,000 particles with a diameter of 
1.8 mm and a density of 1040 kg/m3  were taken into consideration in 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930149F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the CFD-DEM simulations. The simulated parameters such as the particle 
flow patterns, the expansion of the particle bed, and the characteristic 
pressure drop fluctuations agreed satisfactorily with the measurements. 
Traor´e  et  al.  [1364]  presented  a  CFD-DEM  simulation  study  of  a  3D 
fluidized-bed  model  (1 × 0.7 × 0.7  m3),  made  of  2.744  million  poly-
disperse spherical particles. The authors reported that 1 s of simulation 
takes  6  h  on  a  cluster  with  246  Opteron  processors.  Based  on  the 
simulation  results,  several  phenomena  can  be  analyzed,  such  as  the 
evolution of a single bubble starting from its formation until its explo-
sion, the occurrence of the bubbly regime, and the existence of complex 
worm-like structures. Oschmann et al. [1303] investigated the hydro-
dynamic mixing behavior of complex-shaped particles in a fluidized-bed 
system and a pipe bend that is part of a pneumatic conveyance system. 
The results showed that the mixing behavior strongly depends on the 
shape of the particles. The authors suggested that complex-shaped par-
ticles should be included in the context of CFD-DEM simulations to gain 
a  better understanding of the mixing phenomena. Nikolopoulos et al. 
[81] compared the coarse-grained discrete-element CFD-DEM with the 
two-fluid  model  when  both  are  applied  to  simulate  a  semi-industrial 
riser (height of 8.66 m, inner diameter of 0.6 m) installed at the Tech-
nical University of Darmstadt. They also investigated how the selected 
drag model (Gidaspow and EMMS) influenced the results obtained by 
both  approaches.  The  results  showed  that  the  EMMS  drag  model  re-
produces the test rig with higher accuracy for both approaches. How-
ever,  the  improvement  achieved  for  the  coarse-grained  CFD-DEM 

approach is not as good as in the two-fluid model. The authors explained 
that  the  EMMS  model  and  its  respective  theory  were  developed  and 
validated based on two-fluid simulations, and it was directly applied to 
the  coarse-grained  CFD-DEM  model  without  any  modification.  This 
issue was analyzed by Stroh et al. [86,334], who investigated the ac-
curacy of homogeneous drag models and the EMMS drag model using a 
coarse-grained CFD-DEM approach, including a particle size distribution 
(PSD)  from  the  experiment.  The  higher  accuracy  of  the  EMMS  drag 
model  compared  with  the  Gidaspow  model  was  also  confirmed  (see 
Fig. 3.56). A lab-scale 3D cold-flow fluidized-bed test rig with a height of 
3.1 m, and a diameter of 0.21 m is used to validate the model. Along with 
the test rig height, there are 22 ports for pressure transducers and 11 
ports  for  in-situ  measurements  of  solid  velocities  and  concentrations 
with  a  capacitance  probe.  The  riser  was  fluidized  with  air  at  three 
different fluidization velocities (2.7 m/s, 2.3 m/s and 1.9 m/s). Nearly 
spherical shape particles with defined particle size distributions of sand 
and glass materials were used in the experiment. The solid inventories 
amount to approximately 7.5 kg for sand (density of 2,647 kg/m3) and 
2.5 kg for glass beads (density of 2,518 kg/m3). 

Fig. 3.57 illustrates the radial solids concentrations and velocities for 
one height located in the lean zone region at 2.26 m and another height 
located  in  the  dense  zone  region  at  0.25  m  for  sand  at  superficial 
fluidization of 2.7 m/s. In the dense zone (h=0.25 m), the profiles of 
solid  velocities  and  concentrations  agree  well  with  measurements, 
containing a local velocity minimum in the central region and two small 

Fig. 3.56. Measured and simulated pressure profiles for three fluidization velocities using (a) the Gidaspow drag model, and (b) the EMMS drag model (reproduced 
from reference [334], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.57. The solid velocity and the volumetric fraction of solid radial profiles for two reactor heights (simulation is carried out using coarse-grained CFD/DEM 
combined with the EMMS drag model) (reproduced from reference [334], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930150F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

velocity peaks that look like a camel’s humps, but not as symmetric as in 
the experiment in the vicinity of the riser walls. In the lean zone region 
(h=2.26  m),  the  profiles  of  solid  velocities  and  concentrations  are 
slightly overestimated by the simulation, which is also confirmed by the 
higher solid outflow in comparison to the experiment. 

In the case of a circulating fluidized bed (CFB), the riser is connected 
to a recirculation circuit for the solids, which consists of a cyclone, a 
standpipe, and a loop seal. In most of the studies mentioned above, one 
component was generally selected for the CFD-DEM simulations, e.g. a 
riser  or  a  cyclone.  Recently,  there  is  a  trend  toward  a  full-loop  CFB 
simulation.  For  example,  Luo  et  al.  [1365]  carried  out  a  numerical 
investigation into gas-solid motion in a full-loop 3D-CFB system using 
the CFD-DEM model. Air is used as a fluidization agent, while the solid 
phase consists of 200,000 spherical particles with a diameter of 1.6 mm 
(Geldart’s  group  D)  and  a  density  of  1500  kg/m3.  A  few  years  later, 
Wang et al. [1293] extended the previous work by studying how adding 
ring baffles in the riser affected the full-loop CFB performance. The re-
sults showed that the use of ring baffles contributes to the homogeneous 
distribution of the solid in the riser and increases the solid holdup in 
local  regions  of  the  riser.  Furthermore,  the  ring  baffles  improve  the 
gas-particle and particle-particle interactions, increase the solid circu-
lation rate and solid inventory height, decrease the solid cycle time in 
the system and solid residence time in the riser and increase the solids 
residence time in the dipleg (return leg). According to the authors, the 
ring  baffles  have  a  slight  impact  on  the  solid’s  residence  time  in  the 
cyclone, in addition to a slight increase in the pressure drop. Wang et al. 
[1366] presented a parallelization strategy for the large eddy simula-
tions combined with the discrete element method (LES-DEM), applied to 
different fluidized-bed configurations (small-scale pseudo-2D bubbling 
fluidized bed, 3D bubbling fluidized bed, and full-loop circulating flu-
idized bed). The gas phase is parallelized using a spatial decomposition 

technique,  while  the  parallelization  of  the  solid-phase  calculation  is 
based  on  a  ghost  domain technique.  Monodisperse spherical  particles 
(10,000, 200,000 and 1,200,000) with different diameters and densities 
were  tracked.  The  model  was  validated  against  the  measurements, 
showing  good  agreement.  The  authors  stated  that  the  turbulence  of 
gas-solid  flows  in  the  bubbling  fluidized  bed  is  not  obvious.  In  the 
circulating fluidized-bed riser, by contrast, the turbulence is drastically 
intense  and  heterogeneous.  The  investigated  parallelization  strategy 
shows  excellent  accuracy,  good  stability,  and  high  efficiency  using 
different processors and under different operating conditions. However, 
the speed-up ratio and efficiency slightly decrease when the numbers of 
computational grids and particles are increased. In this context, Norouzi 
et al. [396] presented a new parallel CFD-DEM solver that uses both CPU 
and GPU resources. The solver can be applied to complex geometries and 
various kinds of mesh sizes and shapes. Using a desktop computer with a 
4-core CPU, a frequency of 3.6 GHz, and a NVIDIA GeForce
660Ti GPU, 
two different simulation cases were carried out. According  to the au-
thors, it took about 6 hours (with two CPU cores) to complete one second 
of simulation in the case of a large system with 870,000 particles. For the 
smaller system with 47,000 particles, only 30 minutes (with one CPU 
core) were required for one second of simulation. A new CFD-DEM-IBM 
solver was developed by Zhao et al. [413] to simulate several complex 
geometries  (single-phase  flow  past  a  stationary  cylinder,  single-phase 
pipe  flow,  gas-solid  flow  in  a  cylindrical  fluidized  bed,  and  fluidized 
bed with immersed tubes). The interactions between the gas phase and 
complex  geometries  were  modeled  using  the  immersed  boundary 
method,  implemented  OpenFOAM.  The  authors  claimed  that  that  the 
numerical  results  of  CFD-DEM-IBM  simulations  agree  well  with  the 
experimental and numerical results available in the literature. Since the 
internal iterations are not required anymore during the reconstruction of 
velocity  and  pressure  fields,  the  computational  efficiency  of  the 

® 

Fig.  3.58. Fluidization  behavior  of  the  gas-solid  flow  in  the  full-loop  CFB  with  six  parallel  cyclones  at  the  time  instant  of  60  s:  (a)  schematic  illustration,  (b) 
streamline tracer of the gas flow, and (c) solid distribution colored by vertical velocity (reproduced from reference [1248], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930151F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

proposed  solver  is  one  or  two  orders  of  magnitudes  faster  than  the 
original IBM solver of Tukovi´c and Jasak [1367]. 

Okhovat-Alavian et al. [1240], May et al. [348], Dufresne et al. [1368] 
and those in Table 3.9. 

Yang  et  al.  [1248]  applied  the  CFD-DEM  model  for  the 
three-dimensional  simulation  of  a  full-loop  CFB  with  six  parallel  cy-
clones (see Fig. 3.58). The solid phase consists of monodisperse spherical 
particles (900,000) with a diameter of 1.6 mm and a density of 1,500 
kg/m3. The authors stated that there is a need for full-loop simulations in 
future  works,  rather  than  focusing  on  a  specific  component  (i.e.  the 
riser) due to the heterogeneous solid loading in the cyclones. 

Alobaid [50,69] carried out a detailed parametric study to investi-
gate the efficiency and accuracy of the CFD-DEM model. A 3D bubbling 
fluidized bed (1.5 × 0.15 × 0.2 m3) was simulated by varying the stiff-
ness coefficient (in the range between 101  and 109  N/m) and the fluid 
time step (0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90, and 105 ms) for 
different  particle  numbers  (100,101,  102,  103,  104,  105,  and  106) and 
diameters  (0.5,  1.5,  2.5,  and  3.5  mm).  The  obtained  results  were 
compared with the measurements to obtain the optimum parameters for 
the CFD-DEM simulations. It was found that the use of higher stiffness 
coefficients (more than 105 N/m) will improve the simulation accuracy 
slightly,  but  the  average  computing time  exponentially increases  (see 
Fig. 3.59 (a)). Furthermore, the author claimed that for time intervals 
larger  than  five  milliseconds  the  average  computation  time  is  almost 
independent of the fluid time step. By increasing the size of the fluid 
time step, the simulation accuracy extremely decreases. The application 
of finer fluid time steps (smaller than five milliseconds) leads to negli-
gible improvements in the simulation accuracy, but to an exponential 
increase in the average computation time (see Fig. 3.59 (b)). 

B¨ohling  et  al.  [284]  carried out a  numerical  study  of  coating  uni-
formity in a large-scale fluidized-bed coater (Wurster coater) using the 
CFD-DEM model. Several process parameters were investigated, such as 
the inlet air mass flow rate, the atomizing air mass flow rate, the particle 
size distribution, and Wurster gap height. 

Recently published works on the application of the CFD-DEM model 
to 3D fluidized-bed systems and their subcomponents such as cyclones 
include those by Banerjee and Agarwal [338], Chu et al. [1329], Bellan 
et al. [1345], Kerst et al. [400], Takabatake et al. [394], Xu et al. [1263], 

3.3.3. Reactive simulations 

3.3.3.1. Heat and mass transfer models. In the literature on DEM, there 
has  been  broad  discussion  on  specific  thermal  processes  such  as  the 
modeling  of  heat  and  mass  transfer  or  the  consideration  of  high- 
temperature  adhesive  force  (metallic  solid  bridging)  in  fluidized-bed 
systems.  At  a  sufficiently  elevated  temperature  (60  %  of  absolute 
melting  temperature),  stable  solid  bridges  can  be  formed  between 
collided particles. The building of sintered bridges depends strongly on 
the surrounding pressure and the interfacial energies. In the case of low 
pressures and smaller particles (<0.01 mm), the interfacial tension is the 
main mechanism, while pressure sintering is crucial in the case of higher 
pressure  levels  (more  than  1  bar)  and  relatively  big  particles  [743]. 
Agglomeration due to solid bridges has been described in the context of 
the CFD-DEM model. As a reference study for metallic bridging, Kuwagi 
et al. [746] investigated the sintering of iron particles at atmospheric 
pressure based on Kuczynski’s sintering model [747]. The latter model 
assumes  that  the  surface  diffusion  including  the  effect  of  surface 
roughness and the volume diffusion mechanisms is crucial for sintering 
metal powders. Only a few other descriptions were found in the DEM 
literature, contributing to the agglomeration process (e.g. [1273,1369]). 
The modeling of heat and mass transfer, by contrast, was discussed in 
detail. Since 2010, the group around Prof. Kuipers has been involved in 
experimental and numerical investigations of heat and mass transfer in 
gas-solid flows. Patil et al. [653] presented an infrared/particle image 
velocimetry/digital image analysis (IR/PIV/DIA) measuring method to 
investigate heat transfer in a pseudo-2D fluidized bed. CFD-DEM simu-
lations  were  carried  out  taking  into  consideration  the  heat  transfer 
mechanism  (gas-particle,  particle-particle,  gas-wall,  and  particle-wall 
heat  transfer).  Comparison  between  the  numerical  model  and  the 
experimental  data  shows  that  CFD-DEM  simulations  are  capable  of 
accurately predicting the hydrodynamic behavior of gas-solid flows at 
elevated temperatures. One example of CFD-DEM simulations with the 

Fig. 3.59. Influence of the stiffness coefficient variation (a and b) and the fluid time step variation (c and d) on the average computing time per time step at different 
particle diameters and various particle numbers (reproduced from reference [50], with permission of authors). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930152F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.60. CFD/DEM simulation of a pseudo-2D fluidized bed taking into consideration the heat transfer mechanism (hot air is supplied from the bottom from t=0 to 
t=11 s) (reproduced from references [651,1371], with permission of Elsevier). 

heat transfer mechanism was presented by Prof. Kuipers in 2017 [651] 
(see Fig. 3.60). In a further study, Patil et al. [1370] applied the vali-
dated CFD-DEM model with the heat transfer mechanism to simulate the 
injection of hot gas (temperatures ranging from 700 K to 1,100 K) into a 
colder 3D square bed containing up to 8 million particles. Sutkar [630] 
replaced  the  gas  injection  with  liquid  injection  and  presented  a 
CFD-DEM  model  to  simulate  a  pseudo-2D  spouted  fluidized  bed  with 
and without draught plates. According to the authors, the coupled heat 
and mass transfer effects were successfully captured by the numerical 
model  they  developed.  Furthermore,  the  fluidized-bed  system  with 
draught plates was found to offer better features such as simultaneous 
co-current (wetting) and counter-current (drying) contact zones. 

In addition to the group of Prof. Kuipers, the group around Professor 
Aibing  Yu  has  made  particularly  important  contributions,  concerning 
the CFD-DEM simulation with heat and mass transfer, e.g. [1292,1283] 
[1338]. The DEM model that was previously developed to study heat 
transfer of spherical particles (among others: Zhou et al. [868] and Zhou 
et al. [872]) was extended to evaluate the heat transfer of non-spherical 
particles. For example, Gan et al. [1372] studied the heat transfer in gas 
fluidization of ellipsoids. Three heat transfer models (convection, con-
duction, and radiation) were modified to consider the particle shape and 
the  contact  geometry.  The  authors  claimed  that  the  convective  heat 
transfer coefficients of prolate particles are greater than those of spheres 
and  oblate  particles.  Systematical  studies  on  a  fluidized  bed  drying 
system for the long-term storage of food grains were also presented by 
Azmir et al. [649,1308,1309]. A CFD-DEM model was developed and the 
influence of particle size, density, and initial moisture content on the 
drying process was investigated. It was found that the shrinkage rate, 
related to the drying rate, increases with increasing the initial moisture 
content and  grain  density or with  decreasing grain  size. Other recent 
contributions can be found, for example, in Shao et al. [1373] and Cheng 
et al. [1374]. 

Wang  et  al.  [1227]  coupled  the  CFD-DEM  model  with  a  heat 

exchange model for a single particle, firstly validated for a pseudo-2D 
bubbling fluidized bed, and secondly applied to a circulating fluidized 
bed.  The  numerical  results  agree  with  the  experimental  data  in  a 
bubbling fluidized bed. Gas-particle convection was found to dominate 
the  heat  transfer,  while  the  particle-particle  conduction  is  almost 
negligible, consistent with previous numerical and experimental results. 
Furthermore, gas-particle conduction amounts to about 10 % of the total 
heat transfer, and this rises when the gas velocity is increased. The au-
thors also reported that the gas velocity and particle diameter have a 
more  noteworthy  influence  on  convective  heat  transfer  than  on 
conductive heat transfer. 

Wu  et  al.  [1289]  investigated  solid  thermal  radiation  in  a  packed 
pebble bed using the CFD-DEM model. The simulation took into account 
the motion of the gas and solid phases, the interaction and heat con-
vection  of  gas-particle,  the  conduction,  and  particle  radiation.  It  was 
found that the inclusion of the particle radiation greatly improves the 
heat transfer compared to the case without particle radiation, especially 
at  higher  temperatures.  The  authors  introduced  a  non-dimensional 
parameter, known as the particle radiation factor (PRF), to qualify the 
effect  of  particle-scale  radiation  in  packed  pebble  beds.  The  PRF 
significantly rises with the temperature and gradually decreases when 
the  heat  storage  capacity  or  the  thermal  conductivity  of  the  gas  in-
creases.  The  model  developed  was  mainly  used  by  the  authors  to 
simulate  a  high-temperature  gas-cooled  reactor  (HTGR).  Other  appli-
cations such as high-temperature sensible thermal energy storage sys-
tems  can  benefit  from  this  model.  Oschmann  [1251]  extended  the 
existing heat transfer models used in the CFD-DEM approach to describe 
particles with non-spherical shapes to better understand the mechanical 
and thermal behavior of gas-solid flows in fluidized-bed systems. 

Fluidized  beds  develop  a  structured  flow  of  bubbles  if  they  are 
exposed to periodically pulsating mass flow rate of air. This procedure 
enhances the gas-solid mix, obviously improving the heat transfer effi-
ciency by making the contact between the particles more uniform. In 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930153F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

3.3.3.2. Combustion and gasification. Despite the considerable progress 
in recent years, the CFD-DEM simulation of reactive gas-solid flows in 
fluidized beds remains a major challenge and is still at an early stage of 
development. One of the first contributions to this field of research was 
presented by Zhou et al. [1258] in 2004. Here, the DEM model with a 
large eddy simulation (LES) was used to model coal combustion in a 2D 
bubbling  fluidized-bed  system.  The  chemical  reaction  mechanism 
comprises the heterogeneous reactions of char with O2, CO, CO2, NO, 
and N2O, along with the homogeneous reactions including CO, O2, NO, 
and N2O. The heat transfer model used took into account particle-gas 
convective heat transfer, particle-bed radiation heat transfer, the heat-
ing rate of a particle, and particle-particle heat transfer. The numerical 
results showed that instantaneous particle-particle heat transfer (based 
on the analysis of the elastic deformation during the contact) is weak, 
making up less than 5.0 % and 1.5 % of the total heat transfer during the 
heating and combustion phases, respectively. Furthermore, it was found 
that the bed temperature is much lower than the temperature of coal 
particles at different conditions. This is consistent with the experimental 
data from the literature. Oevermann et al. [414] published a study, in 
which the DEM-LES approach was coupled with a thermochemical re-
action. This model was used to simulate the wood gasification process in 
a 2D bubbling fluidized bed, taking into consideration the detailed gas 
phase chemistry, zero-dimensional modeling of pyrolysis and gasifica-
tion  of  each  particle,  particle  shrinkage,  and  heat  and  mass  transfer 
between the gas and solid phases. The model was validated against the 
measurements obtained from a laboratory-scale bubbling fluidized-bed 
reactor  by comparing  the  exhaust  gas compositions  and  the tempera-
ture  of  the  experiment  and  the  model.  The  authors  stated  that  the 
computational  effort  for  the  2D  simulation  on  a  single-core  AMD 
Opteron  running  at  a  clock  speed  of  2.4  GHz  was  2.4  hours  for  1  s 
real-time. In order to reduce the computational cost, Bruchmüller et al. 
[1323]  carried  out  a  parallel  CFD-DEM  simulation  on  a  high-end 
multiprocessor computer. That study investigated the thermochemical 
degradation  of  biomass  (fast  pyrolysis)  inside  a  lab-scale  bubbling 
fluidized-bed  reactor  containing  800,000  particles.  The  numerical  re-
sults  obtained  are in  good agreement  with the  100  g/h  fast pyrolysis 
fluidized-bed  test  rig.  According  to  the  authors,  the  superficial  fluid-
ization  velocity  is  crucial,  while  the  biomass  moisture  content  is  less 
important for the final bio-oil yield. Alobaid et al. [50] developed a 3D 
in-house program, “DEMEST”, for the numerical simulation of biomass 
combustion in  a  bubbling fluidized-bed system  (including drying, py-
rolysis, and combustion of the char and volatile matter). The solid phase 
consists of 99 % inert sand particles and 1 % pine wood spherical par-
ticles (36,000), while combustion air is supplied as a fluidization me-
dium.  The  numerical  results  achieve  coupling  between  the  CFD-DEM 
model and the thermochemical reaction mechanism model. The author 
mentions that the use of other solid fuels such as coal or a mixture of coal 
and  biomass  can  also  be  handled  with  the  program.  Ku  et  al.  [417] 
simulated  the  biomass  gasification  process  in  a  fluidized-bed  reactor 
measuring  1.5 × 0.23 × 0.0015  m3  using  the  CFD-DEM  model.  To 
accurately  simulate  biomass  gasification  with  steam,  the  proposed 
model took into account gas-particle and particle-particle interactions, 
turbulence,  radiation,  heat  and  mass  transfer,  particle  shrinkage,  py-
rolysis  process,  and  homogeneous  and  heterogeneous  chemical  re-
actions.  The  solid  phase  consists  of  40,000  spherical  sand  and  pine 
particles, while the gas phase is a mixture of steam and nitrogen. The 
simulation  results  were  evaluated  qualitatively  and  quantitatively 
regarding the flow pattern, the solid mixing and the solid entrainment, 
the  pressure  drop  of  the  bed,  the  product  gas  composition,  and  the 
carbon conversion. The CFD-DEM model was found to be successful for 
the  multi-scale  modeling  of  biomass  gasification  or  combustion  in 
fluidized-bed systems. Zhuang et al. [1320] used the CFD-DEM model to 
evaluate the char combustion in a bubbling fluidized bed under different 
atmospheres  (oxy-combustion  O2/CO2  and  conventional  combustion 
O2/N2) and varying the concentrations of O2. The results showed that 
the  char  gasification  process  should  not  be  neglected  when  the 

Fig. 3.61. (a) mixed pulsed gas mass flow rate, (b) particle flow patterns (total 
apparent gas velocity of Ua=2 m/s, pulsed gas velocity of Upuls=1.33 m/s and 
frequency of f=1 Hz), (c) particle flow patterns (total apparent gas velocity of 
Ua=2 m/s, pulsed gas velocity of Upuls=1.33 m/s and frequency of f=2.5 Hz), 
and (d) particle mixing sequence diagram (total apparent gas velocity of Ua=2 
m/s, pulsed gas velocity of Upuls=1.33 m/s and frequencies of f=0, 1 and 2.5 
Hz) (reproduced from reference [1336], with permission of Elsevier). 

this context, a combined experimental and CFD-DEM simulation study 
for drying particles was performed by Li et al. [1336]. In their work, a 
mixed pulsed-fluidized bed, whose total gas mass flow rate consists of a 
stable gas mass flow rate and a pulsed gas mass flow rate was proposed 
(see  Fig.  3.61).  Applying  different  pulse  frequencies  and  flow  ratios, 
particle mixing, motion, and heat transfer characteristics were studied. 
The authors claimed that the particles in the mixed pulsed-fluidized bed 
experience  regular  periodic  motion,  promoting  the  mixing  effect  of 
particles. If the total mass flow rate is relatively low, the particle mixing 
effect can be improved by increasing the proportion of the pulsed gas. 
When  the  total  mass  flow  rate  is  relatively  high,  the  particle  mixing 
effect is improved by decreasing the flow ratios. 

Examples of further works on hydrodynamics and heat transfer in 
fluidized-bed  systems  can  be  found,  for  example,  in  Liu  et  al.[1375], 
Golshan et al. [22] and in Table 3.9. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930154F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

concentration of O2 in the O2/CO2 atmosphere reaches 30 %. Wiese et al. 
[354]  studied  wood  pellet  combustion  in  a  13  kWth  domestic  wood 
pellet stove. For the simulation, an in-house DEM model was hooked by 
the  commercial  CFD  code “ANSYS-FLUENT”.  In the  model,  the  cylin-
drical  geometry  pellet  particles,  represented  by  polyhedrons,  can  be 
shrunk  during  the  combustion  process.  The  authors  reported that the 
profiles  of  the  gas  temperature measured  in  the  combustion  chamber 
and  simulation  have  a  similar  structure  and  flame  orientation. 
Furthermore,  the  averaged  gas  phase  concentrations  as  a  function  of 
stoichiometry  can  be  predicted  correctly,  but  the  model  failed  to 
reproduce the spatial distributions and the absolute values. In another 
study by the same group based on the above model, Wissing et al. [1264] 
simulated  an  existing  municipal  solid  waste  incineration  plant  (see 
Fig.  3.62).  Considering  the  measurement  uncertainties  and  the 
complexity of the process, a fair agreement was reached with the mea-
surement.  Although  the  model  had  some  simplifications,  the  authors 
believe that it provides insights into the complex process of solid waste 
incinerators,  which  cannot  be  delivered  with  other  numerical  ap-
proaches such as the two-fluid model, in particular for the waste bed (i.e. 
the grate). 

Zhao et al. [587] investigated glucose gasification in a supercritical 
water  fluidized-bed  reactor  using  the  CFD-DEM  model.  The  authors 
applied a simplified reaction kinetic model, including glucose decom-
position, the water-gas shift reaction, and methanation reactions. The 
numerical results showed good agreement with measurements. It was 
found that the high wall temperature, the low flow mass rate, and the 
high initial bed height support the gasification process. At a mass flow 
rate  below  the  minimum  fluidization,  the  gasification  efficiency  and 
thus  the  H2  yield  decreases.  Qi  et  al.  [577]  used  the  coarse-grained 
CFD-DEM  model  to  simulate  the  steam  gasification  process  of  woody 
biomass in a lab-scale fluidized-bed gasifier. The numerical results agree 
very well with the experimental data, demonstrating the validity of this 
model.  According  to  the  authors,  the  computational  cost  for  the 
coarse-grained CFD-DEM model is significantly less than with the DEM 

approach. Increasing the reactor temperature improves the production 
of  CO  while  suppressing  the  H2  yield.  Furthermore,  a  higher  steam/-
biomass ratio enhances the yields of H2 and CO2, while suppressing the 
production  of  CO.  The  studies  shown  above  demonstrate  that  the 
CFD-DEM model can validly be used for different fluidized-bed systems. 
However,  the  computational  cost  of  the  simulation  is  still  a  major 
challenge.  In  this  context,  Uglietti  et  al.  [1376]  proposed  a  speed-up 
algorithm for the CFD-DEM model to reduce the computational cost of 
fluidization systems. As an example, methanation and steam reforming 
systems  were investigated  under different operating  conditions.  Good 
agreement with the experimental data was obtained and the CFD-DEM 
model with  the speed-up  strategies was  proven capable of simulating 
millions of bed particles. 

Directly-irradiated fluidized bed reactors are a promising technology 
for solar applications (e.g. thermochemical energy storage, solar gasi-
fication of hydrocarbons (e.g. coal, biomass, and RDF), and production 
of solar fuels). Several experimental studies investigated this technology 
and recently numerical CFD-DEM studies were also performed. In this 
context, interesting CFD-DEM studies on solar gasification were carried 
out  by  Bellan  et  al.  [303,363,1325]  using  first  a  5  kWth 
directly-irradiated  fluidized  bed  reactor  and  recently  30  kWth.  The 
lab-scale  directly-irradiated  fluidized  bed  (DIFB)  consisted  of  a  cylin-
drical part (diameter: 0.16 m and height: 0.175 m) and a frustum shape 
(height:  0.195  m)  chambers.  The  DIFB  reactor  is  closed  by  a  0.38  m 
diameter  quartz  window  on  the  top  of  the  frustum  chamber  and  was 
filled  with  chemically  inert  particles  (the  size  of  the  particles  ranges 
from 100 μm to 300 μm). Experiments were performed at a 30 kWth high 
flux  solar  simulator,  including  19  Xe  arc  lamps  (each  7  kWel)  with 
elliptical  reflecting  mirrors  that  were  mounted  on  the  dome  of  the 
simulator house to generate the concentrated radiation (see Fig. 3.63). 
The developed CFD-DEM model was validated using the experimental 
data (e.g. temperature and pressure drop). The influence of bed mass, 
particle  size  distribution,  gas  mass  flow  rate,  and  amount  of  loaded 

Fig. 3.62. Simulation of an existing municipal solid waste incinerator using the CFD-DEM model (flue gas  temperature (top) and surface temperature of  waste 
particles (bottom)) (reproduced from reference [1264], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930155F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.63. Directly-irradiated fluidized bed reactor for solar gasification: (a) experimental setup, and (b) temperature distribution of the bed after 1 s, 480 s, and 780 
s of irradiation (reproduced from reference [1325], with permission of Elsevier). 

powder  on  the  thermal  performance  of  the  reactor  has  been 
investigated. 

Examples of further contributions to this field of research (reactive 

gas-solid flows) can be found in Table 3.9. 

3.3.3.3. CO2  capture  technologies. Various  carbon  capture  processes 
based on fluidized-bed technology are currently being developed (e.g. 
carbonate-looping process and chemical-looping combustion), but most 
of them have the consequence of relatively high energy consumption. In 
the literature on DEM, few studies have been conducted to simulate the 
chemical-looping combustion process. The major focus of these works 
was on investigating the hydrodynamic behavior of cold gas-solid flows 
in lab-scale systems, while the chemical reaction model was not taken 
into  consideration,  e.g.  [339,1377–1381].  The  same  applies  to 
CFD-DEM studies used for the carbonate-looping process, with very few 
exceptions,  such  as  the  work  of  Stroh  et  al.  [347].  According  to  the 
authors, the challenges for research lie in the complex hydrodynamics in 
fluidized beds and the accurate prediction of reactive gas-solid mixtures. 
Stroh et al. [347] studied the carbonator (9 m in height and 0.6 m inside 
diameter) of the 1 MWth  carbonate-looping test facility erected at the 
Technical University of Darmstadt. The carbonate-looping process, also 
known as calcium looping, has the potential to significantly reduce the 
efficiency loss of a conventional steam cycle since the process operates at 
high temperatures, allowing heat to be used for energy production in a 
steam  cycle.  The  process  can  be  retrofitted  in  existing  fossil  or 

biomass-fired power plants to remove CO2  from the flue gas. Further-
more, the technology is particularly suitable to efficiently capture CO2 
from  other  industrial  sources  such  as  cement  or  steel  plants.  For  the 
simulation, the coarse-grained CFD-DEM model including a particle size 
distribution  (PSD)  from  the  experiment  was  applied.  The  measured 
pressure profile, along with the riser height and the gas concentrations 
from  the  1  MWth  experiment,  were  used  to  validate  the  model.  The 
Sauter  mean  diameter  and  the  particle  size  distributions  from  two 
different  extraction  points  in  the  riser  were  introduced  into  the  nu-
merical  model  to  represent  the  bed  material.  Furthermore,  different 
homogeneous drag models (Tang, Gidaspow, Wen and Yu, Syamlal and 
O’Brien and Gibilaro) and a heterogeneous drag model (EMMS) were 
applied  and  evaluated.  The  numerical  results  for  the  pressure  profile 
were found to be in good agreement with experimental measurements 
when the PSD was implemented, while a simulation with a representa-
tive Sauter mean diameter for the solid material yields results of worse 
quality (see Fig. 3.64). The influence of the selected homogeneous drag 
model  on  the  calculated  pressure  profile  was  not  significant  and  all 
models  quantitatively  over-predicted  the  pressure  profile  above  a 
reactor  height  of  0.5  m.  The  authors  recommended  using  the  hetero-
geneous EMMS drag model to improve the accuracy of the simulation 
result. 

For the time being, only a limited number of experimental research 
works for large or semi-industrial test facilities are available. This is due 
to the operational challenges in terms of their complexity and the costly 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930156F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.64. (a) pressure profiles using the Syamlal-O’Brien drag model (Sauter diameter, PSD (outlet) and PSD (bottom)), and (b) pressure profiles using PSD (outlet) 
(different drag models) (reproduced from reference [347], with permission of Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.65. Coarse-grained CFD/DEM model for the 20 MW carbonate-looping process.  

measurement  apparatus  required  to  obtain  the  flow  characteristics. 
Therefore, the validated coarse-grained CFD-DEM model at megawatt 
scale  is  of  high  relevance  to  up-scale  the  carbonate-looping  process. 
Fig. 3.65 shows the simulation result of a 20 MW semi-industrial car-
bonate-looping process  (20 × 1.5 × 1.5  m3). The simulation employed 
the  particle  size  distribution  (PSD)  from  the  1  MW  experiment,  the 
EMMS model, and two specific solid inventories of 800 kg/m2 and 1000 
kg/m2 in the carbonator. 

3.3.3.4. Other  processes. CFD-DEM  studies  on  the  wetting  and  drying 

processes  have  been  broadly  discussed  in  the  literature,  providing  a 
better insight into the temperature field and the moisture distribution in 
the entire system (among others: Hobbs [349], Fries et al. [1272], Zhu 
et al. [1270], Sutkar et al. [630], Askarishahi et al. [398], Hou et al. 
[1382]), see also Table 3.9). By contrast, a limited number of CFD-DEM 
studies were found, which studied particle coating [1271,1272,1315], 
although the coating of the particles with a uniform film of a certain 
thickness  is  an  important  precondition  in  many  commercial  applica-
tions,  such  as  pharmaceuticals  and  food  processing.  In  the  industrial 
fluidized-bed  spray  coating  system,  many  physical  and  chemical 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930157F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.66. (a) industrial fluidized-bed spray coating system and the simplified geometry used for the simulation, (b) simulation results for the entire system, (c) 
simulation results for a sub-section showing individual particle coating distributions, and (d) simulation results for coating distributions over four individual particles 
(snapshots are taken 1 s from the start of the spray, gas inflow rate of 15 m/s with a Wurster insert spacing of 20 mm) (reproduced from reference [1314], with 
permission of Elsevier). 

processes can take place, such as the deposition of droplets on the par-
ticle surface during the particle-droplet collision, the evaporation of the 
liquid  from  the  particle  due  to  the  higher  temperature  of  the  sur-
rounding gas, and the agglomeration of the particles. Hilton et al. [1314] 
presented a combined CFD-DEM model and spray droplets to dynami-
cally  simulate  particles,  coating  spray  droplets,  and  gas  flow  over  an 
entire  fluidized-bed  spray  coater.  The  influence  of  the  geometry  and 
system  operating  conditions  on  the  coating  coverage  and  quality  has 
been shown and analyzed (see Fig. 3.66). 

There are a very limited number of CFD-DEM works on fluidization 
systems applied to contexts such as metallurgical processes (ironmakig 

blast  furnace,  roasting of  ores,  e.g.  pyrite,  copper),  calcination  in  the 
cement  industry  (alternative  to  rotatory  kiln  technology),  thermal 
recycling  of  leaching  and  flotation  waste,  calcination  processes  of 
aluminum  and  phosphorus  rock  and  crystallization  process  (among 
others: Zhou et al. [1383], Hou et al. [1338], Bellan et al. [1325], and 
Cui et al. [1343]; see Table 3.9). One recent study, by Bambauer et al. 
[355],  simulated  the  gas-solid  flow  and  the  liquid  accumulation  in  a 
scaled blast furnace (BF) using the CFD-DEM model. An in-house was 
applied  to  describe  the  individual  particle  movement  [1384],  while 
ANSYS-FLUENT was used to solve the governing transport equations for 
the multiphase flow (gas and liquid) by using the volume of fluid (VOF) 

Fig. 3.67. (a) geometry of the blast furnace model, (b) and (c) snapshots of the particle flow pattern and the gas velocity field (reproduced from reference [355], 
experiments from reference [1383], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930158F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3.68. Plane  of  symmetry  for  gas  temperature  and  calcination  degrees  (the  left  shaft  represents  the  burning  shaft)  (reproduced  from  reference  [357],  with 
permission of Elsevier). 

method  (see  Fig.  3.67).  The  obtained  results  were  compared  with 
benchmarking  blast  furnace  simulations,  performed  by  the  group 
around Prof. Yu (e.g. Zhou et al. [1383], Yang et al. [1385], and Wright 
et  al.  [1386]).  The  comparison  shows  that  the  CFD-DEM  model  is 
capable to reproduce the main physical effects in a scaled blast furnace. 
The three dimensional model was applied to study the influence of the 
liquid discharge on the stress distribution along the walls. However, the 
authors  claimed  that  several  simplifications  and  assumptions  were 
necessary to ensure a reasonable computing time for the 3D simulations. 
Another study by the same research group of Prof. Scherer, Krause 
et al. [357] simulated the transient behavior of a parallel flow regen-
erative lime shaft kiln using the CFD-DEM model, taking into consid-
eration  the  heat  and  mass  transfer,  the  gas  combustion,  and  the 
calcination process (see Fig. 3.68). The simulation was carried out using 
the in-house DEM model that was hooked by the commercial CFD code 
“ANSYS-FLUENT” [1384]. The temperature distribution in the calcina-
tion zone was found to be almost uniform, but the inner particle tem-
perature gradients were significant. The degree of calcination is related 
to the location of the particle within the kiln and generally decreases 
toward the outer kiln walls. In a further study from the same research 
group, Bambauer et al. [355] investigated the transient behavior of a 
blast  furnace.  According  to  the  authors,  several  simplifications  were 
necessary  to  carry  out  the  3D  simulations,  such  as  neglecting 
temperature-dependent  fluid  properties  and  downward-dripping 
liquids. 

3.4. Hybrid models 

This  section  will  review  the  hybrid  models  applied  to  different 
chemical engineering processes using fluidized beds. In the first section, 
there will be a short description of the history of these models, including 
the  most  important  developments,  the  main  findings,  and  the  limita-
tions. The second and third sections will provide a comprehensive re-
view  of  the  literature  on  the  application  of  the  two  available  hybrid 

models (MP-PIC and DDPM) in numerical simulations of fluidized beds 
(relative and non-reactive gas-solid flows). 

3.4.1. Development status and research findings 

The history of hybrid models goes back to 1993 when O’Rourke et al. 
[726] significantly improved the single-phase particle-in-cell technique 
(developed by Harlow [1387] in 1962 for single-phase flows) to provide 
a natural structure for multiphase simulations. In 1996, Andrews and 
O’Rourke  [92]  proposed  the  first  multiphase  particle-in-cell  method 
(MP-PIC) and solved six non-trivial multiphase test problems, including 
sedimentation  and  separation  of  a  mixture  of  particles  with  three 
different sizes. During the 1990s, the method was tested and improved 
for  different  benchmark  flows,  such  as  sedimentation  in  an  inclined 
vessel [1388], the sedimentation of a polydisperse suspension [1389], 
instability, 
two-dimensional 
two-dimensional layered sedimentation, the two-dimensional unstable 
buoyancy mixing layer, homogeneous batch sedimentation, and for the 
first  time  the  two-dimensional  simulation  of  two  different  lab-scale 
fluidized-bed systems [1390] (see Fig. 3.69). 

Rayleigh-Taylor 

single  wave 

At  the  beginning  of  the  new  century,  Snider  [93]  extended  the 
method to cover three dimensions and modified the continuum particle 
stress  model  proposed  by  Harris  and  Crighton  [728]  to  remove  the 
singularity at the close-packing limit. The three-dimensional formula-
tion  was  then  tested  for  some  benchmark  tests  such  as  the 
Rayleigh-Taylor  problem,  gravity-dominated  particle  flows,  and  a 
three-dimensional jet of particles [93]. In 2007, for the first time, the 
term “CPFD” (computational particle fluid dynamics) was used for the 
method,  applied  to  three  fundamental  granular  flow  experiments  of 
sedimentation, hoppers, and particles flowing into a U-tube [1391]. In 
the  same  year,  the  MP-PIC  method  was  trademarked  as  CPFD
by 
O’Rourke et al. [1392] with the financial support of the U.S. Department 
of  Energy.  Based  on  that,  a  commercial  software  package  was  intro-
duced,  known  as  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor,  and  capable  of 
handling chemical reactions. The software expanded the horizons of the 

® 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930159F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.69. First two-dimensional fluidized-bed calculation using the MP-PIC approach (reproduced from reference [1390], with permission of Elsevier).  

MP-PIC  method,  making  it  easily  available  to  other  research  groups 
around  the  world.  Using  this  software,  different  reactive  and 
non-reactive  numerical  studies  on  fluidization  have  been  conducted, 
which  will  be  discussed  in  detail  in  the  next  sections.  Parallel  to  the 
development  of  the  “BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor”  software,  other 
authors (Patankar and Joseph [1393,1394], Apte et al., [1395], Cocco 
et al. [1396], Benyahia and Galvin [1397]) also developed their own 
codes based on the MP-PIC method to study different particulate flows 
including fluidized beds, studies on which will also be introduced in the 
following sections. 

To answer the demand of the scientific and industrial communities, 
in 2009 ANSYS introduced a hybrid model building on the framework of 
the  dense  discrete  phase  model  (DDPM),  based  on  the  formulation 
proposed by Popoff and Braun [729] and the structures of the discrete 
phase  model  (DPM),  the  multi-fluid  model  and  the  kinetic  theory  of 
granular  flows  (KTGF),  which  were  available  in  ANSYS-FLUENT.  It 
should be mentioned that the DDPM framework in ANSYS-FLUENT also 
includes  the  discrete  element  method  (DEM)  approach.  Hence,  some 
authors  use  the  term  DDPM-KTGF  for  the  hybrid  method  in 
ANSYS-FLUENT,  and  the  term  DDPM-DEM  for  the  discrete  element 
method. In this review paper, for simplicity, the term DDPM will be used 
for the hybrid method in ANSYS-FLUENT. The method was tested for the 
first time by Pirker et al. [1398] and compared with five other available 
particulate  flow  modeling  approaches  to  simulate  a  pneumatic 
conveying device consisting of a curved and a straight rectangular duct. 
The  DDPM  model  was  concluded  to  be  an  efficient  approach  for 
modeling  particle  conveyance.  Comparisons  of  the  DDPM  with  other 
available  particulate  flow  modeling  approaches  for  different  applica-
tions can also be found, among others, in the works of Ryan et al. [188], 

Adamczyk et al. [308], Chen and Wang [343], Krishnamoorthy et al. 
[1399], Adnan et  al.  [309], Klimanek and  Bigda [118], Hwang  et  al. 
[1400], Ostermeier et al. [307,362] and Adnan et al. [299]. 

The  first  journal  publication  using  the  DDPM  model  to  simulate 
fluidized-bed  systems  was  published  by  Ryan  et  al.  [188]  in  2013, 
investigating  a  small-scale  solid  sorbent  carbon-capture  fluidized-bed 
reactor  and  comparing  the  results  of  the  DDPM,  the  TFM  used  in 
ANSYS-FLUENT and the MP-PIC from the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor. 
Using the DDPM model, different reactive and non-reactive numerical 
studies on fluidization have been conducted, which will be discussed in 
detail  in  the  next  sections  (see  Table  3.10).  Another  hybrid  method 
similar  to  DDPM  and  based  on  the  TFM  calculations  has  also  been 
developed in recent years by Schneiderbauer et al. [315,331,1401]. 

3.4.2. Non-reactive simulations 

Although the main focus of the current review paper is on reactive 
gas-solid flows, reviewing the non-reactive publications can provide a 
better insight into the development of the methods and the history of 
their applications. Hence, this section will review how hybrid methods 
have been used to study different fluidization systems. 

3.4.2.1. MP-PIC. The first non-reactive fluidized-bed calculation using 
the MP-PIC model was developed by Snider et al. [1390] in 1997 in the 
context of testing the newly developed incompressible two-dimensional 
multiphase  particle-in-cell  model.  To  test  the  method,  two  different 
experimental setups were simulated in 2D. The first setup had a width of 
0.25 m and a height of 0.138 m. It was filled with glass bead particles 
with diameters between 0.42 mm and 0.6 mm, and the close packing 
height was 0.11 m. Two different time steps of 0.001 s and 0.002 s were 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930160F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.10 
A review of the hybrid model, applied to chemical and energy processes.  

Sub-models/applications 

Studies 

Main observations 

Sub-models 

Homogeneous drag models 

Structure-dependent drag models 

Volume forces (gravitational, static buoyancy force, 
electric or magnetic fields) 

Aerodynamic surface forces (e.g. virtual mass, Basset, 
Saffman, Magnus forces) 

Chemical reaction (homogeneous and 
heterogeneous), heat and mass transfer (e.g. 
convection, conduction, radiation) 
Spherical particle/ non-spherical particle 

[95,118,188,273,299,307-314,316-330,332, 
333,376,377,381,383-392,449-451,466-473, 
475-514,516-518,521-526,528-530,532-537, 
540-544,546-548,550-553,1373,1402–1410]  

[273,299,309,312,315-317,331,378,380,449, 
451,452,498,509,510,514-516,520,530,531, 
539,554,1401,1405,1411] 

[95,118,188,273,299,307-333,376-378,380, 
381,383-392,449-452,466-473,475-518, 
520-526,528-537,539-544,546-548,550,551, 
554,1373,1401–1411]  

[95,118,188,273,299,307-333,376-378,380, 
381,383-392,449-452,466-473,475-518, 
520-526,528-537,539-544,546-548,550,551, 
554,1373,1401–1411]  

[118,188,314,321-333,378,382-392,496, 
523-544,546-548,550-554,1373,1401, 
1407–1409,1412–1419]  

Applications  Mixing/segregation process 

Drying process 

Coating process 

Combustion 

Gasification/pyrolysis process 

[299,315-317,320,468,502,505,508,1388, 
1390,1403]  

[299,316,317,320,504,512] 

[489,525] 

[299,316,317,320-323,325-328,330,488,528, 
529,533,538,543,546,548,550,551,1415,1417] 

[118,319,324,382-392,524,526,530,536,537, 
540,553,554,1407–1409,1412,1414,1416, 
1418,1419] 

CO2 capture technologies (e.g. carbonate and 
chemical looping processes) 

[188,318,329,527,541,542,544,547,1413] 

[299,331-333,520,531,532,534,535,545,1401]  

Other chemical and metallurgical processes (e.g. 
crystallization, methanation, cyclone separator, 
ironmaking blast furnace, lime shaft kiln, fluid 
catalytic cracking, methanol-to-olefins in a fluidized- 
bed, tube erosion in a fluidized bed, reduction of 
ores, directly-irradiated fluidized bed reactor, 
pulsed-fluidized bed, pressurized fluidized bed, 
vibrated fluidized bed, and particle-driven solar 
power receivers) 

• Homogeneous drag models overestimate the 

momentum transfer between the gas and solid 
phases, resulting in unrealistic predictions  

• Structure-dependent drag models (heterogeneous 

drag models) show better agreement with 
measurements  

• Homogeneous drag models have been applied more 

frequently than heterogeneous drag models  

• Homogeneous and heterogeneous drag models that 
take into account non-spherical particles need further 
investigation 

• The gravitational volume force is taken into 

consideration in all hybrid model simulations  

• The static buoyancy force, the electric volume force, 
and the magnetic volume force are usually not taken 
into consideration 

• The drag force is part of all hybrid model studies  
• Other aerodynamic surface forces (e.g. virtual mass, 
Basset and Saffman forces) are usually neglected due 
to their subordinate relevance except for some 
specific cases 

• Due to the possibility of modeling complicated 

systems including complex reaction mechanisms 
using the hybrid models, few studies in the literature 
focus only on heat transfer in fluidized-bed systems. 
However, in most reactive publications, heat transfer 
has been broadly discussed. Radiative heat transfer 
modeling is generally neglected or simplified ap-
proaches are used, and the subject needs more 
investigation  

• Considerable attention is paid to the modeling of the 

mass transfer compared to heat transfer (only 
modeling due to the method capabilities)  

• Numerous publications including homogeneous and 
heterogeneous chemical reactions using the hybrid 
models can be found in the literature, especially in 
the last 5 years  

• Only spherical particles are taken into consideration 
in hybrid models. Few recent studies have addressed 
non-spherical particles in the formulation of the drag 
models 

• Hybrid-model-based simulations applied to various 

industrial processes  

• Several full-scale modeling concepts can be found in 
the literature, although in some cases simplifications 
by codes have been considered to enable the costly 
simulation (e.g. quasi-2D, spherical particles, 
neglecting various sub-models, and numerically 
replacing some parts of the process (e.g. cyclones)  

• The mixing and segregation processes are used in 
some publications mainly to test and verify the 
quality of the method. Most of the works are directed 
to binary systems that consist of spherical particles 
with different particle sizes or densities  

• There are only a few works on drying and coating 
processes, despite the commercial importance of 
spray coating  

• Due to the potential of the hybrid models to easily 

combine the gas flow and the homogeneous reactions 
with the motions of particles and the heterogeneous 
reactions, as well as the momentum, heat, and mass 
transfer rates between the gas and solid phases, 
hybrid simulations applied to combustion or 
gasification process make up a major proportion of 
reactive publications  

• There are few studies in the literature applied to CO2 
capture technologies and most of them simulate the 
complete loop of the process  

• Hybrid simulations applied to e.g. metallurgical and 
dehydrogenation processes can be found in the 
literature, but not as frequently as the case of 
combustion and gasification processes or CO2 capture 
technologies 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930161F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

used for the calculations. The second test rig had a height of 1 m and a 
width  of  0.4  m,  with  a  close  packing  height  of  0.5  m  and  a  particle 
diameter of 0.5 mm. The time step of 0.0005 s was used for the simu-
lation.  Both  calculations  showed  good  agreement  with  experimental 
data.  In  2001,  Patankar  and  Joseph  [1394]  conducted  the  first  3D 
simulation  of  fluidized-bed  systems  using  the  MP-PIC  model  for  the 
fluidization  process  in  two  configurations,  including  an  uniform  inlet 
gas injection and a jet of gas at the inlet. The calculation domain had 
dimensions equal to (0.2 × 0.6 × 0.0275 m3). The particle diameter was 
0.5 mm and the initial bed height was about 0.3 m. A maximum of 16, 
770 parcels (with 580 particles in each) in a domain with 3,240 control 
volumes  were  used.  To  investigate  the  effect  of  domain  size  on  the 
bubble formation with the uniform gas injection on the inlet, another 
simulation was carried out for a column width of 0.4 m and a parcel 
number  of  19,440.  It  was  seen  that  when  the  domain  width  was 
increased,  two  bubbles  formed  in  the  column  instead  of  one  (see 
Fig. 3.70). 

In 2008, Leboreiro et al. [1402] used the MP-PIC approach to study 
the effect of different drag models (Gidaspow drag model [10], Ergun 
[1124],  and  Wen  and  Yu  [793])  on  the  bubbling  behavior  of 
gas-fluidized beds. They considered various transition volume fraction 
values  of  0.1-0.5 and  different stitching  methods, such  as  the discon-
tinuous  stitching  method  and  methods  based  on  arctan  and  linear 
functions. To test the effects of the transition points and functions, two 
monodisperse systems were investigated. The first test case studied the 
injection of a bubble in a fluidized bed with a superficial velocity close to 
the minimum fluidization velocity. The second test investigated a freely 
bubbling gas-fluidized bed with a superficial velocity equal to several 
times  the  minimum  fluidization  velocity.  Different  parameters  were 
evaluated, such as the dynamic pressure drop profile, the bubble growth 
rate, the bubble structure, the detachment time, the average solid vol-
ume fraction within the bubble, a time-averaged histogram of equivalent 
diameter, the bubble equivalent diameter as a function of height, the 
time-averaged mean pierced length and the time-averaged bubble flux. 
It was found that, overall, the location of the transition point affects the 
bubble properties, whereas the type of continuous stitching function has 
little impact. In another work in the same year, Leboreiro et al. [1403] 
incorporated two different drag approaches for bidisperse fluidized beds 
into a MP-PIC framework to analyze their impact on simulations. The 

first approach was based on adapting a monodisperse drag expression 
into  the  polydisperse  system  in  an  ad-hoc  manner,  and  the  second 
approach was based on developing drag models for polydisperse mix-
tures using lattice-Boltzmann simulations. The case study examined the 
segregation of binary Geldart group B particles of different sizes and/or 
densities.  For  a  system  with  different  particle  sizes  only,  the  drag 
treatment  based  on  lattice-Boltzmann  simulations  presented  a  higher 
degree of mixing than the ad-hoc treatment, while for a system with size 
and density difference, where the small particle is denser and lighter, the 
ad-hoc treatment predicts a higher degree of mixing. For systems with a 
density difference only or with a size and density difference, where the 
large particle is the denser one, the segregation profiles generated by all 
drag  treatments  are  similar.  The  authors  indicated  that  the  drag  law 
treatment plays a crucial role in the qualitative and quantitative nature 
of the axial segregation profiles. Furthermore, it was revealed that the 
type  of  drag  model  may  lead  to  qualitative  differences  in  bubble 
dynamics. 

In 2012, Blaser and Corina [466] investigated the  optimization of 
flow  fields  in  a  40  MW  CFB  biomass  boiler  in  order  to  minimize  the 
erosion on internal surfaces and structures using a three-dimensional, 
transient full CFB loop model in the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor soft-
ware.  The  results  were  validated  against  operational  erosion  experi-
ments  and  used  to  redesign  various  components  of  the  boiler.  The 
re-designed case was predicted to have a 50 % reduction in erosion in 
the cyclone inlet region, a 47 % reduction in erosion in the suspension 
tube region, and a pressure drop 12 % lower than the original design. 

In  2012,  Li  et  al.  [449]  combined  the  MP-PIC  approach  with  the 
EMMS  (energy  minimization  multi-scale)  drag  force  model  in  the 
open-source program MFIX to simulate gas-solid flows in a CFB riser. 
The solid flux calculated by the EMMS drag model agrees well with the 
experimental  data,  while  the  traditional  homogeneous  drag  model 
over-predicts  this  value  (see  Fig.  3.71).  Furthermore,  the  calculation 
results showed that the simulation based on the EMMS drag model can 
successfully predict the macroscopic bottom dense and top dilute axial 
solid distribution, the so-called core-annular radial distribution, and the 
meso-scale  local  particle  aggregation.  There  have  also  been  in-
vestigations into how the number of particles per parcel and the wall 
conditions affect the simulation results. 

At  the  same  time,  Karimipour  and  Pugsley  [467]  evaluated  the 

Fig. 3.70. First three-dimensional fluidized-bed calculation using the MP-PIC approach: (a) three-dimensional view, (b) comparison of parcel position for cases A and 
B at t=0.2 s, and (c) at t=0.32 s (reproduced from reference [1394], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930162F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

fluidized-bed  carbon  capture  unit.  The  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor 
software  was  used  for  the  three-dimensional  simulation  of  the  entire 
full-loop system. The behavior of the gas-solid flow and pressure drop 
predicted by the simulation was a good match with video recordings and 
measurement data provided by the National Energy Technology Labo-
ratory (see Fig. 3.72). 

In the same year, Weber et al. [470] used an Electrical Capacitance 
Volume Tomography (ECVT) sensor and high-speed pressure measure-
ments,  and  CPFD  Software’s  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor  to  study  a 
fluidized-bed system with a diameter of 0.10 m, filled with 185 μm glass 
beads.  Three-dimensional  images  of  the  gas-solid  flow  structure  were 
obtained  and  analyzed,  along  with  frequency  information  from  the 
high-speed pressure transducers. Comparing the physical measurements 
of the ECVT and pressure transducers to the numerical models, it was 
evident that the model’s predictions depended on the way the distrib-
utor plate boundary condition was handled. It was concluded that for 
the experiments with a perforated distributor plate, a uniform boundary 
condition cannot be applied. In 2013, Lan et al. [471] used the CPFD 
modeling approach to investigate solid’s back-mixing behavior and its 
influencing  factors  in  CFB  risers  operating  in  dilute  phase  transport 
(DPT)  and  fast  fluidization  (FF)  regimes.  The  residence  time  of  the 
particles in the FF regime was much longer than that in the DPT regime. 
Little back-mixing in the lower part of the riser was observed in the DPT 
regime,  while  the  particles  in  the  FF  regime  experienced  large-scale 
back-mixing  throughout  the  riser.  The  results  also  demonstrated  that 
the solids back-mixing in the DPT regime was caused by the downward 
flow of particles near the wall region, while the severe back-mixing in 
the FF regime was due to the downflow particles and meso-scale struc-
tures (mainly particle clusters). In 2013, Parker et al. [472] compared 
the experimental operation of three fluidized-bed processors commonly 
used  in  the  pharmaceutical  industry  with  the  CFD  simulation  results, 
employing the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software. Three different 
scaled-up  capacities  of  the  fluidized-bed  processors  were  simulated. 
Both  the  start-up  and  the  steady  operation  of  the  processors  were 
modeled  three-dimensionally  and  on  a  time-transient  basis  within  a 
reasonable  calculation  time  (1-2  days).  The  numerical  calculations 
successfully  predicted  the  flow  behavior  of  several  different  sizes  of 
fluidized beds based solely on the material properties, processor loading, 
inlet air flow rate, and fluidized-bed process geometry. Chen et al. [473] 
investigated the suitability of CPFD for simulating flows in 2D-CFB risers 
containing Geldart A particles with both low and high solid fluxes, and 
in a 3D-CFB riser containing Geldart B particles. The numerical results 
were compared to experimental data and previous TFM simulations. The 
bottom-dense, upper-dilute, and core-annulus heterogeneous structures 
were only captured qualitatively by the CPFD calculations. The calcu-
lation results for Geldart A particles and high solid fluxes differed from 
the experiment, although they were more accurate than the two-fluid 
simulations  with  conventional  drag  models.  However,  the  TFM  with 
an EMMS drag model gave more accurate results compared to the CPFD 
simulations. It was concluded that the drag force in the CPFD scheme is 
still over-estimated and that it is important to take an EMMS drag model 
into account for the CPFD scheme. The effect of the realistic particle size 
distribution was seen in the CPFD results. 

In 2014, Wang et al. [474,475] applied the CPFD method to simulate 
the  gas-solid  flow  in  a  CFB  with  a  loop  seal.  The  influences  of  some 
crucial modeling parameters, such as the mesh size, the volume fraction 
of close-packed  particles, the interphase  drag  model, and the  particle 
size  distribution  (PSD)  on  the  flow  behavior  were  analyzed  and  opti-
mized using experimental data conducted on the same CFB test rig. The 
particle  packing  conditions  were  significantly  affected  by  the  volume 
fraction of close-packed particles in the dense loop seal and standpipe. A 

Fig.  3.71. Comparison  of  EMMS  drag  model  and  homogeneous  drag  model 
(reproduced from reference [449], with permission of Elsevier). 

capability of the MP-PIC approach for modeling a bubbling fluidized bed 
with  Geldart  A  particles  using  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor  soft-
ware. Different simulation cases were studied, including different mesh 
sizes and drag models and with a realistic particle size distribution. The 
bubble  properties  were  extracted  from  the  model  predictions  and 
compared with the predictions of empirical correlations as well as with 
experiments.  The  MP-PIC  approach  showed  a  promising  prediction 
ability and capability in contrast to other studies. There was no need to 
modify the drag force or other constitutive relationships in the model. 
Furthermore,  the authors indicated that although both mesh size and 
selected  drag  model  affect  the  predictions,  the  influence  of  the  drag 
model is negligible compared to the effect  of the mesh size. In 2012, 
Vivacqua et al. [468] conducted experimental and CPFD numerical in-
vestigations  for  a  water-fluidized  binary  system  undergoing  layer 
inversion. Glass beads with a diameter of 1.85 mm and ceramic spheres 
with  a  diameter  of  0.55  mm  were  fluidized  by  water  in  a  cylindrical 
column with an inner diameter of 0.191 m. The BARRACUDA Virtual 
Reactor  software  was  used  to  predict  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the 
layer  inversion,  the  binary  component  segregation  at  different  liquid 
velocities,  and  chaotic  circulation  patterns.  The  predictions  showed 
reasonable  agreement  with  the  experimental  observations,  revealing 
◦
that reducing the temperature from 20 
C caused the inversion 
velocity to decrease by 7 %, while no additional change in this velocity 
was  detected  when  the  temperature  was  further  decreased  to  5 
C. 
Furthermore, the operating temperature had an important effect on the 
degree of separation between the two solids. 

◦
C to 10 

◦

In 2013, Clark et al. [469] carried out experimental and numerical 
studies  on  the  behavior  of  gas-particle  flow  in  a  full-loop  circulating 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930163F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.72. Adsorber fluidization behavior (comparison between experimental images and simulation results); sequence of events: (a) initially empty cone, (b) cone 
plugged with particles, and (c) final empty cone (reproduced from reference [469], with permission of Elsevier). 

suitable value to describe the pressure distribution and particle circu-
lation characteristics were around 0.5. Different gas-solid drag models 
and the use of PSD in the CPFD scheme influenced the behavior of the 
solid circulation and the overall flow characteristics (see Fig. 3.73). A 
combination of the Wen-Yu [793] and Ergun [1124] drag models was 
the optimum choice. 

In 2014, O’Rourke and Snider [476] developed a new contact force 

model for MP-PIC calculations of polydisperse dense particle flows and 
used it to simulate binary fluidized-bed systems. The new contact force 
model  considered  the  individual  particle  accelerations  as  a  blend  be-
tween the particle acceleration appropriate for rapid granular flows and 
an average particle acceleration that applies to closely packed granular 
flows. The new model was called the “blended acceleration” model and 
later implemented in the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software. Good 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930164F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.73. (a) time-averaged pressure distributions under different drag models, and (b) time-averaged pressure distributions with different particle sizes (repro-
duced from references [474,475], with permission of Elsevier). 

agreement  was  obtained  between  the  experimental  measurements  of 
particle separation in binary beds and the results of BARRACUDA cal-
culations using the blended acceleration model, which was not achiev-
able in calculations without the acceleration blending. 

In 2014, Shi et al. [477] applied the CPFD method to study the effects 
of various particle size distributions (PSDs) on the hydrodynamics and 
solids back-mixing in a CFB riser. Gaussian and log-normal distributions 
with various PSD widths were introduced into the CPFD scheme. It was 
shown that particle flow behavior was significantly influenced by the 
type  of  PSDs  in  the  lower  zone  of  the  riser,  while  the  effects  were 
negligible in the upper part. Although a wider PSD dramatically reduced 
particle back-mixing in the riser, it resulted in the segregation of larger 
particles into the bottom part of the riser and longer particle residence 
times in the riser. 

In 2014, Panday et al. [450] conducted comprehensive experiments 
and numerical simulations using TFM and MP-PIC approaches to vali-
date  circulating  fluidized-bed  modeling  for  solids  circulation  rates, 
several gas velocities, and Geldart Group A and B particles. Resources 
such as time, computational facilities, and the experience level of the 
modeler were crucial for achieving good results. Comparison of the axial 
pressure  profiles  in  the  experiments  and  the  models  revealed  that  in 
dilute cases the simulation results were qualitatively better, while sim-
ulations  with  higher  solid  loads  showed  relatively  low  axial  pressure 
profiles (Δp/ΔL). However, the CFD models for the systems operating 
above  the  transport  regime  produced  disappointing  average  pressure 
drops  across  the  riser,  outside  the  95  %  confidence  limits  for  the 
experimental  data.  All  pressure  drops  predicted  by  both  MP-PIC  and 
TFM simulations were too low, demonstrating a general overestimation 
of the effective solids hold-up, which could be the result of inadequate 
resolution  due  to  a  lack  of  computational  capacity.  Low-resolution 
models underestimated or did not predict the dense bed regions near 
the riser inlet and outlets, resulting in low-pressure drops. Based on the 
evaluation of meso-scale radial velocities profiles for Group A particles, 
both MP-PIC and TFM models had difficulties predicting the full radial 
velocity  profile.  This  was  attributed  to  shortcomings  in  the  ability  of 
fluid  dynamic  models  to  capture  micro-scale  multiphase  turbulence. 
Only the highest resolution TFM model was able to predict the parabolic 
radial profiles consistently. For Group B particles, the MP-PIC and other 
lower-resolution  TFM  models  failed  to  capture  the  parabolic  velocity 
profiles correctly. For both Group A and B particles, the MP-PIC models 
demonstrated flatter radial velocity profiles compared to experimental 
data and failed to capture the influence of the wall. On the other hand, 
lower fluxes and velocities near the walls and higher velocity and fluxes 
in the center were predicted by the TFM models as they overestimated 
the  influence of the  wall. There  was an  obvious influence of  the grid 

resolution in the TFM models. However, in the MP-PIC models, a higher 
number  of  particles  was  a  dominating  factor  in  producing  the  most 
quantitatively accurate power spectra and jet penetration. 

In 2014, Yin et al. [478] utilized the MP-PIC methodology to conduct 
a  systematic  sensitivity  analysis  of  modeling  parameters  (such  as  the 
drag model, particle-particle restitution coefficient, normal particle-wall 
restitution  coefficient,  and  tangential  particle-wall  restitution  coeffi-
cient)  when  simulating  the  hydrodynamic  behavior  of  pressurized 
high-flux  circulating  fluidized  beds  (PHFCFBs).  The  results  of  the 
simulation  were  assessed  by  comparison  with  available  published 
experimental  data  (see  Fig.  3.74).  Of  the  different  drag  models,  the 
Gidaspow model [10] displayed better agreement with both the axial 
profiles of the pressure drop and the radial distributions of the particle 
volume fraction. Non-ideal particle-particle interactions (ep  ∕= 1) could 
provide a more reasonable prediction compared with perfectly elastic 
particle collisions (ep = 1). No critical changes were found in simulated 
flow characteristics such as trends in the pressure drop and solid volume 
fraction  distribution  due  to  the  particle-wall  restitution  coefficient. 
Comparing the simulation results with experiments, the following suit-
able models and modeling parameters were determined and verified for 
modeling  gas-particle  flow  behavior  in  DHFCFB  risers:  the  Gidaspow 
drag  model, a particle-particle  restitution coefficient  of 0.9, a  normal 
particle-wall  restitution  coefficient  of  0.1,  and  a  free-slip  boundary 
condition (i.e. a tangential particle-wall restitution coefficient of 1.0). 
The  Ergun,  Wen-Yu,  Gidaspow,  and  Turton-Levenspiel  drag  models 
predicted  similar  and  reasonable  trends,  whereas  the  Stokes  and 
Richardson drag models failed. The energy dissipation due to non-ideal 
particle interactions had a significant influence on the hydrodynamics in 
the riser and should not be neglected. 

In 2014, Jiang et al. [479] employed the CPFD model combined with 
electrical capacitance tomography (ECT) to investigate a CFB with six 
cyclone  separators  and  to  improve  the  design  and  performance  of  a 
large-scale CFB boiler (see Fig. 3.75). Two types of cyclone arrangement 
were  used  in  the  simulation  and  ECT  measurements.  Key  parameters 
including  the  pressure,  solids  recirculation  flux,  and  velocity  profile 
along  different  positions  were  analyzed  and  compared  with  experi-
mental data. The gas-solid flow was non-uniform among the six parallel 
cyclones and the solids concentration of four cyclones at the corner of 
the chamber was higher than that of the others. It was concluded that an 
“axis”-based symmetric arrangement for cyclones provides a more uni-
form distribution of solids flux than a “point” arrangement. 

In 2015, Fotovat et al. [480] reported numerical simulation results of 
a sand fluidized bed with 8 wt.% and 16 wt.% biomass loadings using 
the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software. The calculations were vali-
dated against experimental data obtained in a bed with a diameter of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930165F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3.74. Prediction  results  for  different  particle-particle  restitution  coefficients:  (a)  axial  distribution  of  the  pressure  drop,  (b)  radial  distribution  of  the  solid 
volume fraction at h/H = 0.65, and (c) radial distribution of the solid volume fraction at h/H = 0.92 (reproduced from reference [478], with permission of Elsevier). 

Fig. 3.75. Contours of particle volume fraction at t=21.07 s: (a) particle tracks in the full-loop of CFB, (b) contour of the cross-section at Z=5.5 m, and (c) contour of 
the bottom (reproduced from reference [479], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930166F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

15.2  cm  and  a  static  bed  height  of  22.5  cm.  The  model  was  able  to 
capture the asymmetric character of both the bubble  size and bubble 
velocity  distributions.  The  calculated  first-,  second-  and  third-order 
statistical  moments  of  bubble  size  and  bubble  velocity  distributions 
were very close to the experimental data. Vashisth et al. [481] compared 
the ability of a CFD code based on TFM and a force-balance (FB) model 
[1420] with the CPFD model in predicting the hydrodynamics of par-
ticles in a bubbling fluidized bed. Simulations were conducted in both 
two and three dimensions, examining the effects of different parameters 
such as the superficial gas velocity, particle diameter, particle-particle 
restitution  coefficient,  and  specularity  coefficient  on  the  voidage  dis-
tribution, particle volume fraction profiles, bed expansion, formation of 
agglomerates,  solid  velocity  vectors  and  circulation  patterns.  The 
sensitivity of different gas-solid drag closures in the TFM-FB model was 
also tested and compared. Different drag models significantly affected 
the predicted bed expansion and the particle concentration in the dense 
phase regions of the bed. Because of the formation of clusters and how 
they affected the reduction of the overall drag, it was shown that in the 
case  of  TFM-FB  simulations,  existing drag  models should  be tuned  to 
simulate the fluidization process involving Geldart A particles. On the 
contrary, CPFD showed promising predictive capability with no need to 
modify the drag model. Both the TFM-FB and CPFD models were suc-
cessful in capturing the key fluidization characteristics in the 3D case; 
however,  TFM-FB  strongly  under-predicted  particle  volume  fraction 
near the wall in the 2D cases. The possibility of including the real par-
ticle size distribution in the CPFD model resulted in a better prediction 
of the overall flow characteristics. The salient features of the TFM and 
CPFD  models,  together  with  their  potential  and  shortcomings,  are 
summarized in Table 3.11. 

In  2015,  Solnordal  et  al.  [482]  modeled  a  laboratory-scale 
isothermal  internally  circulating  fluidized  bed  (ICFB)  using  the 
MP-PIC method. The results were compared with available experimental 

observations. Ballotini glass beads with a mean diameter of 140 μm were 
fluidized with air. Nine different chamber velocity ratio conditions were 
tested  by  changing  the  fluidization  velocities  of  the  central  reaction 
chamber and two heat exchange chambers. The overall bed dynamics 
were successfully captured by the model, including the relative degree of 
fluidization between the central reaction (RX) chamber and the two heat 
exchange (HEX) chambers, the degree of bubbling in the chambers, and 
the  relative  and  absolute  bubble  size  within  each  chamber  (see 
Fig. 3.76). The estimated solid recirculation rates were generally within 
one standard deviation of the mean experimental values. The accuracy 
of the model was reduced at lower fluidization rates. 

In 2015, Shi et al. [483] studied the solid’s back-mixing and flow 
hydrodynamics behavior in risers with smooth (C shape) and abrupt (L 
and  T  shape)  exit  geometries.  Different  exit  geometries  led  to  quite 
different flow hydrodynamics and behavior of the solids back-mixing. It 
was concluded that the riser exit geometry should be carefully specified 
when  modeling  CFB  risers.  The  particles  were  observed  to  flow  uni-
formly out of the riser with a relatively lower residence time in the case 
of smooth exits, while with abrupt exits, some of the particles reflected 
into the riser. Stronger back-mixing of the solids was observed in the 
riser  with  an  abrupt  exit  geometry  compared  to  the  risers  with  the 
smooth one. In the same year, Wang et al. [484] used the CPFD method 
of the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software to study the effects of the 
particle size distribution (PSD) on solids distribution and flow in a CFB 
riser. A binary PSD case and polydisperse PSD cases were considered. 
The modeling results were compared with the experimental data and the 
available Eulerian-Eulerian (two-fluid model) simulation data. Similar 
flow patterns were obtained for both PSDs, which were compatible with 
experimental measurements. CPFD simulations with a fine mesh were 
not able to predict the dense bottom region in the riser. Three different 
numbers  of  computational  parcels  were  evaluated  (approximately 
400,000, 540,000, and 890,000). Simulation results obtained using the 

Table 3.11 
Summarization of features, potential, and shortcomings of the TFM and CPFD models.  

TFM 

CPFD  

• The granular material is characterized by mean particle size and density  
• Granular phase properties such as the granular temperature, solid viscosity, and 

particle interaction are determined based on the kinetic theory of granular flows, with 
empirical values of restitution coefficient and friction coefficient  

• Needs reduction in gas-solid drag to avoid bed expansion  
• Finer mesh generally enhances the prediction accuracy  
• Smaller time steps in the range of 10-4 or 10-5 s are needed for better convergence  
• Limited application to large or industrial-sized fluidized beds  

• Capable of incorporating particle size distributions  
• Particle-particle interaction is calculated from the Harris-Crighton model, while 
particle-wall interaction is determined from the normal-to-wall momentum, the 
tangent-to-wall momentum retention, and the diffuse bounce  

• Predicts reasonable bed expansion without needing any reduction in the gas-solid drag 

model  

• In addition to mesh size, parcel number is also a crucial parameter. Finer mesh size and 

large parcel number can greatly increase the computational time  

• An appropriate time step is automatically determined and adjusted by the CFL 

algorithm (Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition) based on the mesh and number of 
particle-parcels  

• The concept of computational particles (parcel) and the MP-PIC method enables the 

simulation of large numbers of particles in industrial-scale fluidized beds  

Fig. 3.76. Comparison between experimental observation and model prediction of the ICFB bubbling behavior in the reaction chamber and heat exchange chamber: 
(a, c) experimental images, and (b, d) model simulation at selected time steps that show similar behavior to experiments (reproduced from reference [482], with 
permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930167F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

400,000 and 540,000 parcels were relatively close, but the calculation 
with 890,000 parcels caused the accumulation of solids and a significant 
reduction  of  solids  in  the  riser.  A  comparison  of  the  CPFD  and  TFM 
methods  revealed  that the CPFD  model produced better results  in re-
gions close to the walls than the simplified 2D-TFM model. Furthermore, 
the CPFD model predicted a slightly higher solid volume fraction at the 
center of the riser compared to the experimental data or the 2D-TFM 
simulation  results.  The  CPFD  simulation  showed  that  the  segregation 
of  larger  particles  at  the  bed  bottom  was  stronger  in  the  case  of  the 

polydisperse PSD, which was confirmed by the measurements. In 2015, 
Shi  et  al.  [485]  applied  the  CPFD  approach  to  investigate  the  solid’s 
residence time distribution (RTD) and back-mixing behavior in a CFB 
riser.  The  CPFD  method  successfully  produced  hydrodynamics  and  a 
solids mean residence time, which was comparable to the experimental 
data. A non-uniform distribution of the solid’s residence time was found 
throughout the riser. Even in the dilute phase transport (DPT) regime, 
the solids flow deviates from the plug flow and exhibits back-mixing. 
The  solids  back-mixing  mainly  occurs  in  the  lower  part  of  the  riser, 

Fig. 3.77. (a) test rig of the circulating fluidized bed with the annular combustion chamber, CPFD simulation results of solid volume fraction in turbulent fluidization 
regime ((b) in the annular combustion chamber, (c) in the x-y sliced plane, (d) in x-z sliced plane, (e) gas velocity vector in x-z sliced plane), and (f) pressure profiles 
in the combustion chamber for different regimes (reproduced from reference [486], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930168F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

where most of the chemical reactions and heat/mass transport processes 
occur.  This  is  not beneficial  for  the  industrial  applications  of  CFB  re-
actors. In 2015, Qiu et al. [486] conducted a CPFD calculation to obtain 
pressure  fluctuations  and  particle  concentration  in  a  newly  proposed 
annular combustion chamber geometry. To optimize the structure of the 
chamber, the numerical results were compared with the experimental 
data obtained from a “cold” test rig with a cross-sectional area of 1.18 
m2  and a height of 8.0 m. Different flow regimes including the single 
bubble  regime,  exploding  bubble  regime,  and  turbulent  fluidization 
regime  were identified  by  increasing  the  superficial  gas velocity.  The 
results obtained from pressure measurements and CPFD showed that the 
gas-solids flow in the bottom region of the annular combustion chamber 
was  relatively  uniform  and  there  was  no  significant  effect  on  the 
gas-solids  flow  due  to  the  new  proposed  design  compared  with  the 
conventional CFB riser (see Fig. 3.77). Therefore, similar scale-up stra-
tegies  to  conventional  CFB  can  be  used  to  scale  up  the  annular  com-
bustion chamber. 

In 2015, Zhang and You [1404] coupled the MP-PIC method and the 
Monte  Carlo  method  for  population  balances  to  simulate  particle 
breakage in dense particulate flows. Assuming that the particle motion 
and breakage were decoupled into separate processes at small enough 
computational  time  steps,  the  multiphase  flow  dynamics  at  each 
moment  were  solved  using  the  MP-PIC  method.  In  the  next  step,  the 
possible breakage events during the time step were predicted using the 
Monte Carlo method. Different test cases including a fluidized bed were 
used  to  demonstrate  the  accuracy  and  capability  of  the  proposed 
method. A kinetic breakage kernel and a parabolic fragment distribution 
were  employed  to  simulate  the  flow  hydrodynamics  with  particle 
abrasion in a fluidized bed. The predicted abrasion rates were in good 
agreement with the measurements. 

In 2016, Lim et al. [487] carried out a numerical simulation using the 
CPFD method of the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software to determine 
the bed pressure drop and bubble behavior in bubbling fluidized beds 
with a shroud nozzle distributor. The internal diameter and height of the 
fluidized bed were 0.3 m and 2.4 m, respectively. Approximately 75 kg 
of metal-grade silicon particles with a diameter of 150 μm, a density of 2, 
330 kg/m3, and a minimum fluidization velocity of 0.02 m/s were used 
as bed materials for the calculation, and the static bed height was 0.8 m. 
Air at room temperature with a superficial velocity in the range of 0.07 
m/s to 0.17 m/s was used for the fluidization process. The validation 
was  performed  by  comparing  the  pressure  drop  profile  with  experi-
mental data. To obtain accurate simulation data, the restitution coeffi-
cient  of  the  collision  model  and  the  particle-normal  stress  parameter 
were adjusted; otherwise, the bed pressure drop and bubble flow char-
acteristics were opposite to those obtained from the experimental data. 
The simulation data was found to be consistent with the experiments at 
particle-normal stress constant of (P = 5). 

In  2016,  Thapa  et  al.  [488]  performed  comprehensive  3D-CPFD 
calculations to study the gas-solid isothermal flow in a riser of a dual 
fluidized-bed biomass gasification system. Olivine, char, and a mixture 
of the two were used with minimum fluidization velocities of 0.06 m/s, 
0.06 m/s, 0.34 m/s, and transport velocities of 2.8 m/s, 2.6 m/s, and 12 
m/s, respectively. The particle and gas temperatures were maintained at 
1,300 K. Different fluidization regimes such as bubbling, turbulent and 
fast fluidization were identified. The pressure reached its peak before 
stabilization  with  a  constant  solid  out-flux  at  a  gas  velocity  of  about 
(35Umf). The authors also investigated how the primary and secondary 
air flow at the bottom of the riser affected the fluidization regime and 
particle transport rate. The optimum bottom air velocity and the opti-
mum velocity of the secondary air flow were shown to be about (10Umf) 
and  (48Umf),  respectively.  Furthermore,  it  was  found  that  when  the 
single bottom-feed positions were divided into primary and secondary 

air, the total gas feed rate increased. In 2016, Wang et al. [489] inves-
tigated  the  flow  hydrodynamics  behavior  in  a  lab-scale  fluidized  bed 
with  a  Wurster  tube,  both  experimentally  and  computationally.  The 
CPFD  and  TFM  models  were  used  for  the  calculations.  Different  key 
process parameters of coating processes, such as the solids concentration 
in  a  cross-sectional  area,  the  time-averaged  capacitance  data,  the 
average solids concentration in the chamber and the effect of the Wur-
ster tube on the hydrodynamic behavior of gas-solid flow were measured 
and analyzed. The simulation results gained using both methods were 
compared  with  the  measurement  results  without  spraying  a  coating 
solution.  Based  on  the  CFD  simulation  and  ECT  measurement  in  the 
Wurster tube coating region, the solids concentration increased with an 
increase in the gap between the bottom of the Wurster tube and the air 
distributor. 

In  2017,  Adkins  et  al.  [490]  conducted  a  3D-CFD  simulation  of 
catalyst  fluidization using the  CPFD  method  (BARRACUDA)  and vali-
dated the results by performing experiments using lab-scale cold-flow 
test  rigs  with  a  fixed  bed  (FB)  and  a  circulating  fluidized  bed  (CFB). 
Based  on  the  grid  independence  study  for  both  fixed  and  circulating 
fluidized-bed models, an average grid volume of 23-29 mm3 was suffi-
cient to effectively capture the quantitative and qualitative features of 
the phenomena occurring in the reactor. Several CFD parameters were 
evaluated to determine the best combinations of drag models, blended 
acceleration models, particle-wall interactions, and collision and stress 
models.  This  evaluation  determined  that  the  Parker  drag  model  with 
blended  acceleration  and  advanced  settings  for  particle-wall  in-
teractions and collision and stress parameters provided the best agree-
ment with experimental results. The evaluation of the CFD results used 
quantitative data such as the pressure drops (FB and CFB), the catalyst 
bed expansion (FB), the catalyst mass holdup (CFB), and the particle size 
classification (0-40 μm fines content) (CFB), along with qualitative ob-
servations such as flow patterns, bubbling behavior and jet penetrations 
(CFB). 

In 2017, Wang et al. [491] utilized the CPFD model to calculate the 
pressure drop and adsorbent attrition of a compact micro-fluidized-bed 
(CMFB)  reactor  and  compared  the  results  with  a  traditional 
fluidized-bed (FB) reactor in order to reduce the pressure drop and in-
crease the adsorption performance in their proposed new reactor for CO2 
capture  using  solid  adsorbents  in  heating,  ventilation  and  air  condi-
tioning (HVAC). Based on the CPFD model, a CMFB experimental plat-
form was designed and the pressure drop, the adsorbent attrition, and 
the  CO2  capture  performance  were  systematically  investigated  there. 
The results showed that the CMFB reactor had a much lower pressure 
drop (86 % in the experiment and 85 % in the simulation) and lower 
adsorbent attrition compared to the FB reactor due to the large inlet area 
and the reduced feed velocity. Hence, the CMFB reactor was capable of 
having long-term energy-saving effects in the HVAC. 

(HDCFB)  numerically  using 

In  2017,  Ma  et  al.  [492]  studied  the  full  loop  of  a  high-density 
circulating  fluidized  bed 
the 
three-dimensional MP-PIC approach. Experimental data on the pressure 
distribution and solids circulation rate were used to validate the calcu-
lation,  and  good  agreement  was  observed.  For  all  cases,  a  maximum 
relative error of less than 10 % was observed for the circulation rate of 
the solids in the loop. The solids in the standpipe were observed to have 
a non-uniform flow based on the predicted residence time distribution of 
the solids, featuring an early peak with an extended tail. A CPFD model 
of a pilot-scale CFB was developed by Liu et al. [493] in 2017 to study 
the bed pressure drop, the velocity, and the concentration characteris-
tics for different bed material heights and to determine the minimum 
fluidization velocity. The results indicated that the solids concentration 
was very high near the wall, and very low in the central area of the riser. 
Based  on  the  distributions  of  the  particle  volume  fraction  and  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930169F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.78. Comparison of simulated and measured gross heat transfer coefficient (reproduced from reference [496], with permission of Elsevier).  

particle residence time, the particle back-mixing was the strongest at a 
fluidization  velocity  of  5  m/s.  In  2017,  Cho  et  al.  [494]  analyzed 
particle-fluid flow patterns in a residue fluid catalytic cracking (RFCC) 
riser to investigate how the number of feed injectors affected the uneven 
distribution of particle flow using a CPFD method. The simulation re-
sults  from  the  CPFD  model  with  one  injector  were  verified  against 
commercial plant data. The use of one injector resulted in a variation of 
the  particle  flow  distribution  by  15.5-18.7  %  at  different  outlets  and 
affected  the  separation  efficiency  of  the  cyclone.  The  standard  de-
viations in the particle mass flow rates due to the uneven distribution of 
the particle flow with 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 12 injectors were 7.52, 4.07, 2.66, 
1.78,  2.85  and  3.82,  respectively.  The  cases  with  6  injectors  had  a 
largely even particle flow distribution. In 2017, Upadhyay et al. [495] 
carried  out  a  CPFD  simulation  to  examine  how  air  influenced  a 
cold-mode CFB’s behavior as the fluidizing gas, versus three different 
concentrations of O2/CO2. The comparison of the CPFD simulation re-
sults versus the experimental data showed that the trends observed in 
experiments were successfully captured. Based on a detailed statistical 
analysis of the transient pressure data, there were differences between 
the  conventional  air  and  oxy-gas  modes.  Changing  the  fluidizing  gas 
from air to O2/CO2 compositions resulted in a 13-33 % increase in the 
mean  pressure,  while  the  standard  deviation  decreased.  A  typical 
core-annular flow structure was observed in all cases; however, higher 
solid volume fractions were achieved near the wall region for O2/CO2. It 
was  concluded  that  the  hydrodynamic  effects  due  to  the  use  of 
oxy-fluidizing  gases  have  an  impact  on  the  actual  CFB  operation  by 
directly affecting the heat and mass transfer properties, and should be 
taken  into  consideration  during  the  design,  scale-up  and  operational 
stages of the oxy-CFB combustor. 

In  2017,  Zhang  and  Wei  [496]  studied  heat  transfer  between  bed 
material and an immersed vertical heat tube in a gas-solid fluidized bed 
of fine particles using the CPFD approach of the BARRACUDA Virtual 
Reactor  software  and  based  on  a  previous  experimental  study.  They 
obtained circumferential profiles of heat transfer coefficients around the 
heat tube  surface, as well as  radial and axial profiles of heat transfer 
coefficients for different superficial gas velocities. Although the general 
trends  in  the  predicted  radial  and  axial  profiles  of  heat  transfer  co-
efficients at different superficial gas velocities agreed well with experi-
mental  results,  experimental  values  of  heat  transfer  coefficients  were 
higher than the simulation results due to the default heat transfer co-
efficient correlation of the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software (see 
Fig. 3.78). The distribution of the heat transfer coefficient around the 
circumference  of  the  heat  tube  was  strongly  non-uniform,  especially 
near the  column wall. This  non-uniformity became worse as  the heat 
tube moved toward the column wall and at higher superficial gas ve-
locities. A good linear correlation was found between the bed-to-wall 
heat transfer coefficient and the solids renewal flux, demonstrating the 
superior  role  played  by  solids  renewal  in  the  efficiency  of  the  heat 

exchangers. 

Dong et al. [497] investigated the kinetic characteristics of the par-
ticles in a dense-phase pulsed fluidized bed (DPPFB) in 2017 using the 
CPFD approach. It was demonstrated that the bubbles in the DPPFB were 
much smaller than those in an air dense medium fluidized bed (ADMFB) 
and  large  bubble  motions  were  replaced  by  the  motion  of  the 
dilute-phase  region.  The  pulsating  airflow  with  a  suitable  frequency 
resulted  in  the  uniform,  steady  motion  of  the  heavy  medium  and 
consequently  significantly  suppressed  the  back-mixing  phenomenon 
caused by the circulation motion of the heavy medium. 

In  2018,  Xie  et  al.  [1405]  incorporated  the  traditional  and 
LBM-based  homogeneous  and  heterogeneous  drag  models  into  the 
MP-PIC approach to carry out a three-dimensional study of two types of 
CFB risers with Geldart group A and B particles. Six different homoge-
neous drag models (the Wen and Yu, Wen, Yu and Ergun, Syamlal and 
O’Brien,  Gidaspow,  HKL  and  BVK  models)  and  four  heterogeneous 
Sarkar and EMMS-based models (the EMMS-Yang, EMMS-Matrix, and 
EMMS-QL models) were implemented and compared (see Fig. 3.79). It 
was revealed that the axial void fraction profile was strongly affected by 
the number of particles per parcel and the solid flux gradually increased 
with the  decrease in the number of  particles per  parcel. For  the riser 
simulation  with  the  Geldart  A  particles,  all  homogeneous  models 
extremely over-predicted the solid fluxes and void fraction distributions 
did  not  agree  with  the  experimental  data.  The  heterogeneous  models 
significantly improved the simulation accuracy and were able to capture 
a typical core-annulus flow structure. The most accurate solid flux was 
obtained using the EMMS-QL model. For the simulation using the Gel-
dart B particles, both the heterogeneous and homogeneous drag force 
models were able to predict a flow structure reasonably well. The drag 
force model selected made no significant differences in terms of the void 
fraction and velocity profiles, and all drag models successfully captured 
the meso-scale local particle clusters. The most accurate solid flux was 
predicted using the Wen-Yu/Ergun drag model. 

In 2018, Tu and Wang [498] coupled the EMMS drag model with the 
CPFD approach using the BARRACUDA software to model a scaled-up 
complex full-loop CFB with a rectangular combustion chamber and six 
cyclones  and  to  characterize  different  fluidization  regimes.  Flow  pa-
rameters obtained from the EMMS-CPFD simulation, such as the axial 
pressure  distribution,  solid  volume  fraction,  or  particle  recirculation, 
were  compared  with  those  from  the  Wen-Yu  model  and  validated 
against available measurement data. The calculation using the EMMS 
drag  model  successfully  predicted  the  heterogeneous  structures,  the 
axial pressure distribution (especially in the dense region), the so-called 
S-shape  solid  volume  fraction  profile  in  the  axial  direction,  and 
two-core-annulus  structures  (“M”  shape)  in  the  radial  direction.  The 
Wen-Yu drag  model failed to predict a  distinctly different region and 
provided a uniform particle volume distribution, a C-shaped solid vol-
ume fraction in the axial direction, and a one-core-annulus formation in 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930170F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.79. Axial profiles of voidage with different drag models: (a) riser with Geldart A particles, and (b) riser with Geldart B particles (reproduced from reference 
[1405], with permission of Elsevier). 

the radial direction. The drag force calculated based on the EMMS model 
provided smaller values for the drag force and the particle recirculation 
fluxes inside and outside the riser compared to the Wen-Yu model. A 
multiple-bubble regime, an exploding bubble regime, and a turbulent 
fluidization regime were detected when the superficial gas velocity was 
increased. 

In 2018, using the CPFD approach, Ma et al. [499] investigated how 
different  operating  conditions,  such  as  the  aeration  rate,  solids  in-
ventory, riser flowrate, aeration distribution in the valve, and several 
aeration  ports  on  the  standpipe  affected  the  hydrodynamics  of  a 
high-density  CFB.  Reasonable agreement  was  found  between the  pre-
dicted results and experimental data. Under the same amount of aera-
tion,  the  increase  in  the  standpipe  aeration  rate  increased  the  solids 
circulation  rate  more  efficiently  and  was  a  more  effective  means  of 
avoiding the gas bypass phenomenon than the increase in the standpipe 
bottom aeration rate. Under fixed aeration conditions, the flux of the 
solids demonstrated a parabolic relation to the increase in the inventory 
of  the  solids,  while  the  standpipe  pressure  drop  exhibited  an  almost 
linear increase. The riser flow rate and the aeration distribution in the 
valve were evaluated as having a negligible effect on solids circulation. 
Furthermore, the aeration distribution in the valve significantly affected 
the valve pressure drop and transient flow behavior. The influence of the 
number of aeration ports on the solids flux was not significant, but it 
induced hydrodynamics instability. In 2018, Gu et al. [1406] developed 
a  three-dimensional  MP-PIC  model  to  study  particle  flow  in  a  dual 
circulating  fluidized-bed  system,  including  a  fuel  reactor  and  an  air 
reactor. They investigated the effects of different operational parameters 
such  as  particle  size  distribution  (dp = 1 (cid:0) 108  μm),  particle  density, 
initial  bed  inventory,  and  fluidizing  gas  flow  rate.  Reactor  pressure 
profiles were used for validation against published experimental data. 
The  study  revealed  that  the  small  particles  tended  to  stay  in  the  fuel 
reactor,  while  large  particles  tended  to  mainly  distribute  in  the  air 
reactor, which is a potential source of a negative effect on the efficiency 
of metal oxide. The medium-sized particles were distributed relatively 
evenly in the two reactors. Higher particle densities led to higher global 

and  internal  circulation  rates.  However,  too  large  particle  densities 
resulted in a gradual reduction of the circulation rate and the eventual 
drop-off  of  the  system.  After  a  critical  value  for  the  particle  density, 
particles mainly accumulated in the air reactor, and the fuel reactor was 
almost empty. It was concluded that controlling particle density plays an 
important 
for 
chemical-looping  reactions.  Both  the  particle  concentration  and  the 
lower  axial  velocities  of  particles  increased  when  the  initial  bed  in-
ventory increased. 

in  achieving  proper  working  conditions 

role 

In 2018, Omer and Weng [500] investigated the effect of primary air 
maldistribution due to nozzle wear on the performance of a large-scale 
(105 MWth) circulating fluidized-bed combustor (CFBC) plant using the 
BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software. As a result of the study, the bed 
inventory  and  the  number  of  maximum  load  events  were  reduced. 
Following on from their previous experiment, in 2018 Gu et al. [501] 
carried  out  MP-PIC  calculation  of  a  dual  circulating  fluidized  bed 
(DCFB) to investigate particle motion behavior such as particle velocity 
and distribution, which are difficult to capture with experiments. The 
calculation  was  validated  by  comparing  the  particle-volume  fraction 
and solid flux with the experimental values. The effects of the overflow 
valve, initial bed inventory, and fluidizing-gas-flow rate were studied 
numerically. It was found that open overflow had an insignificant effect 
on the full gas-solid circulation. With the initial bed inventories were 
increased, a higher pressure drop was found in the down-comer and the 
particle  circulation  was  significantly  strengthened.  In  2018,  Chladek 
et al. [502] quantified the classification efficiency of a binary mixture of 
two different particle types experimentally and numerically using CPFD 
in a lab-scale cylindrical fluidized bed with an inner diameter of 8.4 cm 
and  a  height  of  150  cm.  The  investigation  used  alternating  layers  of 
ceramic beads with a median diameter of 70 mm and a skeletal density 
of 3830 kg/m3, and steel shot with a median diameter of 290 mm and a 
density of 7790 kg/m3, which were fluidized with ambient air. Gener-
ally, the two-particle types can be separated by selecting an appropriate, 
gradually increasing fluidization air velocity interval between the two 
minimum  fluidization  velocities.  After  separation,  lighter  and  smaller 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930171F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

particles  mainly  form  the  top  layer  (flotsam),  and  heavier  and  larger 
particles  mainly  form the  bottom layer  (jetsam). The  minimum fluid-
ization  velocity  of  steel  shot  obtained  from  the  calculation  using  the 
BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software and Ergun drag model was quite 
close to the experimental value. For the ceramic beads, however, a lower 
simulated value was achieved compared to the experiment when using 
the  Wen-Yu  drag  model.  Nevertheless,  the  calculation  successfully 
captured the general rearrangement of the layers, with the assumption 
of using a higher gas velocity to complete the classification of the binary 
mixture. It was concluded that experimental work is still necessary to 
capture  the  concept  of  the  segregation  of  binary  mixtures  better.  In 
2018, Yang et al. [503] carried out a numerical study on the fluidization 
process  of  Geldart  A  particles  in  a  bubbling  fluidized  bed  with  and 
without perforated plates, using the MP-PIC approach and a modified 
structure-based drag model. To investigate the effects of drag models, 
the Parker drag model and a combination of the Wen-Yu and Ergun drag 
models were also employed. When calculating the baffle-free bubbling 
fluidized  bed,  the  modified  structure-based  drag  model  predicted 
gas-solid hydrodynamics closer to the experimental data. However, in 
the baffled bubbling fluidized-bed simulations, none of the drag models 
was able to predict a good enough gas-solid flow due to the treatment of 
the  baffles  in  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor  software.  Feng  et  al. 
[451] conducted a parametric study of the MP-PIC method in a bubbling 
fluidized bed with Geldart A particles using the open-source MFIX pro-
gram in 2018. Parameters such as the drag models, grid resolution, and 
several particles per parcel (PPP) were taken into consideration during 
the  investigation.  To  validate  the  calculation,  the  axial/radial  solid 
distribution and bed height were compared with the experimental data. 
The drag models were found to have a strong influence on the result. 
More accurate results were achieved by utilizing the energy minimiza-
tion  multi-scale  (EMMS)  bubbling  drag  model.  According  to  the 
parameter  analysis, decreasing  the grid  size  or the  PPP improved  the 
accuracy of the calculation. By decreasing the grid size or the PPP, an 
independent  solution  to  the  grid  and  PPP  was  obtained.  Using  the 
EMMS/bubbling drag model, it was possible to get a reasonable result 
with much coarser grids, which provided a great opportunity to reduce 
the computation time for large-scale industrial simulations. Similarly, 
with a constant grid size, decreasing the PPP enhanced the accuracy of 
the calculation. In 2018, Zhang et al. [504] used CPFD schemes to study 
the effect of the draught tube and inlet air temperature on the drying 
process of particulate oil shale in a spouted bed. They concluded that 
poor drying uniformity was achieved in an ordinary cylindrical spouted 
bed due to a large number of the particles migrating from the annulus 
region into the spout region. This resulted in an unstirred area near the 
wall. The uniformity of the drying process was particularly improved by 
reducing the drying temperature and inserting the draught tube. 

In 2019, Yuan et al. [376] developed an OpenFOAM solver based on 
the  MP-PIC  methanol-to-olefins  (MTO)  model  to  investigate  how 
gas-solid  flow  patterns  and  the  reactor  structure  affect  the  catalyst 
residence 
time  and  coke  content  distribution.  No  significant 
back-mixing of the catalyst was observed at lower superficial velocities. 
At higher superficial velocities, the MP-PIC method provided a similar 
coke  content  distribution  to  that  gained  using  the  ideally  mixed-flow 
assumption  of  catalyst  particles.  The  catalyst  residence  time  and  the 
coke content distribution were also affected by the reactor structures. 
Using a structure imitating industrial MTO reactors at high superficial 
velocities, a model derived from the assumption that catalyst particles 
had  a completely  mixed flow was used to  represent both the  catalyst 
residence time and the coke content distribution. In 2019, Park et al. 
[505] applied the CPFD approach to a bubbling fluidized bed to inves-
tigate the segregation characteristics of char particles. They examined 
how  the  nozzle  arrangement  of  the  distributor  affected  the  bubble 
behavior and the consequent segregation of char particles in a mixture of 
char  and  sand  particles.  Parameters  such  as  the  pressure  fluctuation, 
bubble  diameter,  number  of  bubbles,  and  mixing  index  were  investi-
gated. An increasing number of nozzles decreased the bubble diameter 

and resulted in better segregation between the char and sand particles. 
Increasing  the  number  of  nozzles  from  8  to  17  decreased  the  mixing 
index of the char and sand particles from 0.75 to 0.42. A further increase 
in the number of nozzles to 20, however, increased the mixing index to 
0.50. Bubbles coalescing with surrounding bubbles increased the bubble 
diameter  and  reduced  the  number  of  bubbles  when  the  number  of 
nozzles was higher than 17. Increasing the number of nozzles from 8 to 
17 led the dominant frequency of the pressure fluctuation signal to in-
crease from 1.8 to 5.0 Hz. In 2019, Zhang et al. [506] studied circum-
ferential gas-solids flow heterogeneity in a disc-donut catalyst stripper 
using both experimental data and CPFD simulation. In contrast to pre-
vious two-fluid model (TFM) simulations, the CPFD model successfully 
predicted similar gas bypassing and circumferential flow heterogeneity 
to that observed in the experiments. Based on sensitivity analyses, suc-
cessful prediction of the circumferential flow heterogeneity depended 
heavily  on  whether  the  CPFD  model  took  into  account  particle  size 
distribution (PSD). Furthermore, the mesh and parcel number had a very 
limited influence on the simulation results, and the Haider-Levenspiel 
drag model provided the best simulation results in this study. In 2019, 
Yang et al. [273] carried out 2D simulations based on the CPFD model to 
study the effects of louvre baffles on bed hydrodynamics and gas mixing 
of  fluidized  bed  with  Geldart  A  particles.  Except  for  the  gas  tracing 
simulation, hydrodynamics in close agreement with experimental data 
were predicted using the bubble-based energy-minimization multi-scale 
(EMMS)  drag  model.  The  great  discrepancy  between  the  gas  tracing 
simulation and experimental results was due to the lack of modeling of 
the particles’ porous structure. The authors emphasized the importance 
of  choosing  a  suitable  drag  model  such  as  the  EMMS  drag  model  to 
achieve acceptable results. Louvre baffles were proven to strongly sup-
press the back-mixing of the solids and break-up of bubbles. Contrary to 
the traditional opinion in the fluidization community that louvre baffles 
split  bubbles  with  their  vanes,  it  was  observed  that  under  higher  su-
perficial  gas  velocities,  louvre  baffles  act  more  like  a  distributor. 
Kadyrov et al. [452] utilized a cluster-based EMMS drag model in 2019 
to investigate how the solid stress model affected the MP-PIC simulation 
of a CFB riser. A 2D-MFIX MP-PIC open-source code was employed. It 
was  proved  that  selecting  proper  values  for  the  tested  parameters 
improved  the  simulation  accuracy.  Specifically,  the  role  of  the  solid 
stress  parameters  was  more  significant  close  to  the  packing  limit. 
Optimal values for the solid stress model parameters were determined 
based on a comparison between the simulation and experimental data 
and the elapsed simulation time. Using a higher value for the parameter 
of particle pressure ps homogenized the distribution of the particles and 
increased the flux of the solids. However, increasing the drag coefficient 
parameter β  led to an inhomogeneous particle distribution, decreased 
the solid flux, and increased the elapsed simulation time. The maximum 
packing parameter had a minor impact on the distribution, velocity, and 
flux  of  the  solids.  Increasing  ps  or  decreasing  β  led  to  an  increasing 
particle  interaction  force.  One  single  particle  diameter  was  recom-
mended  for  the  thickness  of  the  third  direction  of  2D  simulations.  In 
2019, Jayarathna et al. [507] developed a cold flow CPFD model of an 
agglomerated  bubbling  fluidized  bed  to  study  ash-related  challenges, 
mainly  agglomeration,  in  the  biomass  gasification  process.  It  was 
revealed  that  bed  agglomeration  affected  the  fluidization  characteris-
tics, decreased the pressure drop, and increased the minimum fluidiza-
tion  velocity.  The  formation  of  agglomerates  led  to  an  uneven 
distribution  of  bubbles,  channelling,  extreme  instabilities,  and  finally 
de-fluidization. In 2019, Timsina et al. [508] investigated the effects of 
different  particle  sizes  on  fluidization  behavior  experimentally  and 
numerically,  using  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor  software.  Sand 
particles with a mean diameter of 293 µm and 750 µm, and a mixture of 
the two with 20 % small particles and 80 % large particles, were used for 
the investigation. Good agreement was found between the simulations 
and experiments and with both mixtures of small and large particles. 
Some degree of particle segregation was found with larger particles at 
the bottom and with smaller particles at the upper half of the bed. Shao 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930172F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

◦
C to 800 

et al. [1373] used a three-dimensional MP-PIC model in 2019 to predict 
the minimum fluidization velocity at elevated pressures (1-40 bar) and 
◦
C). Higher temperatures and pressures 
temperatures (from 25 
decreased the minimum fluidization velocity, although variation trends 
were  insignificant  at  temperatures  and  pressures  greater  than  600 
C 
and 20 bar, respectively. Decreasing the particle density and particle size 
led  to  a  decrease  in  the  minimum  fluidization  velocity.  The  particles 
with the wide size distribution had a lower minimum fluidization ve-
locity  and, in  this  case,  the  fine  particles  were helpful  to  fluidize the 
larger particles at lower gas velocities. An excessively wide particle size 
distribution decreased the heat and mass transfer in the fluidized bed. 
Based on the numerical calculation results, a revised Wen-Yu correlation 
was proposed to predict Umf at elevated temperatures and pressures. The 
predicted error of ±15 % for Umf was achieved from the revised corre-
lation in comparison with the existing experimental data. 

◦

In  2020,  Yang  and  Wang  [377]  carried  out  a  three-dimensional 
full-loop pilot-scale CFB-MP-PIC simulation to explore the effect of the 
shape of the riser cross-section on the typical flow characteristics of the 
bed. The model was successfully validated with experimental data and 
the typical core-annulus structure and the non-uniformity of the solid 
phase distribution along the radial and axial directions of the riser were 
evaluated. Compared to the circular riser, the square riser was found to 
have  a  higher  solid  inventory  in  the  standpipe,  a  more  uniform  axial 
mass  distribution,  a  larger  rising  solid  flux,  a  larger  horizontal  trans-
portation velocity between the core and annulus regions, and a larger 
horizontal dispersion coefficient in the riser. In general, the thickness of 
the  solid  back-mixing  layer  decreased  along  with  the  riser  height  for 
both  riser  cross-sections.  The  main  concentration  of  the  solid 
back-mixing was in four corners and not near the side walls of the square 
riser. In 2020, Zhang and Lu [509] coupled a three-dimensional CPFD 
model with an EMMS drag model to investigate how the particle-size 
distribution influenced the performance of a full-loop CFB. One mono-
disperse and two polydisperse cases were explored and validated against 
the  experimental  axial  voidage  distribution  and  solid  mass  flux.  The 
EMMS drag model brought a greater accuracy and more reasonable solid 
mass flux into the simulation. The axial voidage distribution in the riser 
was affected by the total number of parcels in the system Np, especially 
at  the  lower  part  of  the  riser.  Increasing  the  Np  value  raised  the 
computational time. For the two polydisperse cases, axial segregation by 
size was predicted. Higher segregation sizes were observed with an in-
crease in the number of size classes. Using the CPFD approach, in 2020 
Kraft  et  al.  [510]  developed  a  cold  flow  model  of  an  8  MW  dual 
fluidized-bed (DFB) system including a bubbling bed connected to a fast 
fluidized bed. The authors studied how the different drag laws such as 
EMMS,  Ganser,  Turton-Levenspiel, 
combination  of 
Wen-Yu/Ergun,  influenced  parameters  such  as  the  pressure,  particle 
distribution, and bed material recirculation rate and compared the re-
sults with experimental data. The pressure and distribution of the bed 
material in different parts of the DFB were predicted best by the EMMS 
drag law, and the Ganser drag law showed the best bed material recir-
culation  rate.  However,  drag  laws  were often  not able  to predict  bed 
material  recirculation  rate  trends  found  in  experiments.  The  highest 
deviations were observed in the simulation using the EMMS drag model. 
In 2020, Ma et al. [511] applied the CPFD approach to investigate the 
effects of two types of aeration schemes on characteristics such as solids 
circulation  in  a pressurized  high-density CFB.  The simulated  pressure 
profiles  in  both  the  riser  and  standpipe  were  validated  with  experi-
mental data under pressurized conditions. The solids’  circulation rate 
increased  with a  small increase in both the standpipe aeration or the 
turning aeration. Under these conditions and high pressure, no distinct 
interface was found between the packed bed and the free moving region. 
Instead, a dense transition region emerged. However, the increase in the 
solids circulation rate caused by the turning aeration was more obvious 
than  that  due  to  the  standpipe  aeration.  A  more  uniform  pressure 
gradient  distribution  was  observed  due  to  the  standpipe  than  in  the 
packed bed aeration. In 2020, Chen et al. [512] carried out experimental 

and 

a 

and numerical investigations into coking coal pneumatic classification 
and  drying  behavior  in  a  three-stage  cross-flow  fluidized-bed  dryer. 
Based on the fluid dynamics inside the dryer, calculated using the drag 
model including particle sphericity, the classification parameters, and 
the  dryer  configuration were optimized.  The fluidization velocities of 
the  1st  and  2nd  stage  chambers  were  not  observed  to  influence  the 
pneumatic classification. However, increasing the fluidization velocity 
in the 3rd stage chamber connected to the overflow outlet increased the 
classification efficiency. Decreasing the overflow outlet height also had 
the same effect on the pneumatic classification. In 2020, Zhu et al. [513] 
combined CPFD simulation with the electrical capacitance tomography 
(ECT) technique and pressure measurement to investigate the granular 
flow  properties  of  a  pilot-scale  pressurized  circulating  fluidized  bed 
(PCFB). The Wen-Yu/Ergun and EMMS drag models were used for the 
calculation and the results were evaluated against the experiments. A 
non-uniform gas-solids flow distribution was identified in the PCFB riser 
both axially and radially. Significant overestimation of the circulation 
flux and particle dispersion was predicted by the Wen-Yu/Ergun model, 
while  a  better  agreement  with  the  experiments  was  noted  for  the 
EMMS-based simulation. The gas-solids mixing and the particle circu-
lation flux were improved by the elevated operating pressure. Using the 
MP-PIC  approach,  in  2020  Sulzgruber  et  al.  [514]  investigated  the 
concept of fluidization with particle thermal energy storage (FP-TES) for 
particle  transport.  Based  on  preliminary  numerical  simulations,  an 
optimized geometry was developed for a cold test rig, working with 800 
kg of quartz sand. The results of the experimental investigations were 
compared  to  further  numerical  simulations.  To  tackle  the  challenge 
posed by the changing boundary conditions, the transient CPFD simu-
lation was coupled to a MATLAB controller script. Based on particle and 
fluid  parameters,  the  controller  calculated  the  minimum  fluidization 
velocity  and  converted  the  fluidization  grades  into  air  mass  fluxes, 
which were set in the flow BCs. Furthermore, the required pressures at 
the top of each chamber were also calculated by the MATLAB controller. 
Based  on  the  results  of  both  the  simulation  and  the  experiment,  a 
controlled,  stable  particle  mass  flow  could  be  achievable  using  the 
advanced fluidization technology, which is being developed. Jiang et al. 
[378] developed an EMMS-based heterogeneous solid stress model for 
the MP-PIC approach in 2020 taking into account subgrid structure in-
formation obtained from dividing the local flow field inside a compu-
tational cell into a series of dense phases and a dilute phase with uniform 
solid  distributions.  Coupling  this  EMMS-based  heterogeneous  solid 
stress  model  with  an  in-house  MP-PIC  code,  2D  simulations of  a  CFB 
riser and a bubbling fluidized bed (BFB) were carried out. The results 
showed  that  although  a  heterogeneous  drag  model  was  required  to 
obtain  accurate  results,  further  improvement  was  achieved  in  combi-
nation  with  the  heterogeneous  solid  stress  model.  Even  with  larger 
coarse-grained parameters and coarser meshes, better agreement with 
experimental data was attainable in the latter case. In 2020, using the 
CPFD  approach,  Liu  et  al.  [515]  compared  the  gas-solids  flow  in  the 
downer and riser of a CFB with the EMMS-based drag model under the 
same  operating  conditions.  In  comparison  to  the  riser,  a  much  more 
uniform solids holdup and solids velocity distribution were found in the 
downer, with a 10 times lower radial non-uniformity index. The reason 
for the higher non-uniformity in the riser was the formation of a large 
cluster with a vertical strand or “V” shape. The riser had a higher overall 
solids holdup than the downer, And small clusters were mainly present 
throughout the downer, while large clusters were mainly present near 
the walls of the riser. Furthermore, based on the residence time distri-
bution  (RTD)  curve,  extreme  solids  back-mixing  was  observed  in  the 
riser, while that in the downer was limited. Much weaker solids turbu-
lence was found in the downer compared to the riser. In 2020, Raheem 
et al. [516] investigated a 30 kWth CFB combustor experimentally and 
numerically under cold flow conditions using the BARRACUDA Virtual 
Reactor software to determine how the bed inventory and drag model 
influenced the pressure and velocity profiles and particle concentration. 
Two advanced drag models - Wen-Yu/Ergun and EMMS - were chosen 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930173F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

for this study. Initial bed material masses of 3.79, 4.55, and 5.20 kg were 
used  for  the  calculation.  The  solids  concentration  and  pressure  drop 
increased  with  increasing  bed  inventory;  however,  the  axial  particle 
velocities  were  slightly  affected.  Good  agreement  (<5  %  error)  was 
found between the simulation results and experimental measurements. 

More accurate pressure profiles were predicted by the simulation using 
the  EMMS  drag  model  compared  to  the  Wen-Yu/Ergun  drag  model. 
Although both drag models were able to capture the core-annulus flow 
pattern, only the EMMS drag model was able to reproduce the M-shaped 
profile.  Furthermore,  the  meso-scale  structures  at  an  instantaneous 

Fig. 3.80. Snapshots of the spatial distribution of solid (mass flow rate 0.006 kg/s; time range between 0 and 225 ms): (a) experiment, (b) DEM model (legend: 
vertical particle velocity), (c) MP-PIC model (legend:  vertical particle velocity), (d) two-fluid model (legend: vertical particle velocity), and (e) two-fluid model 
(legend: particle volume fraction) (adopted from references [117,642], with permission of authors and Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930174F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig.  3.81. (a)  pressure  distribution,  and  (b)  solid  volume  fraction  distribution  in  the  riser  calculated  using  both  investigated  numerical  models  and  geometry 
configurations (reproduced from reference [308], with permission of Elsevier). 

particle concentration distribution were revealed better by the EMMS 
drag model. The particle volume fraction distributions were sensitive to 
the  particle  size  distribution  (PSD) 
in  simulations  using  the 
Wen-Yu/Ergun model, while no effect of PSD was found for the EMMS 
model. Jaiswal et al. [517] developed a new method in 2020 to identify 
the  bubbling  regime  in  a  fluidized-bed  gasifier  using  experimental 
measurements  and  CPFD.  Sand  and  limestone  particles  with  a  mean 
diameter of 346 µm and 672 µm, respectively, were used in the exper-
iment and simulation and the modeling results were validated against 
the  experimental  measurements.  By  analyzing  the  fluctuations  in  the 
solid volume fraction and the pressure drop as a function of superficial 
air velocity, the change in the standard deviation of these fluctuations 
was  used  to  predict  the  transition  from  one  regime  to  another.  Inde-
pendently of the particle aspect ratio, minimum fluidization velocities of 
0.135  m/s  and  0.36  m/s  were  found  for  sand  and  limestone,  respec-
tively. A transition into the bubbling regime occurred immediately after 
the bed was fluidized for both types of particle bed and no effect on the 
onset of bubbling fluidization regime was found due to the bed aspect 
ratios.  However,  for  both  types  of  particle,  the  slugging  velocity 
decreased when the aspect ratio increased. In 2020, Tu and Wang [518] 
investigated how three different riser geometries (circular, square and 
rectangular) with the same cross-sectional area and height affected the 
performance of a laboratory-scale CFB. A combination of CPFD simu-
lations, electrical capacitance tomography, differential pressure trans-
ducers and an optical-fibre probe was used for the investigation, and two 
different  static  bed  heights  of  20  cm  and  35  cm  were  examined.  The 
results demonstrated that single bubbles appeared in the bottom region 
of the square and circular risers, while double bubbles with an irregular 
shape that stretched along the long side of the cross-section appeared in 
the bottom region of the rectangular riser. According to the radial par-
ticle concentration profiles, a single-core annulus structure was found in 
the  circular  and  square  risers.  However,  along  the  long  side  of  the 
rectangular  riser,  a  double-core  annulus  structure  was  observed,  and 
along the short side, a single-core annulus structure was captured. An 
over-predicted drag force was obtained using the Wen-Yu drag model, 
resulting  in  a  smaller  simulated  axial  pressure  drop  than  the  value 
measured  in  all  three  risers.  A  small  difference  in  the  mass  flow  rate 
between two cases with different static bed heights was observed in the 
circular  riser  while  the  deviation  was  much  larger  in  the  square  and 
rectangular risers. 

Alobaid and Stroh et al. [69,117] carried out a comparison between 
three different numerical CFD methods, namely the two-fluid, MP-PIC, 
and  DEM  models,  to  treat  a  dense  spouted  bed.  A  simple  cold  flow 
experiment was used to investigate the hydrodynamics of gas-solid flow 
in  a  three-dimensional  lab-scale  spouted  bed.  In  this  context,  two 
different air mass flow rates were used during fluidization. At both gas 
mass flow rates, all three approaches captured the overall bed expan-
sion. However, at higher gas mass flow rates, discrepancies between the 
experiment  and  simulation  increased  for  the  two-fluid  and  MP-PIC 

models. The DEM model most accurately predicted the flow pattern at 
both mass flow rates (see Fig. 3.80). 

3.4.2.2. DDPM. In 2014, Adamczyk et al. [308] implemented the first 
non-reactive DDPM model to simulate particle transport in a mid-sized 
experimental  CFB  facility  using  the  commercial  ANSYS-FLUENT  soft-
ware. The DDPM approach was validated against experimental data and 
the results were also compared with the TFM approach (see Fig. 3.81). 
The particle size distribution (PSD) was taken into consideration in both 
approaches. To include PSD in the TFM calculation, three phases cor-
responding to three characteristic diameters were examined. Only the 
combustion chamber  was modeled  and several  user-defined functions 
(UDFs)  were  used  in  both  approaches  to  recirculate  solid  particles  in 
order to reduce the calculation times. To identify the consequences of 
model reduction, a complete pilot geometry was also modeled and the 
calculation was compared with experimental data. A negligible effect 
due to simplifications of the geometry was observed. Comparable results 
were predicted by the TFM and DDPM models. A similar tendency as the 
experimental data for the pressure drop in the CFB riser was predicted 
using  both  numerical  models.  However,  the  TFM  deviation  from  the 
experiment was larger near the recirculation section and at the bottom 
of  the riser,  near  the distributor. The average  pressure deviations  be-
tween the experimental data and the complete DDPM, simplified DDPM, 
and simplified TFM were 0.3, 0.23, and 0.4 kPa, respectively. 

In 2016, Adamczyk et al. [310] proposed a new approach based on 
DDPM to simulate a complete full-loop CFB boiler by dividing the CFB 
boiler  geometry  into  several  sub-models,  whose  inlets/outlets  were 
connected using a set of user-defined functions introduced into the so-
lution  procedure.  Different  numerical  approaches  (two-fluid,  hybrid 
Euler-Lagrange), turbulent models, time step sizes, particle interaction 
closure models, or even mesh resolutions were used to resolve gas-solid 
transport  for  each  section.  A  stable  and  accurate  solution  within  the 
separated boiler zones was guaranteed by the proposed approach. The 
disadvantage of the proposed procedure was the long calculation time 
required to obtain a pseudo-steady-state solution. 

In 2018, Tricomi et al. [95] employed the DDPM approach to capture 
the bubbling behavior of a fluidized-bed reactor with Geldart group B 
particles.  A  model  sensitivity  analysis  was  performed  to  identify  the 
parameters with the greatest influence on the numerical accuracy and 
performances. The DDPM was most sensitive to the drag law; however, 
the mesh size and restitution coefficients also affected the results. Su-
perior  accuracy  was  obtained  using  the  parametric  Syamlal-O’Brien 
drag law, while an underestimation of bubbling vigor was found using 
the  Gidaspow  formulation.  Furthermore,  the  CPU  performance  was 
strongly  affected  by  the  mesh  size.  Poor  sensitivity  to  the  number  of 
parcels, radial distribution function, solid pressure, and kinetic viscosity 
was revealed. A major barrier was found when the model was imple-
mented in the fixed-bed regime, where, due to the limited ability of the 
KTGF approach to handling regions with a high particle density, the data 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930175F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

on the extent of overlapping was unreliable. While most of the calcu-
lations  were  conducted  using  a  2D  model,  a  great  improvement  was 
achieved using a 3D full geometry, whose results matched the empirical 
data very well. Adnan et al. [309] coupled the DDPM approach with the 
EMMS  drag  model  for  the  first  time  in  2018  to  simulate  a  3D 
semi-industrial-scale CFB with Geldart A particles. The effect of particle 
numbers in a parcel was investigated and the simulation results were 
generally found to agree with the experimental data and were not sen-
sitive to the particle number in a parcel when the parcel diameter fell 
into  the  size  range  of  clusters  (dcl /dp = 55 (cid:0) 95).  Additionally,  the 
DDPM  calculations  were  compared with  the  TFM  approach  using the 
EMMS  and  conventional  homogeneous  drag  models.  The  results  sug-
gested that the meso-scale structures should be taken into consideration 
in drag force for both modeling approaches to get reasonable results. In 
2018,  Yang  et  al.  [311]  carried  out  cold  flow  simulations  of  a  fast 
fluidized-bed  fuel  reactor  with  chemical-looping  combustion  (CLC) 
system to obtain a thorough understanding of the process and the hy-
drodynamics behavior inside reactors using the ANSYS-FLUENT DDPM. 
Molochite  and  Fe100  were  used  as  bed  materials  in  a  fuel  reactor. 
Satisfactory agreement was found between the simulated values and the 
experimental data for static pressures and volume fractions at various 
heights.  To  obtain  accurate  results,  it  was  necessary  to  select  an 
appropriate drag law depending on the particle size and flow conditions. 
The  best  calculation  results  were  obtained  using  the  Syamlal-O’Brien 
drag  model  for  molochite  particles  and  Gidaspow’s  drag  model  for 
Fe100 particles. Furthermore, whether or not a correct relationship was 
achieved between the volume fraction and the static pressure in the fuel 
reactor  and  complete,  stable  circulation  conditions  were  created 
depended on the appropriate initial particle distribution and the circu-
lating mass flow rate. 

In 2019, Ostermeier et al. [307] comprehensively investigated the 
features  of  TFM,  DDPM,  and  CFD-DEM  approaches,  such  as  their 
computational  demand  and  independence,  or  the  sensitivity  of  the 
respective  sub-models  and  model  parameters.  Simulation  results  ob-
tained using different approaches were also compared with each other. 
The test case was a pilot-scale reactor with an inner diameter of up to 
387 mm and a height of 900 mm. Geldart B monodisperse particles with 
a diameter of 200 µm, a density of 2500 kg/m3, and a sphericity factor of 

◦
C and with 
0.8 were fluidized with water vapor at a temperature of 400 
an inlet velocity of 0.495 m/s. Parameters for the independence study 
included the grid size, fluid and particle time steps, and particle clus-
tering. For the TFM model, different calculation methods for the gran-
ular temperature were considered. Different wall boundary conditions 
were investigated for both the DDPM and TFM models. Different DEM 
collision  sub-models  (Hertzian  and  Hookean)  were  considered  and 
sensitivity  analysis  of  the  respective  model  parameters  was  also  con-
ducted. According to the time step and grid independence study, inde-
pendence was only achieved with the TFM approach. In the case of the 
DDPM model, the simulation results were primarily observed to depend 
on the grid and fluid time step size. However, only a slight dependency 
on the parcel number and particle time step size (due to the calculation 
of  particle  interactions  based  on  the  KTGF)  was  captured.  It  was 
recognized that the results of the CFD-DEM model could be considered 
to be independent of fluid and particle time step sizes; however, further 
refinement of the parcel number and the computational grid would be 
needed for complete independence. As long as sufficiently high specu-
larity  coefficients  were  selected,  the  TFM  model  showed  a  low  sensi-
tivity to the wall boundary condition. Furthermore, whether algebraic or 
granular conductivity was chosen for the granular temperature calcu-
lation method, the results of the TFM model were almost the same. The 
wall boundary condition choices, such as the discrete phase reflection 
coefficient or specularity coefficient, could influence the results of the 
DDPM. Only slight sensitivity was seen toward the DEM model imple-
mented  in  the  CFD-DEM  simulations.  However,  different  Young’s 
moduli in the Hertzian collision law resulted in varying hydrodynamics. 
On the other hand, within a relatively wide range, the Hookean collision 
law was seen to be independent of the value for the spring constant. The 
calculation results demonstrated that, if appropriate model parameters 
were set, the TFM and CFD-DEM models were able to predict qualita-
tively and quantitatively similar gas and particle flow fields. However, a 
relatively different bed expansion and pressure drop were observed for 
each  model.  Although  the  DDPM  model  predicted  a  similar  pressure 
drop and bed expansion to the TFM model, it was not able to predict 
realistic flow fields for the test case under investigation. The expected 
annular-core flow was captured by the TFM and CFD-DEM model, while 
the DDPM model was not able to do so. It was concluded that, to validate 

Table 3.12 
Approximate recommendations for the setups of the numerical approaches and indication of their sensitivity and their computational demands (bold items indicate 
high sensitivity) [307].  

Criterion 

Grid size (axial cell length) 

Fluid time step size 

TFM 

l < 50 dparticle 

≤ 0.1 l/vg;inlet 

Parcel-diameter-to-cell-size ratio 

Particle time step size 

- 

- 

Time-averaging period 

10 s 

DDPM 

CFD-DEM 

dparcel < l < 50 dparticle 

dparcel < l < 50 dparticle 

≤ 0.1 l/vg;inlet 

≤ 0.1 l/vg;inlet 

≤ 0.25 

= tfluid 

10 s 

< 0.2 

=0.1tfluid 

10 s 

Drag model 

Huilin-Gidaspow (non-spherical) 

Huilin-Gidaspow (non-spherical) 

Huilin-Gidaspow (non-spherical) Algebraic 

Granular temperature 

Algebraic/granular conductivity 

Algebraic 

Specularity coeff. 

0.25-0.75 

Discrete phase reflection coeff. 

DEM collision model 

Young’s modulus 

Spring constant 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1e-6 

0.25-0.75 

- 

- 

- 

Computational demand 

≈45 % 

≈65 % 

- 

- 

- 

Hertzian/Hookean 

5e6-1e7 

≤250  

100 %  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930176F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the model, not only globally observable values such as pressure drop and 
bed expansion must be taken into consideration, but also local particle 
flow  fields  and  bubbling  behavior.  Table  3.12  lists  approximate  rec-
ommendations  for  setting  up  different  approaches  to  achieve  feasible 
and  independent  results,  along  with  each  method’s  sensitivity  and 
computational demands as found in the work of Ostermeier et al. 

In  2019,  Muhammad  et  al.  [312]  investigated  how  key  modeling 
parameters  such  as  particle-particle/particle-wall  restitution  co-
efficients, the particle number per parcel, and the drag force affected the 
performance  of  a  CFB  reactor  using  a  full-loop  3D-DDPM  simulation 
coupled  with  an  EMMS  drag  model.  For  the  validation,  previous 
experimental data was used. Based on the simulation results, meso-scale 
structures  had  important  effects  on  the  drag  force,  which  should  be 
taken into consideration in the DDPM approach using the EMMS drag 
model (see Fig. 3.82). The heterogeneous flow was predicted throughout 
the  CFB  loop  using  the  EMMS  drag  model,  whereas  a  homogeneous 
distribution was observed with the Gidaspow drag  model, which was 
against the experimental data. It was shown that similarly to their pre-
vious study [309], parcel-independent results were achieved for a parcel 
diameter in the size range of clusters (dcl /dp = 65 (cid:0) 125). Better results 
were  generated  for  the  non-ideal  energy  dissipation  particle-particle 
collision 
the 
particle-wall  restitution  coefficient  epwal  had  a  slight  effect  on  hydro-
dynamics. Similar results were predicted from the simulation with PSD 
to those from the mean particle diameter simulations; however, different 
particle distributions were obtained in the CFB. 

(epp = 0.1 (cid:0) 0.9).  However, 

restitution  coefficient 

In 2019, Hashemisohi et al. [313] studied the formation, expansion, 
and breakage of bubbles in a single bubble bed and a freely bubbling 
fluidized bed using the DDPM approach. The solid stress was modified to 
include both normal forces (solid pressure) and tangential forces. The 
study showed that the consideration of solid pressure (normal forces) as 
the only contributor to the solid stress resulted in an overestimation of 
bubble size and the domination of bubble breakage in a single bubble 
bed. The improved stress model offered a better prediction of the bubble 
path  in  a  freely  bubbling  bed.  The  particle  content  of  the  bubbles 
increased at higher restitution coefficients, which led to lower breakage 

during  the  bubble  formation.  Fewer  discrepancies  were  observed  be-
tween the probability of bubble formation calculated with experimental 
results using a new stress model compared to those obtained using the 
stress model based only on the solid pressure. In 2020, Zhang et al. [314] 
performed a three-dimensional simulation to study the characteristics of 
heat  transfer  from  bed  to  the  wall  in  a  tapered  fluidized  bed  with  a 
pulsed  flow  using  the  DDPM  approach.  The  existence  of  a  unique 
core-annulus structure was captured in the tapered fluidized bed. The 
heat  transfer  was  closely  related  to  the  gas-solid  hydrodynamics. 
Reducing the taper angle improved the bed-to-surface heat transfer co-
efficient. Bed-to-surface heat transfer was also enhanced by reducing the 
distance between the gas inlet and the probe location. Furthermore, a 
stronger heat transfer capacity was observed in the tapered fluidization 
with  a  sinusoidal  pulsed  flow  compared  to  that  with  the  rectangular 
pulsed flow. 

3.4.2.3. Other  hybrid  methods. In  2015,  Schneiderbauer  et  al.  [315] 
utilized a hybrid model combining a Lagrangian discrete phase model 
(DPM)  and  a  kinetic  theory-based  TFM  to  numerically  assess  poly-
disperse gas-solid fluidized beds. The local distribution of the different 
particle diameters, which is necessary for the gas-solid drag force, was 
obtained by tracking statistically representative particle trajectories for 
each  particle  diameter  class.  The  contribution  from  inter-particle 
stresses, i.e. inter-particle collisions, was deduced from the TFM solu-
tion and was added as an additional body force in the force balance of 
the  DPM  approach.  The  numerical  model  was  applied  to  a  lab-scale 
(0.15  m × 0.02  m  cross-section)  fluidized  bed  handling  a  bidisperse 
mixture of glass particles with diameters of 0.5 mm and 2.5 mm. Vali-
dation  of  the  results  demonstrated  fairly  good  agreement  with  the 
experiment. However, it was suggested that subgrid drag corrections for 
polydisperse  fluidized  beds  should  be  considered  for  the  numerical 
investigation of industrial-scale fluidized-bed units. 

3.4.3. Reactive simulations 

3.4.3.1. MP-PIC. In 2010, the first publication using a reactive MP-PIC 

Fig.  3.82. Instantaneous  snapshots  of  solid  volume  fraction  distribution  and  quantitative  comparison  of  cross-sectionally  averaged  radial  solid  volume  fraction 
profiles between experimental data and simulation results predicted by the EMMS matrix and Gidaspow drag models at different CFB riser heights (reproduced from 
reference [312], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930177F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.83. Measured and calculated O3 normalized mass fraction as a function of inlet velocity: (a) static bed height is 11.5 cm and chemical rate constant 1.57 s(cid:0) 1; 
(cid:0) 1, ρf = 1.2 kg/m3, θp = 45, x = 11.5 cm), and (b) static bed height is 23.1 cm and chemical rate constant 0.33 s(cid:0) 1; analytic solution 
analytic solution uses (k = 1.57 s
uses (k = 0.33s

(cid:0) 1, ρf = 1.2 kg/m3, θp = 45, x = 11.5 cm) (reproduced from reference [523], with permission of Elsevier). 

model to simulate a fluidized bed was published by Snider [523] on the 
subject  of  ozone  decomposition.  The  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor 
software was used for the simulation and the geometry and operating 
conditions  were chosen  based  on the  experiment  by  Fryer  and Potter 
[1052]. The packed bed included silica sand impregnated with Fe2O3 
solid catalyst of a constant size. The bed was fluidized with dry air with 
O3  added.  However,  only  a  single  stoichiometric  equation  with  a 
first-order  reaction  rate  was  used  in  the  simulation  for  the  ozone 
decomposition in the gas phase. The reaction rate was a function of the 
catalyst volume fraction, but the effect, which the particle size distri-
bution (PSD) had on the catalyst surface area (catalyst sizes), was not 
taken into consideration. It was shown that the catalyst was uniformly 
mixed at the bottom of the bed, in contrast to the top of the bed where 
multiple bubbles exist, resulting in uniform O3 decomposition to O2 near 
the  inlet  and  a  high  concentration  of  O3  rising  in  the  bubbles.  The 
calculated and measured ozone decomposition as a function of the inlet 
flow rate showed excellent agreement and increasing the inlet flow rate 
resulted in a lower percentage of ozone decomposition (see Fig. 3.83). 
Furthermore,  it  was  demonstrated  that  the  unadjusted  Wen-Yu  drag 
model satisfactorily predicted the minimum fluidization velocity. 

In  2011,  Snider  et  al.  [524]  extended  the  energy  transport  and 
chemistry of the CPFD methodology used in the BARRACUDA Virtual 
Reactor software to calculate flows with large chemistry-induced tem-
perature  variations  and  finally  showed  the  capabilities  of  CPFD  in 
modeling large-scale fluidized-bed gasifiers. The gasifier had a relatively 
complex geometry including a cylindrical vessel with a dome top, four 
single-stage  internal  cyclones,  internal  heaters,  and  gas  spargers.  The 
reactor diameter and height were 4.57 m and 13.7 m, respectively. The 
transient  three-dimensional  calculation  was  run  for  300  s  to  reach  a 
quasi-steady  condition  and  the  wall-clock  time  for  calculation  on  a 
single Intel CoreTM i7 computer was 6 days. An enthalpy equation was 
used to calculate the energy transport for fluid transfer and sensible and 
chemical energy transfer between phases and within the fluid mixture. 
Particle temperature changes due to chemical reactions were not taken 
into consideration and only heat release due to surface reactions were 
incorporated  in  the  gas  phase  energy.  The  heat  transfer  between  the 
particles  and  the gas  phase  was  also  included.  Furthermore,  the  tem-
peratures  were  assumed  to  be  uniform  within  the  particles.  A 
reduced-chemistry approach was utilized to include one homogeneous 
reaction  (water-gas  shift)  and  four  heterogeneous  reactions  (steam 
gasification,  CO2  gasification,  methanation,  and  combustion).  The  re-
action rates were implicitly solved numerically on the Eulerian grid with 
the discrete particle properties mapped to the grid; these vary from cell 
to cell depending on the particle distribution in the system. The solid 
particles  were  considered  to  be  pure  carbon,  and  their  associated 
moisture and volatile matter were directly included in the gas stream 

due to the assumption of instantaneous vaporization and devolatiliza-
tion. In the same year, Parker [525] utilized the BARRACUDA Virtual 
Reactor software to simulate the reaction of silane gas with the surface 
of the fluidized silicon seed, the deposition of additional silicon on the 
particles,  and  consequently  the  growth  of  the  particle  in  a  lab-scale 
fluidized-bed reactor. The authors investigated how two different inlet 
gas distributors - a screen mesh and a ¼′′
nozzle - affected fluidization 
and  deposition  behavior.  A  uniform  particle  size  distribution  with  a 
mean diameter of 250 microns was used for the calculations. Two main 
routes for silicon formation on the silicon seeds have been considered: 
the heterogeneous deposition of silane gas on a solid silicon surface and 
the homogeneous decomposition of silane gas into silicon dust or fines. 
It was found that the screen mesh distributor creates a bubbling bed with 
a high silane conversion. However, the inlet nozzle minimizes clogging 
in  the  reactor  and  provides  better  cooling  in  the  inlet  region.  Abbasi 
et al. [526] developed a 2D-CPFD dynamic model for steam coal gasi-
fication in a fluidized bed to maximize coal gasification yields with an 
optimum producer gas composition and minimum operational upsets. 
The simulation results were compared with an ideal plug flow reactor 
(PFR) model. Gas compositions close to the PFR were obtained from the 
2D-CPFD model. Using the CPFD model, it was possible to predict early 
signs of suspension choking in the gasifier feeding section. 

In 2012, following Snider et al. [524], Xie et al. [1407] studied the 
gasification of forestry residues in a lab-scale fluidized-bed reactor using 
the 3D-MP-PIC approach. The total height of the reactor was 1.4 m, with 
a fluidized bed diameter of 0.04 m and a freeboard diameter of 0.06 m. 
Similarly  to  Snider  et  al.  [524],  a  reduced  set  of  heterogeneous  and 
homogeneous reactions were implemented and the rates were solved on 
the Eulerian grid. However, in addition to the water-gas shift reaction, 
Xie et al. [1407] also took into consideration CO, H2, CH4, and C2H4 
combustion  reactions,  and  methane  steam  reforming.  The  authors 
investigated how several critical parameters  such as the temperature, 
equivalence ratio, and steam-to-biomass ratio affected the product gas 
composition  and  carbon  conversion  efficiency.  The  product  gas 
composition and carbon conversion efficiency showed good agreement 
with experimental data. In a further study, Xie et al. [1412] utilized the 
3D-MP-PIC  approach  to  simulate  a 
lab-scale  atmospheric  coal 
fluidized-bed gasifier with a height of 2.0 m and a diameter of 0.22 m. 
Similar chemical reactions and rates to the previous study [1407] were 
used in [1412]. It was assumed that the evaporation and devolatilization 
were instantaneous, and consequently, they were not simulated and coal 
particles were considered as carbon and ash. The calculated product gas 
compositions were shown to compare well with the experimental data. 
Breault  and  Huckaby  [527]  simulated  the  performance  of  a 
lower-temperature  CO2  absorption  reactor  using  a  reactive  MP-PIC 
model. Three-dimensional geometry of the lower mixing section of the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930178F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

riser of a CO2 capture test unit was used for the simulation. To explore 
the  performance  of  the  riser  adsorber,  an  eight-point  test  matrix  was 
used taking into consideration the gas flow rate, heat removal and solids 
circulation  rate.  Increasing  the  flow  of  the  solids  raised  the  CO2 
adsorption, while increasing the gas flow resulted in the CO2 adsorption 
decreasing.  A  65  %  reduction  in  the  gas  flow  rate,  compared  to  the 
design point, changed the operation regime from core-annular to fast 
fluidization. 

In 2014, Parker [1413] developed a full three-dimensional model of 
a chemical-looping combustion (CLC) system with an overall height of 
approximately 3.66 m and coal particles as a fuel using the BARRACUDA 
Virtual  Reactor  software  to  study  the  particle-fluid  hydrodynamics, 
thermal  characteristics,  and  reaction  efficiency.  The  model  included 
multiple  heterogeneous  and  homogeneous  reactions,  including  the 
gasification reactions and oxidation and reduction reactions of the metal 
oxide  carrier.  Furthermore,  moisture  release,  temperature-dependent 
devolatilization, and particle swelling effects were taken into consider-
ation for each coal particle. 50 s of the CLC operation was simulated to 
demonstrate  the  utility  of  the  model.  Despite  some  fluctuation in  the 
instantaneous circulation rates, the predicted solid circulation rate was 
close to the design target rate of 360 kg/h. The efficiencies of the air 
reactor and fuel reactors were 57 % and 23 %, respectively. Loha et al. 
[1414]  carried  out  a  three-dimensional  numerical  simulation  of  a 
bubbling fluidized-bed biomass gasifier using the BARRACUDA Virtual 
Reactor software. The gasifier had a diameter of 0.05 m and a height of 
0.5 m, with a side port biomass feeder that was 0.04 m in diameter. The 
geometry was discretized with 8,932 cells. The drying and devolatili-
zation  of  biomass  were  assumed  to  be  instantaneous  and  were  not 
modeled. Gasification with oxygen or air, steam, and carbon dioxide was 
considered  as  heterogeneous  reactions,  and  the  oxidation  of  carbon 
monoxide,  hydrogen,  and  methane  along  with  water-gas  shift  and 
methane  steam  reactions  were  considered  as  homogeneous  reactions. 
The  last  20  s  of  the  calculation  was  used  for  time-averaging  after 
approximately  10  s  to  reach  quasi-steady  conditions.  The  simulations 
were  performed  for  different  gasification  temperatures,  equivalence 
ratios, and steam-to-biomass ratios, and the calculated outlet gas com-
positions  demonstrated  a  very  good  resemblance  to  the  experimental 
data.  In  the  same  year,  Weng  and  Omer  [1415]  coupled  the  BARRA-
CUDA Virtual Reactor software with zero-dimensional balancing models 
to  investigate  the  cause  of  tube  damage  in  the  riser  of  a  137  MWth 
circulating  fluidized-bed  (CFB)  combustor  in  Wuppertal-Elberfeld, 
Germany, to predict the emission and erosion characteristics of a 489 
MWth CFB in Połaniec, Poland, and to investigate the effects of co-firing 
of  biomass in a  242 MWth  CFB  in Berlin, Germany. Zero-dimensional 
balancing models were used to calculate fractional cyclone separation 
and  heat  withdrawal  in  the  fluidized-bed  cooler.  Different  operating 
conditions were simulated, such as the boiler load, secondary air dis-
tribution, and bed height. Based on the results of the study, to reduce the 
roof damage in the Elberfeld CFB, the bed inventory and the number of 
maximum load events were reduced. For the Połaniec CFB, partial mode 
operation was found to be noncritical for emissions and erosion. For the 
Berlin CFB, it was observed that biomass co-firing is beneficial for the 
combustion  rate,  oxygen  distribution,  emission,  and  erosion.  Breault 
et al. [1416] conducted experiments and 3-dimensional non-isothermal 
reacting CPFD calculations in a laboratory-scale fluidized-bed reactor to 
investigate  a  new  process  for  CO2  capture  from  large  sources  using 
polyamine sorbents. Kinetics obtained from the TGA tests were used in 
the CPFD calculations. A mixture of CO2, H2O, and N2 was used in both 
the  experiments  and  the  calculations.  The  effects  of  the  distributor 
design, gas flow rate, and particle size were explored through the CPFD 
simulations. An increase in the gas flow resulted in a reduction in the 
time taken for the CO2  adsorption. In the reactor, there were regions 
where the inert FCC particles were segregated and de-fluidized; how-
ever,  the  capacity  of  the  sorbent  to  adsorb  CO2  was  not  adversely 
affected. 

In  2015,  Zhong  et  al.  [1417]  established  a  comprehensive 

three-dimensional numerical model of olive cake combustion in a CFB 
riser.  The  model  included  the  gas-solid  flow,  chemical  reaction,  and 
heat, and mass transfer. The reaction mechanisms included pyrolysis, 
combustion of char and volatile matters, and SO2, NO, and N2O emis-
sions. The CFB riser had a diameter of 0.125 m and a height of 1.8 m. The 
results revealed that the core-annulus flow structure was formed. The 
gas and solid temperatures increased along the CFB riser and the main 
waste combustion region was in the upper parts. Close to the fuel inlet, 
the  concentrations  of  devolatilized  HCN  and  NH3  were  suddenly 
elevated and then quickly decreased because of the oxidation reaction. 
Due to the equilibrium between the formation and reduction reactions, 
the  maximum concentration  of  NO and  N2O was  above the  fuel  inlet 
level. The SO2  concentration peak occurred close to the fuel inlet. NO, 
and N2O emissions  increased with an increase in the excess air ratio. 
However,  there  was  no  obvious  variation  tendency  for  the  SO2 
emissions. 

® 

similar 

solid  volume 

fractions,  while 

In 2015 [1418] and 2016 [1419], Liu et al. simulated the full loop of 
a  pilot-scale  (6  tonnes/day,  1  MWth)  dual  fluidized-bed  circulating 
biomass gasifier including a gasifier, a combustor, a cyclone separator, 
and a loop-seal using the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software. The 
gasifier height and diameter were 6.54 m and 1.067 m respectively, and 
the combustor height and diameter were 7.4 m and 0.356 m, respec-
tively. Compared to previous studies, in addition to heterogeneous char 
reactions,  homogeneous  gas-phase reactions,  biomass  drying,  and  py-
rolysis were also taken into consideration. The authors investigated how 
the  system  was  affected  by  the  particle  size  distributions  (a  normal 
distribution with a mean diameter of 488 microns and a standard de-
viation of 0.146), drag models, gasifier temperature, steam-to-biomass 
(S/B)  ratio,  and  air  supply  to  the  combustor.  To  reach  the 
pseudo-steady-state,  100  s  of  the  real  process  were  simulated.  Each 
simulation took about 96-120 h on a workstation with an Intel
i7 CPU 
@3.50 GHz and a GeForce GTX TITAN graphics card. It was found that 
the PSD effect was more important in the lower region of the combustor. 
It  was  also  shown  that  the  Wen-Yu  and  the  Gidaspow  drag  models 
predict  almost 
the 
Turton-Levenspiel  model  predicts  more  dilute  solid  volume  fractions 
and a higher solid velocity. Furthermore, it was proven that increasing 
the gasifier temperature results in higher H2 and CO and lower CO2 and 
CH4 concentrations. It was also shown that a high gasifier temperature 
promoted producer gas production and increased hydrogen content in 
the producer gas. Yan et al. [382] integrated the solid-gas surface re-
actions and the MP-PIC approach in the OpenFOAM software and tested 
the solver against experiments. The solver was then used to predict the 
performance of biomass-steam gasification in a dual fluidized-bed (DFB) 
gasifier. The predicted results agreed well with the experimental data. 
The main features of the DFB were detected, such as the dense bed zone, 
splash zone, and freeboard, as well as the particle circulation loop. The 
bubbling fluidized bed had a dense section of about 1 m, in which the 
voidage gradually increased along with the height. Thapa et al. [528] 
developed a 3D-CPFD model of a lab-scale (50 mm diameter) cold flow 
CFB test rig and validated it against experimental measurements. After 
the successful validation of the cold flow model, the model was used for 
further investigations under high temperatures and reactive conditions 
for biomass gasification, as well as for optimizing the primary and sec-
ondary air inlet locations to achieve an optimum bed material circula-
tion rate. The optimum bed material circulation rate was achieved when 
the ratio of the height of the primary and secondary air feed positions to 
the  total  height  of  the  riser  were  0.125  and  0.375,  respectively.  At  a 
given  feed  rate,  splitting  the  primary  and  secondary  air  feed  to  the 
bottom resulted in a reduction in the bed material circulation rate. The 
maximum circulation rate was obtained when the total air was fed as 
bottom air. Under the high temperature and reactive conditions, the bed 
material  circulation  rate  and  pressure  drop  throughout  the  CFB 
decreased for the given air feed rate. Using the CPFD approach, Kraft 
et al. [529] investigated deposit build-up in the freeboard of a 50 MW 
biomass input bubbling fluidized-bed combustion chamber due to ash 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930179F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

melting. The temperature distribution was calculated in the combustion 
chamber to detect zones where ash melting could occur by comparing 
the temperature profiles with the ash melting temperature. Based on the 
comparison of the detected zones with the fouling observed on the walls 
of the combustion chamber freeboard, good agreement was achieved. To 
optimize the operating points, with the aim of reducing the regions with 
a temperature higher than the ash melting temperature, three different 
inlet gas stream distributions were used for the simulation. A more even 
temperature distribution was obtained by moving the air inlet streams 
from  the  freeboard  to  the  necking  area  above  the  bed,  resulting  in  a 
significant reduction of the areas where the ash melting temperatures 
were exceeded. 

selected, 

assuming 

kinetic  model  was 

In 2017, Kraft et al. [530] also used the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor 
software  to  model  a  dual  fluidized-bed  biomass  gasifier  including  a 
gasification  reactor,  a  connecting  chute,  a  combustion  reactor,  a 
cyclone, and a loop seal with a total fuel input of 8 MWth. The gasifier 
reactor had a diameter of 1 m at the bottom and 2.5 m at the top. The 
combustion reactor had a diameter of 0.85 m and a height of 9.7 m. The 
geometry was divided into 140,000 computational cells, and 700,000 
computational  particles  were  involved  in  the  simulation.  In  order  to 
reach a steady-state situation, 150 s of the real process were modeled 
and  the  last  50  s  were  used  for  the  time  averaging.  Each  1  s  of  the 
simulation took around 1.5 h on an Intel Core i5-3570 workstation with 
a  GeForce TITAN X graphics card. The implemented biomass particle 
conversion model covered the drying and devolatilization processes as 
well  as  homogeneous  and  heterogeneous  reactions.  The  EMMS  drag 
model was implemented in this work, and the EMMS drag model was 
shown to demonstrate the best fit compared to other drag models. Using 
the EMMS drag law, the model was able to correctly predict the different 
fluidization regimes, pressure drops, compositions  of the product and 
flue gas, and temperatures inside the reactor. Using the BARRACUDA 
Virtual  Reactor  software,  Berrouk  et  al.  [531]  carried  out  a 
three-dimensional  simulation  of  a  large-scale  fluid  catalytic  cracking 
(FCC)  riser for  converting heavy oil to  products such  as gasoline  and 
propylene.  To  represent  the  oil  feed  cracking  reaction  network,  a 
four-lump 
four 
pseudo-hydrocarbon  components:  vacuum  gas  oil  (VGO),  gasoline  or 
light naphtha (LN), light gases (LG), and coke (C). The processing ca-
pacity  of  the  22-meter  high  reactor  was  6×106  tonnes/year  and  the 
larger part of the riser had a diameter of 2.5 m. It was assumed that feed 
oil was completely vaporized at the inlet of the feed injectors, therefore 
liquid phase injection and oil vaporization were not taken into consid-
eration. The EMMS heterogeneous drag model was used for the simu-
lation. The total amount of the 1,840,000 mesh was used for the entire 
riser.  To  obtain  a  fully  developed  flow,  120  s  of  the  process  were 
simulated, running on a high-performance computer (HPC) with a 64-bit 
CPU and a 2600 GPU for 3 weeks. The last 25 s of the simulation were 
used for the time averaging. The results showed good agreement with 
the real operation data on the yield distribution. In 2017, Berrouk et al. 
[532]  also  simulated  an  industrial  fluid  catalytic  cracking  (FCC) 
regenerator with complex internal structures using a three-dimensional 
MP-PIC  model to investigate the bed hydrodynamics, thermal effects, 
and chemical kinetics. The unit had a diameter of 15.2 m and a height of 
29.2  m  and  the  model  included  291,420  computational  cells.  The 
modeling  started  with  2.51  million  computational  particles.  Typical 
industrial operational issues related to industrial regenerators, such as 
erosion  areas,  standpipe  drainage  and  CO  emission  levels,  were  also 
studied. Due to the coke formation as a combustion product, the inef-
ficient placement of the air distributor rings, and an undersized stand-
pipe, the total outlet gas flow was higher than the total inlet flow. The 
highest erosion was found in the feed line and plate. In the center of the 
unit, a low-temperature column was captured. The highest temperatures 
were observed in the periphery of the freeboard and outside the diplegs. 
Lower than optimal temperatures in the unit and poorly designed air 
distributor rings resulted in elevated CO levels in the outlet gas. To solve 
the solids standpipe issues and to decrease the CO emission levels, the 

authors  suggested  redesigning  the  regenerator’s  air  distribution  rings 
and  standpipe,  including  revisiting  the  ways,  in  which  both  spent 
catalyst and air were fed to the unit. 

Using the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software in 2017, Xie et al. 
[533] simulated the full loop of an industrial-scale (75 t/h) circulating 
fluidized-bed  (CFB)  co-combustor  with  municipal  solid  waste  (MSW) 
and coal as fuel input. Devolatilization, char and volatiles combustion, 
acid  gas  formation  and  retention,  and  NO  and  N2O  production  and 
reduction were included in the model, using a comprehensive reaction 
mechanism  including  29  heterogeneous  and  homogeneous  reactions. 
The furnace had a height of 16.325 m and a cross-section of 2.55 × 2.4 
m2 at the bottom and 3.53 × 2.4 m2 at the water wall section above it. 
30 s of stimulation with 1.0 × 106  particles and at most 350,364 grid 
cells took about 40 days on an Intel Xeon workstation. Simulation results 
revealed that serious wall erosion took place in the horizontal flue duct 
and the entrance region of the cyclone. Increasing the coal mass fraction 
reduced the  NO and N2O emissions  and increased  the SO2  emissions. 
Amblard et al. [534] coupled the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software 
with an in-house coke combustion kinetic model to simulate an indus-
trial  FCC regenerator. The results were compared with operating and 
performance data on the regenerator, acquired from a selected industrial 
unit. The regenerator had a diameter of 4.7 m and 1,000,000 cells were 
used for the calculation. The predicted bed density was lower than the 
measured  value, resulting  in  a  higher  bed  level  prediction. Useful  in-
sights such as solid holdup and temperature profiles, the oxygen content, 
and the catalyst regeneration time were obtained from the simulation. 
Singh and Gbordzoe [535] also developed a comprehensive CPFD-based 
kinetic tool to predict regenerator combustion characteristics such as the 
flue  gas  composition  and  the  dilute  and  dense  bed  temperatures 
(Fig. 3.84). The regenerator had a complex geometry with a diameter of 
approximately 6.7 m and a height of 15.2 m. The coke burning kinetics 
were described through proprietary combustion kinetic equations with 
appropriate kinetic constants. Hardware and operational modifications 
were recommended and modeled. 

in 

In  2018,  Wang  et  al.  [383]  implemented  the  MP-PIC  model  in 
OpenFOAM  to  study  biomass  gasification  in  a  spouted  fluidized-bed 
three  dimensions.  The  reactor  had  a  rectangular 
reactor 
cross-section with dimensions of 0.04 × 0.23 m2 and a height of 1.5 m. 
◦
The conical distributor angle was 60
and the inlet orifice diameter was 
20 mm. Around 62,000 cells were used for the final calculations and the 
total  calculation  time  for  each  case  was  30  s.  All  particle  conversion 
steps, consisting of drying, devolatilization, heterogeneous and homo-
geneous reactions, were included in the simulation. The impact of the 
operating parameters on the gasification performance was comprehen-
sively investigated. Based on the results, biomass particles were found to 
be concentrated mainly at the bed surface, and the heterogeneous re-
actions mainly occurred in that area, while the homogeneous reactions 
mostly  took  place  above  the  bed  surface.  Increasing  the  temperature 
resulted in higher endothermic reaction rates and higher product for-
mation. A higher steam-to-biomass ratio increased H2  and CO2  forma-
tion and reduced CO formation. The four types of feedstock were tested 
and  all  shown  a  similar  gasification  performance.  At  the  same  time, 
Upadhyay  et  al.  [1408]  studied  the  fast  pyrolysis  of  biomass  in  a 
lab-scale (0.3 m wide and high and 0.075 m deep with 1 kg/h fuel input) 
rectangular  bubbling  fluidized  bed  utilizing  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual 
Reactor software. The pyrolysis reaction was simulated via two-stage, 
semi-global kinetics, through which the biomass first decomposed into 
tar, non-condensable gas, and char. In the second step, the tar decom-
posed further into non-condensable gas and char. The Gidaspow [28] 
model was used for the drag correlation, with the non-spherical drag law 
developed  by  Haider  and  Levenspiel  [1421].  A  mesh  resolution  of 
(51 × 13 × 53) was used for the calculation. A total physical time of 120 
s were simulated and the last 80 s were used for time averaging. The 
influences  of  operating  conditions  and  reactor  configurations  on  the 
yield of the products were investigated. The superficial gas velocity and 
reaction temperature were found to be the operating conditions with the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930180F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.84. Regenerator temperature profile at t=200  s: (a) radial temperature  profiles, (b) axial temperature profile, and (c)  time-averaged temperature profile 
(reproduced from reference [535], with permission of Elsevier). 

® 

2  CPU  quad-core  Intel

greatest influence. The effects of the reactor geometric parameters on tar 
yield were minor due to the small size of the reactor. In the same year, 
Nardo et al. [536] investigated a bubbling fluidized-bed (BFB) upstream 
coal gasifier numerically using the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor soft-
ware. The gasifier had a 3.5 m high, variable cross-section area and a 
capacity  of  1.4  tonnes/day  of  anthracite  coal  input  (0.5  MWth).  The 
model was successfully used to obtain an efficient injection configura-
tion  to  improve  the  bubbling  fluidization  regime  and  a  satisfactory 
prediction  of  produced  gas  composition.  The  simulations  were  per-
formed  on  an  ENEA  CRESCO
E5620 
machine, equipped with a NVIDIA GPU TESLA K40, four 2880 CUDA 
cores,  1.43  teraflops  of  double-precision  peak  performance,  and  4.29 
teraflops  of  single-precision  peak  performance.  Bandara  et  al.  [537] 
employed the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software to analyze the ef-
fect of the reactor temperature in biomass-steam gasification. At three 
different steam temperatures of 873 K, 973 K, and 1073 K, the cold gas 
efficiency,  lower  heating  value,  and  product  gas  composition  were 
compared.  A  constant  steam-to-biomass  ratio  of  0.45  was  considered 
during the calculations. Increasing the temperature from 873 K to 1073 
K increased the hydrogen content of the product gas from 36 % to 57 %, 
while reducing the carbon monoxide content from 33 % to 13 %. For the 
same temperature change, the cold gas efficiency and the lower heating 
value changed from 76.6 % to 73.2 % and 10.4 MJ/kg to 10.1 MJ/kg, 
three-dimensional 
respectively.  Liu  et  al.  [538]  developed  a 

Xeon

® 

® 

compressible  model  including  heat  and  mass  transfer,  and  chemical 
reactions (pyrolysis, coke and volatile substances combustion) for a CFB 
combustor. The combustor had dimensions of 0.685 × 0.184 × 9.15 m3 
and  667,128  cells  were  used  for  the  calculations.  The  authors  also 
investigated  how  varying  the  operating  parameters  may  affect  the 
temperature distribution, the gas composition distribution, and the re-
action rate of the cornstalk particles reacting with solid waste from oil 
shale retorting. Based on the comparison of the temperature distribution 
profiles, there was good agreement between the numerically predicted 
results and the experimental results (see Fig. 3.85). The optimum mixing 
ratio for the uniformity of the furnace temperature and highest oxygen 
consumption  and  carbon  dioxide  generation  was  R1=7:3.  For  this 
mixing ratio, the primary air rate was 66.67 %, resulting in a more stable 
and sufficient combustion. 

Wu et  al.  [539] established  a  CPFD  approach  with EMMS  drag  to 
investigate a gas-solids CFB riser reactor handling Geldart A particles. 
The model was validated based on hydrodynamics parameters such as 
the solids holdup distributions and solids velocity and reaction behavior 
such as the ozone concentration distribution (for ozone decomposition), 
and acceptable agreements were achieved. The model was also extended 
to analyze the hydrodynamics and the cracking reactions of an industrial 
FCC riser reactor (capacity of 1.0 × 106  tonnes/year). The results indi-
cated interphase chemical reactions such as catalytic cracking reactions 
in FCC, which varied the volume of gas in the CFB riser, resulting in a 

Fig. 3.85. Instantaneous distribution of the fluid temperature along with the axial height of the furnace at 80 s ((a) mixing ratio of R=8:2, and (b) mixing ratio of 
R=7:3)) (reproduced from reference [538], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930181F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 3.86. Coal pressurized pyrolysis process in an industrial-scale spouted-fluid-bed reactor: (a) flow patterns, and (b) mixing behaviors under different particle 
sizes (reproduced from reference [1409], with permission of Elsevier). 

significant  influence on the hydrodynamics. Near the feedstock  injec-
tion,  a  rapid  decrease  in  solids  holdup  and  a  rapid  increase  in  solids 
velocity were captured. The typical annular-core features with strong 
heterogeneous  characteristics  were  also  observed  at  different 
cross-sections of the FCC riser reactor. 

such  as 

the  particle 

In 2019, Zhou et al. [1409] developed a MP-PIC model to simulate 
gas-solid flow and pyrolysis characteristic of coal (500 thousand tonnes 
per year capacity) in an industrial-scale (height of 16.6 m and diameter 
of  3.1  m)  pressurized  spouted-fluid-bed  reactor  (see  Fig.  3.86).  The 
impacts  of  operating  variables 
sizes, 
semi-coke-to-coal ratio, and coal feeding rate on the performance of the 
reactor were also numerically investigated. The flow pattern of “jet in 
the fluidized bed with bubbling” was observed. A stabler flow pattern 
and worse mixing effectiveness were found in the pyrolysis reactor with 
the increase in particle sizes. A particle size range within 0-6 mm was 
suggested  for  the  feedstock.  The  flow  uniformity  and  the  spouting 
structure  were  improved  by  the  rise  in  the  pressure.  Coal  pyrolysis 
benefited from the increase in the semi-coke-to-coal ratio; however, the 
enhancement was limited and came at the cost of a sharp increase in the 
number of particles in the reactor. 

Park and Choi [540] also implemented the CPFD model to calculate 
biomass pyrolysis in a spouted-bed reactor using the kinetics parameters 
of  biomass  pyrolysis  measured  in  a  micro-spouted-bed  thermogravi-
metric analyzer (MSB-TGA). Reliable results were provided by the ki-
netic data obtained from MSB-TGA in comparison to conventional TGA. 
The effects of gas velocity and the reaction temperature on the hydro-
dynamics,  heat  transfer,  and  pyrolysis  reaction  were  also  studied. 
Increasing the gas velocity resulted in a better mixing and heat transfer 
between  the  biomass  particles  and  the  bed  material,  which  in  turn 
significantly  changed  the  pyrolysis  product  yield.  The  tar  yield  first 
increased  and  then decreased as  the  gas velocity increased.  A similar 
trend was observed with an increasing reaction temperature. Chen et al. 
[541]  simulated  an  in-house  50  kWth  dual  circulating  fluidized-bed 
reactor  for  the  chemical-looping  combustion  of  coal,  using  the  CPFD 
approach. The height of the CLC reactor was around 5 m and 476,000 
computation cells with 2,139,908 particles were used for the simulation. 
The simulation was validated by comparing the fuel reactor (FR) pres-
sure profiles and outlet gas concentration with those from experimental 
measurements.  Using  the  validated  model,  the  reactive  flow  in  the 
full-scale reactor was simulated in detail. The evolution of the bed in-
ventory, solid circulation rate, and the residence time distributions of 
the oxygen carrier (OC) and char were obtained to get a better insight 
into the complex relationships between hydrodynamics and reactions. 
To improve the residence time of char and consequently to extend the 
reaction path of both homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions in the 
FR, a taller FR was proposed. Instead of the originally designed single 
coal feeding point, a structure with two opposing coal feeding points was 

proposed to improve the mixing among combustible gases and OC, as 
well as enhancing the diffusivity of the volatile plume throughout the 
FR. Using the same geometry as [541], Chen et al. [542] studied carbon 
conversion  improvement  based  on  the  ideas  for  the  residence  time 
extension  for  char  particles,  char  and  OC  mixing  enhancement,  and 
based  on  the  char  particles  being  physically  separation  in  a  carbon 
stripper  (CS)  and  recycled  to  the  FR.  The  full-scale  CPFD  simulation 
revealed that the carbon capture efficiency of the FR alone was quite low 
(42.3 %) when the gasification carbon stripper (GCS) was  off. In this 
case, even optimizations of the FR, such as including an additional coal 
feeding point or increasing the height of the FR, did not increase the 
carbon capture significantly. However, turning the GCS improved the 
carbon  capture  efficiency  significantly.  The  carbon  conversion  was 
further improved by designing and optimizing a new non-mechanical 
valve  integrated  with  a  four-chamber  CS/GCS,  which  could  function 
as  the  loop  seal  and  carbon  stripper  simultaneously.  The  new  design 
could be operated in both CS and GCS modes depending on the fluid-
ization  agent  and  operational  velocity.  Carbon  capture  efficiencies  of 
97.8 % and 98.9 % were achieved for GCS and CS modes, respectively. 
Liu et al. [543] carried out 3D MP-PIC simulations with comprehensive 
reaction models including devolatilization, char and volatiles combus-
tion,  and  the  production  of  pollutants  to  study  oxy-fuel  combustion 
behavior in a micro-fluidized bed with a height of 0.106 m and diameter 
of 0.01 m. Based on the validated simulations, useful information was 
obtained,  including  the  gas  and  particle  velocities,  distributions  of 
particle  concentration  and  temperature,  and  pollutant  emissions. 
Furthermore,  four  different  fluidization  regimes  were  reproduced: 
bubbling, fluidization, turbulent fluidization, and pneumatic conveying. 
Coal particle injection did not affect the particle phase properties such as 
the gas-solid flow structure and particle concentration and temperature 
distributions.  However,  it  significantly  affected  the  CO2,  SO2  and  NO 
concentration distributions. A narrower width of the CO2 concentration 
curve peak was observed, as the fluidizing gas flow rate increased and 
the curve shape changed from flat to a curve with a peak. The curve of 
SO2 formation contained a single peak, while the double or multi-peak 
structure was found in that of the NO formation. The best regime for 
implementing  oxy-fuel  combustion  was  found  to  be  fluidization  and 
turbulent  fluidization.  Reinking  et  al.  [544]  simulated  a  100  kWth 
chemical-looping with an oxygen uncoupling system (CLOU) operating 
at the University of Utah using the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor soft-
ware.  A  full  3D  model  of  both  reactors  with  loop  seals  and  cyclone 
separators was used for the calculations. The heights of the FR and AR 
were  5.7  and  6.0  m,  respectively,  and  253,000  cells  with  3.3 × 1010 
particles in 8 × 105  parcels were used for the simulations. The hydro-
dynamic settings, the drag model, the CLOU AR cuprous oxide oxida-
tion, and the FR cupric oxide reduction reaction kinetics mechanisms 
were  based  on  previously  completed  experimental  work.  The 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930182F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

carbon-hydrogen-nitrogen-oxygen-sulfur (CHNOS) method was used for 
coal  char  kinetics.  Devolatilization,  gasification,  and  homogeneous 
gas-phase reactions were also implemented based on the available data 
in the literature. The efficient oxidization of the oxygen carrier in the AR 
and the reduction of the oxygen carrier in the FR were predicted. Im-
mediate  volatile  burnout  was  predicted.  Coal  combustion  occurred 
throughout the fuel reactor and continued into the cyclone. Nitrogen gas 
leakage  into  the  FR  was  mostly  a  carryover  from  the  AR.  91.4  %  of 
carbon capture was predicted. Du et al. [545] investigated the exergy 
analysis  of  the  propane  dehydrogenation  (PDH)  process  in  a 
fluidized-bed  reactor  experimentally  and  numerically.  Detailed  distri-
butions of total exergy along with chemical and physical exergies in the 
fluidized-bed  reactor  were  quantified  based  on  the  numerical  pre-
dictions of the flow field, temperature field, and gas species concentra-
tion distributions, and the effects of operating conditions on the exergy 
efficiency were examined. Yang et al. [384] used the MPPICFoam solver 
available  on  the  OpenFOAM  platform  to  develop  a  reactive  MP-PIC 
model to study the effects of size-induced segregation on biomass gasi-
fication  in  a  three-dimensional  lab-scale  bubbling  fluidized  bed.  The 
cylindrical  reactor  had  a  diameter  and  height  of  0.05  m  and  0.5  m, 
respectively, with a 0.04 m diameter horizontal particle inlet at a height 
of 0.05 m. 9,702 cells were used for the final simulations after a grid 
independence study. Only 30 s of the process were simulated and drying, 
devolatilization,  heterogeneous  and  homogeneous  reactions  were 
included in the modeling. The Wen and Yu [30] drag model was used for 
the calculation. The results demonstrated that obvious radial and axial 
segregation  impacted  the  spatial  distribution  of  the  temperature  and 
heat transfer of particles. Expanding the PSD width improved the gasi-
fication performance. 

Using a similar geometry, approach, and conditions to [384], in 2020 
Yang et al. [385] studied the impact of the particle size distribution on 
the dynamical and thermal properties of rising bubbles. Enlarging the 
particle  size  distribution  width  decreased  the  pressure,  density,  and 
rising velocity of the rising bubbles and increased the volume, the aspect 
ratio, the thermal conductivity and temperature of the bubble, and the 
mass fraction of combustible gas in the lower part of the bed. Based on a 
similar geometry, Yang et al. [386] also investigated air-blown gasifi-
cation  with  a  continuous  coal  feedstock  using  the  reactive  MP-PIC 
approach.  Thermochemical  distributions  of  coal  particles  such  as  the 
temperature, heat transfer coefficient, constituents, residence time, slip 
velocity and particle Reynolds number were found to be notably affected 
by the lateral and vertical segregation in the gasifier. Coal particles had a 
low  temperature,  large  heat  transfer  coefficient,  and  high  content  of 
moisture  and  volatiles  close  to  the  coal  inlet.  Coal  gasification  was 
improved by enlarging the air flow rate because of the promotion of char 
conversion. An “early peak with a long tail” structure was found for the 
coal particle residence time distribution. Furthermore, Yang et al. [387] 
coupled the heat transfer and chemical reactions to study biomass-steam 
gasification in a lab-scale spouted gasifier using the MP-PIC approach. 
The spouted gasifier had a height of 1.7 m, a width of 0.23 m, and a 
depth of 0.04 m, and the dimensions were divided into 240, 32, and 5 
elements, respectively. After the successful validation of the model, it 
was used to study the spout-annulus boundary, the spatial distributions 
of biomass particles, the gas-solid flux, and the gas species along with 
the  influences  of  operating  parameters  on  the  performance  of  the 
gasifier. A similar effect was observed to the well-known Brazil nut effect 
(the segregation of biomass and sand species due to density differences 
and the accumulation of large-diameter biomass particles near the bed 
surface).  The  spout-annulus  boundary  was  not  affected  by  high  tem-
peratures. The main concentration of the gaseous products was in the 
fountain region. Increasing the bed height and biomass diameter led to 
an increase in the H2 mole fraction and a decrease in other gas species. 
H2  production was promoted by the steam-to-biomass ratio and lower 
quantities of H2  were produced at higher gasification temperatures. In 
the dense region, the gas and solid vertical fluxes were decreased when 
the bed height was enlarged and increased when the steam-to-biomass 

ratio increased. Wan et al. [388] simulated a pilot-scale dual fluidized 
bed  for  biomass  gasification  using  a  reactive  MP-PIC  approach.  The 
hydrodynamics of different components operating under different flow 
regimes were explored. The simulation captured the elutriation of fine 
particles in the freeboard of the gasifier and a dense bottom and dilute 
top structure in the combustor. In the cyclone, a strong swirling flow 
along with the fishtailing phenomenon was observed. The heat carrier 
particle  size  distribution  was  found  to  have  a  negligible  on  the  gas 
thermal property of the lower part of both the combustor and gasifier. 
However, the PSD had a noticeable impact in the upper regions of the 
combustor and gasifier. A wider PSD increased the contents of gas spe-
cies. Simultaneously, Wan et al. [389] also studied particle-scale ther-
mochemical  properties  and  the  distribution  of  biomass  particles  in  a 
dual fluidized-bed gasifier by simulating a full-loop pilot-scale (1 MWth) 
dual  fluidized-bed  biomass  gasifier  using  the  MP-PIC  approach.  The 
preferential distribution of biomass material near the bed surface was 
strengthened  due  to  the  species  segregation  caused  by  the  size  and 
density  differences.  The  undesired  segregation  phenomenon  inhibited 
the sufficient mixing of the biomass and heat carrier. The highest tem-
perature value was found near the bed surface for biomass particles. A 
wider  PSD  of  heat  carrier  particles  promoted  biomass  dispersion.  Jia 
et al. [546] established a three-dimensional compressible CFB model for 
the co-combustion of solid waste from oil shale retorting and cornstalk 
particles  using  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor  software.  Steady 
combustion was achieved when the primary air rate was 80 % and the 
mixing ratio of RW to CS was 6:4. The co-combustion of solid waste from 
oil shale retorting and cornstalk was found to be feasible, as when the 
solid waste from oil shale retorting was used on its own, the combustion 
conditions were difficult to adjust due to its low heat value and high ash 
content. Ahmed and Lasa [547] demonstrated the scalability of CLC to 
efficiently capture biomass-derived CO2  using a 3D-CPFD model. Pro-
ducer  gas  from  biomass  gasification  as  a  fuel  and  a  high-performing 
nickel-based oxygen carrier were used in the process. To describe the 
kinetics of the oxygen carrier, a new solid-state model was developed. 
Based on the calculation, a 100 kW CLC reactor could yield a 92 % CO2 
◦
C, 1 atm and 50 kg/m2 mass flux in the fuel reactor. To 
capture at 650 
yield an energetically efficient CLC process, a slightly exothermic fuel 
reactor combined with an exothermic air reactor was needed. Zhou et al. 
[390] carried out a three-dimensional simulation of a bubbling fluidized 
biomass gasifier using the MP-PIC approach to explore the effect of the 
PSD on the gas yield. A higher total gas yield, molar concentration of 
combustible  gases,  and  carbon  conversion  efficiency  were  obtained 
when the PSD width increased. Furthermore, a large PSD width resulted 
in a large axial distribution of the mole fraction of combustible gases. 
Finally,  Cui  et  al.  [548]  developed  a  3-D  MP-PIC  model  with  a  coal 
combustion  process  to  investigate  a  pressurized  (3-9  bar)  CFB  with 
S-CO2  wall  boundaries.  Enhanced  combustion  and  heat  transfer, 
increased  combustion  efficiency  and  lower  pollution  emissions  were 
observed  under  the  pressurized  conditions  compared  with  the  atmo-
spheric pressure conditions. Combustion efficiency was also increased 
by up to 2.65 % by increasing the excess air ratio. 

small-scale 

low-temperature 

investigation  of  a  fluidized-bed  system  using 

3.4.3.58. DDPM. In  2013,  Ryan  et  al.  [188]  published  the  first-ever 
numerical 
the 
ANSYS-FLUENT  DDPM  approach,  taking  into  consideration  reactive 
kWth) 
gas-solid  flows.  A 
post-combustion  solid  sorbent  carbon  capture  reactor  fluidized  bed 
using  a  silica-supported  amine  sorbent  was  simulated,  employing  the 
two-fluid model and Eulerian-Lagrangian (DDPM and MP-PIC) methods 
to  investigate  the  hydrodynamics  and  carbon  dioxide  adsorption. 
ANSYS-FLUENT  and  the  BARRACUDA  Virtual  Reactor  software  with 
different particle drag models and various meshing methods were used 
to develop the model. The strengths and weaknesses of both the software 
and modeling approaches were discussed. The results of the simulations 
demonstrated that, for the given reactor design, the DDPM model was 

(1 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930183F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

unstable, while  the MP-PIC  of BARRACUDA was  able to simulate the 
system with appropriate simplification assumptions. However, as par-
allelization was not possible, it was claimed that computational issues 
should be expected for expansion to larger systems. A stable solution was 
also  provided  by  the  TFM  simulations  using  the  appropriate  simplifi-
cation assumptions. The above-mentioned simplification assumptions in 
the geometry and operating conditions for BARRACUDA and TFM cal-
culations were made to reduce the complexity (number of cells). The 
DDPM simulation was stabler and faster when a cut-cell mesh with fewer 
computational  cells  but  a  better  maximum-to-minimum  cell  volume 
ratio was used. Different solid volume fractions in steady-state condi-
tions  were  predicted  by  DDPM  and  TFM  cut-cell  meshes  due  to  the 
particle resolution in the DDPM simulations. Reducing the number of 
particles per parcel in the DDPM could reduce the discrepancies between 
the TFM and DDPM simulations at the cost of a higher computational 
time. 

In 2014, Adamczyk et al. [321] used the DDPM model to study the 
combustion process in a large-scale industrial CFB boiler (see Fig. 3.87). 
The CFB combustion chamber had a rectangular cross-section of 27.6 
m × 10.6 m and a height of 48 m. To reduce the calculation time, only 
half  of  the  combustion  chamber  was  simulated.  To  control  the  boiler 
mass  load,  the  particle  recirculation  process  (cyclones  were  not 
modeled) and interphase hydrodynamic properties in the original CFD 
code were extended by adding UDFs. The results of pseudo-combustion 
simulations (hot and non-reactive case with constant gas density) were 
compared  with  that  of  the  two-fluid  model  approach  and  against 
measured data. The pseudo combustion simulations were performed for 
two cases with boiler thermal loads of 80 % and 100 %. Furthermore, the 
combustion  process  was  modeled  for  air-fuel  combustion,  and  the 
simulation results were compared with experimental data. A constant 
rate  devolatilization  model  was  used  for  the  simulation  and  two-step 
homogeneous reactions for the gaseous phase. As a result, the released 
volatiles reacted with O2  to produce  CO, H2O, SO2, and  N2, and in a 
second  step,  the  produced  CO  reacted  with  O2  to  produce  CO2.  To 
simplify the combustion model, only one heterogeneous surface reaction 
was  implemented  to  combust  the  char  particles  and  form  CO2.  1.3 
million  cells  were  used  to  simulate  the  combustion  process  and  the 
overall number of tracked parcels was maintained between 10 and 12 
million. A modified version of the Gidaspow drag model [10] was used 
for the drag correlation [806]. For the reactive cases, the computation 
time  was  approximately  three  months  on  a  computer  cluster  of  two 
computational nodes, each equipped with 2 × 4 core processors (Intel 
Xeon CPU E5620) and a 16 GB operating memory. 560 s of the physical 
time  were  simulated  and  the  averaging  time  exceeded  60  s.  As  a 

Gaussian node-based averaging kernel was used for the solid phase with 
a Gaussian factor of 6, it was possible to use a relatively large time step 
of 0.1 s. 

In  the  same  year,  Adamczyk  et  al.  [322]  also  used  the 
ANSYS-FLUENT DDPM model with a similar modeling approach to their 
previous work [321] to simulate the coal oxy-fuel combustion process in 
a  pilot-scale  experimental  circulating  fluidized  bed  with  a  maximum 
thermal load of 0.1 MW and a riser tube height and diameter of 4.98 m 
and  0.98 m, respectively.  Numerical simulations were  carried out for 
three O2/CO2  compositions of 21, 30, and 35 vol% of the oxygen, and 
the sensitivity of the model to changes in the combustion conditions was 
investigated. The numerical results were compared with the tempera-
ture profile measured within the combustion chamber of a pilot-scale 
test rig. It was found that although all evaluated results showed com-
parable  tendencies  to  the  experimental  data,  the  riser  temperature 
profiles were over-predicted for all the cases investigated. 

Furthermore, in 2015, Adamczyk et al. [323] used a similar approach 
to  simulate another  compact industrial  CFB  boiler  with  a  rectangular 
cross-section  of  22×10  m2  and  a  height  of  42  m.  The  goal  was  to 
determine how the geometrical model simplification affected the pre-
dicted  mass  distribution  and  temperature  profiles  by  simulating  the 
whole CFB and simplified combustion chamber with UDFs for recircu-
lation. 1,300,000 tetrahedral and hexahedral elements were used for the 
full-loop calculation and 600,000 elements for the simplified model. For 
the simplified boiler model, 1 month of wall-clock time simulation was 
necessary to obtain a solution over 350 s, whereas for the entire CFB, this 
time  increased  to  3  months.  The  simulation  results  were  compared 
against measured data available from the real operation of the boiler, 
and trends comparable to the measured data were obtained. The influ-
ence  of  radiative  heat  transfer  on  the  temperature  profile  was  also 
investigated. Interestingly, it was found that radiative heat transfer had 
a minor influence on the temperature profile. In the same year, Klima-
nek et al. [324] numerically modeled the riser of a small-scale experi-
mental CFB coal gasifier using the ANSYS-FLUENT DDPM approach. The 
simulated part had a barrel-like bottom section with a diameter of 0.38 
m and a height of 0.97 m, connected to a 3.74 m riser section. A total of 
14  homogeneous  and  heterogeneous  reactions  were  considered.  The 
results  of  the  simulations  were  compared  with  the  experiments  per-
formed.  A  maximum  number  of  90,800  quadrilateral  and  tetrahedral 
elements were used to create the mesh. The averaging time of 90 s of 
real-time  flow  was  used  for  the  simulations.  Two  case  studies  were 
investigated (gasification in air and air/steam mixture). 

In 2017, Massoudi Farid et al. [325] used the ANSYS-FLUENT DDPM 
model to investigate how coal feeder positions and coal feeding rates 

Fig. 3.87. Distribution of the solid volume fraction on external boiler walls in a time-averaged form calculated using the DDPM and two-fluid approaches for two 
mesh resolutions (reproduced from reference [321], with permission of Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930184F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

affected the operating conditions of an industrial-scale CFB combustor. 
The capacity of the CFB was 340 MWel with a combustor cross-section of 
34 × 8 m2 and a height of 42 m. Only half of the combustor was simu-
lated  and  cyclones  were  replaced  by  UDFs.  Similarly  to  [321],  a 
constant-rate  devolatilization  model  was  implemented  along  with 
two-step  homogeneous reactions  for  the gaseous  phase, and  only  one 
surface  heterogeneous  reaction.  Also,  when  a  Gaussian  node-based 
averaging  kernel  was  employed,  a  relatively  large  time  step  of  0.1  s 
was  used.  Particle  size  distribution  was  used  for  both  coal  and  sand 
particles. Based on a comprehensive mesh study, 1.6 million cells were 
used for the simulation. The last 60 s of the 600 s simulation were used 
for time averaging. The computational time for each case was approxi-
mately 5 months on a computer with 8 dual-core i7 processors and a 64 
GB  operating  memory.  Various  calculated  operation  indexes  were 
compared  with  operating  data  obtained  from  the  real  CFB  and  good 
agreement  was  found.  Changing  the  coal  feeder  positions  and  coal 
feeding rates had the positive effect of decreasing erosion on the roof of 
the combustor, near the side walls, and on heat transfer to the upper part 
of the combustor and wing wall tubes. Furthermore, lower solids con-
centrations on the roof of the combustor and near the side walls were 
obtained after the design change and helped decrease erosion in those 
regions.  Adamczyk  [326]  discussed  a  three-dimensional  numerical 
simulation of large-scale industrial CFB boilers, working under air-fuel, 
and  oxy-fuel  combustion.  One important  element of  the  investigation 
was the experimental validation of the obtained numerical results, car-
ried out by starting from a simple model (geometrically and physically) 
and  adding  the  modeling  complexities  step  by  step.  The  impact  of 
radiative heat transfer on the predicted temperature profile was inves-
tigated using a novel model (an extended version of the WSGG model) 
for retrieving the radiative properties of gases under oxy-fuel combus-
tion.  To  reduce  computational  time,  the  entire  CFB  geometry  was 
simplified  and  the  combustion  chamber  was  only  simulated.  The  cal-
culations  were  validated  by  comparing  the  temperature  and  pressure 
profiles  against  measured  data  collected  during  boiler  air-fuel  and 
oxy-fuel combustion. The author also studied the model’s stability and 
sensitivity  to  changes  in  the  oxidizer  composition  and  evaluated  its 
response to the combustion conditions changing from an air-fuel to an 
oxy-fuel  combustion  process.  Some  discrepancies  were  observed  be-
tween  the  evaluated  results  of  oxy-fuel  combustion  and  air-fuel  com-
bustion. Simulations revealed that the retrofitting procedure of the CFB 
boiler  was  computationally  expensive.  Switching  the  oxidizer  from 
air-fuel  to  oxy-fuel  brought  large  difficulties  and  temperature  field 
fluctuation. The OXY-WSGG model for spectrally active gases also added 
further instabilities regarding the solution convergence. 

In  2018,  Klimanek  and  Bigda  [118]  compared  the  MP-PIC  model 
using the CPFD approach of the BARRACUDA Virtual Reactor software 
and  the  ANSYS-FLUENT  DDPM  approach  to  simulate  and  predict  the 
producer gas composition of CO2-enhanced coal gasification in a pres-
surized circulating fluidized-bed reactor (see Fig. 3.88). The simulated 

reactor had a barrel-like bottom section with a diameter of 0.16 m and a 
height of 0.543 m connected to a 2.674 m riser section, and a maximum 
capacity of 100 kg/h of coal. The external char recirculation was not 
simulated. The results of a small-scale test facility were used to validate 
the simulation. It was shown that except for some local gas composition 
discrepancies  from  the  experiment,  the  simulated  producer  gas  com-
positions  were  in  good  agreement  with  the  experimental  data.  There 
the  data  obtained  by 
were  considerable  differences  between 
ANSYS-FLUENT  and  BARRACUDA.  The  temperature  distribution  pre-
dicted  by  ANSYS-FLUENT  was  in  better  agreement  with  the  experi-
mental data. The BARRACUDA software also predicted a solids mass, 
which  was  around  20-30  %  higher,  affecting  the  distribution  of  the 
solids and the local gas compositions. It should be emphasized that the 
settings of the two CFD models were not the same; completely different 
turbulence models, devolatilization models, reaction mechanisms, and 
kinetic  parameters  were  used.  For  example,  in  the  ANSYS-FLUENT 
calculation, the standard k-ε model was used for turbulence and chem-
ical percolation devolatilization (CPD) for the devolatilization, while in 
BARRACUDA large eddy simulation was applied to the turbulence and 
´
Scią˙zko  model  [1422]  to  the  devolatilization.  Moreover,  85,000 
the 
hexahedral elements were used for grid generation in ANSYS-FLUENT, 
while  102,500  hexahedral  and  tetrahedral  elements  were  used  to 
build  the  mesh  for  the  BARRACUDA  calculations.  Finally,  it  was 
concluded that, although the two models were different in terms of the 
mesh sizes, numbers of particles tracked, number of equations solved, 
etc.,  and  they  were  run  on  different  computers,  the  simulations  per-
formed  using  BARRACUDA  were  considerably  faster  than  those  per-
formed using ANSYS-FLUENT. 

Adamczyk et al. [327] utilized information collected using the DDPM 
approach  for  an  arbitrary  isothermal  furnace  to  tune  the  empirical 
correlations  of  a  semi-empirical  model.  Tuning  data  is  normally 
collected  during  measurements.  However,  when  designing  a  new 
furnace such data is not available. The DDPM calculation results were 
used in this case. For the validation, measurement data from a 235 MWel 
CFB with a cross-section of 21 × 10 m2 and a height of 43 m were used. 
141 s of the real process was simulated in four days. 3,000,000 parcels 
and 1,250,000 tetrahedral, hexahedral, and prism elements were used 
for the calculations. The flow parameters obtained, such as the volume 
fraction  distributions  and  other  flow  fields,  could  be  utilized  in  the 
semi-empirical  code,  making  it  possible  to  comprehensively  model  a 
CFB system, showing detailed modeling of reactions and the formation 
and reduction of emissions. This approach leads to a reduction in the 
simulation time and can guarantee that the new boiler construction will 
meet the defined working conditions. The results obtained by the DDPM 
approach for both non-reacting and reacting cases showed a promising 
tendency to reproduce the time-averaged values of parameters, such as 
the pressure drop or the distribution of the solid volume fraction. There 
was  also  good  agreement  between  the  measurements  and  both  simu-
lated  cases.  The  main  disagreements  were  found  near  the  membrane 

Fig.  3.88. Comparison  of  producer  gas  composition  yield  calculated  in  BARRACUDA  and  ANSYS-FLUENT  (reproduced  from  reference  [118],  with  permission 
of Elsevier). 

0Mole fraction [%]10203040506070CH4COCO2H2N2TAR0Mole fraction [%]10203040506070CH4COCO2H2N2TARExp. (Case 1)BARRACUDA(Case 1)FLUENT(Case 1)Exp. (Case 1)BARRACUDA(Case 1)FLUENT(Case 1)ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930185F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

walls  and  in  the  velocity  profiles  of  the  solid  phase,  which  could  be 
improved  by  enhancing  the  mesh  resolution  and  adjusting  the  model 
coefficients, such as the specularity coefficient, tangential and normal 
components of the particle wall reflection, or the particle wall restitution 
coefficient (only if a partial differential model for the granular temper-
ature was chosen). Furthermore, it was observed that to generate input 
data  for  the  semi-empirical  code,  the  non-reacting  case  could  be 
sufficient. 

In 2019, Wu et al. [328] conducted a DDPM simulation of the riser of 
the CFB oxy-fuel combustion process with different O2 concentrations to 
investigate  the  effects  of  gas  turbulence,  heat  and  mass  transfer,  and 
homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions. The riser height was 5.2 m 
and  88,004  hexahedral cells were applied  to discretize  the  geometry. 
115,000 and 426,000 parcels were used to simulate coal and sand par-
ticles, respectively. The calculated gas composition, carbon conversion, 
temperature, and particle flow structure were used to analyze the results 
qualitatively and quantitatively. The particle size distribution (PSD) had 
a significant effect on the simulation results. An increase in the inlet O2 
concentration resulted in a decrease in the superficial gas velocity and 
an increase in the chemical reaction rate, which in turn changed the coal 
particles’  flow  structure  and  combustion  characteristics.  Wang  et  al. 
[329]  carried  out  a  three-dimensional  simulation  of  a  1-m-high 
fluidized-bed  absorber  to  investigate  the  CO2  capture  process  with 
potassium-based sorbents using the DDPM approach. 24,650 cells were 
used for discretization. The effects of the sorbent size distribution on the 
CO2 concentration and temperature field and the influence of operating 
velocity on the sorbent size distribution and bed expansion were eval-
uated. When the PSD was taken into account, the solid volume fraction 
near the bed surface was more obviously non-uniform. Meanwhile, the 
temperature  difference  in  the  bed  was  enhanced  when  the  PSD  was 
taken into consideration. Increasing the operating velocity reduced the 
mean particle diameter at the bottom of the bed. 

Finally,  in  2020,  Gu  et  al.  [330]  developed  a  three-dimensional 
DDPM model to simulate the oxy-fuel combustion process in the CFB 
boiler  on  three  different  scales  (lab-scale,  pilot-scale,  and  industrial 
scale, and from 0.1 MWth  to 330 MWel). Increasing the thermal inputs 
decreased  the  cross-section  thermal  load  gradually  and  increased  the 
carbon  conversion  ratio.  A  more  uniform  particle  velocity  field  was 
observed in the lab-scale and pilot-scale oxy-fuel CFB compared to that 
in the industry-scale CFB. Lower CO, NO, and SO2 emissions were pre-
dicted  in  the  industry-scale  oxy-fuel  CFB  boilers  than  those  on  the 
lab-scale  and  pilot-scale.  Therefore,  the  larger  oxy-fuel  combustion 
power plant could be beneficial due to higher carbon capture and lower 
pollutant emissions. 

3.4.3.59. Other  hybrid  methods. In  2017,  Schneiderbauer  et  al.  [331] 
used  a  reactive  version  of  their  hybrid  model  in  a  lab-scale  iron  ore 
reduction  fluidized  bed.  The  fractional  reduction  of  the  iron  ore  and 
conversion  rates  were  correctly  predicted  by  the  model  and  the  tem-
peratures  and  reaction  gas  consumption  due  to  the  reduction  process 
were  obtained.  Schneiderbauer  et  al.  [1401]  also  applied  a  reactive 
version of their hybrid model to olefin polymerization fluidized beds. At 
each DPM trajectory, they examined the olefin polymerization for the 
catalyst profile (activity over time), the reaction gases’ pressure-driven 
solubility in the polymer particles, the particles’  crystallinity, and the 
corresponding reaction masses and reaction heat. In the next step, these 
were mapped to the TFM approach as additional mass and energy source 
terms.  Two  cases  of  an  inert  bidisperse  fluidized  bed  and  an 
industrial-scale  olefin  polymerization  fluidized  bed  were  used  to 
demonstrate the predictive capability and numerical efficiency of this 
reactive hybrid modeling approach. The segregation in the polydisperse 
gas-solid flow, the particle growth, and its impact on the hydrodynamics 
of the bed were correctly predicted. The computational time required for 
the  hybrid  calculation  was  approximately  15  %  greater  compared  to 
TFM simulation with one solid phase for the presented cases, although 

the number of tracer particles plays an important role in the amount, by 
which the computation time increases. 

4. Conclusion and prospects 

Several  engineering  applications  in  the  chemical  and  energy  in-
dustries  are  based  on  fluidized-bed  technology,  where  solid  particles 
with a wide range of shapes and sizes undergo time-dependent turbulent 
flow  motion,  thermochemical  reactions,  and  mass,  and  heat  transfer. 
Solid particles in the fluidized beds may also experience complex phe-
nomena such as pyrolysis, oxidation, shrinking, segregation, agglomer-
ation,  and  attrition  that  inevitably  take  place,  but  many  challenges 
remain to be overcome before their effects on the process are fully un-
derstood. Experimental measurement, although it is an expensive pro-
cess  usually  carried  out  at  a  lab-scale,  contributes  to  this  field  of 
research, providing basic knowledge of the investigated process to un-
derpin  design  and  development.  However,  gaining detailed  operation 
data  from  fluidized-bed  reactors  is  difficult  because  of  the  lack  of 
accessibility, the harsh environment, and the costs of measuring devices. 
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) provides qualitative and in many 
cases  quantitative  predictions  of  the  real  process.  The  low  costs,  the 
adaptability and the possibility to obtain detailed information are the 
main reasons why CFD is frequently applied to fluidized-bed systems. 
However, fluidized-bed systems pose a major challenge for numerical 
simulation  due  to  the  nonlinear  and  non-equilibrium  behavior  of  the 
gas-solid flows. The particles may, for example, be spread quite differ-
ently in the control volume, which leads to various gas pressure drops 
and  drag  forces.  In  engineering  practice,  the  numerical  simulation  of 
gas-solid fluidized beds faces three major challenges:  

• The particles feature complex geometries with a wide range of size 
distributions, where larger particles may have internal temperature 
and composition gradients. Furthermore, the particles are in contact 
with the gas phase, which may be air or other gases released by the 
particles themselves, resulting in a large number of chemical com-
ponents that appear as intermediates or end products (e.g. volatiles 
from solid fuels or CO2 from the calcination process). 

• Solid particles may experience complex phenomena such as pyroly-
sis, oxidation, shrinking, segregation, agglomeration, and attrition, 
leading to continuous changes in their shape, size, and composition 
(e.g. combustion or gasification process).  

• The number of particles is in the range of millions to billions. 

Further challenges are faced due to the large ranges of spatial and 
temporal scales. For instance, the spatial scales (micro-scale and meso- 
scale flow structures in the range of centimeters or even micrometers) 
should  be  simulated  in  a  large-scale  reactor  (40 × 10× 50  m3).  The 
temporal scale required time steps in the order of 1 ms or even less and 
some phenomena (e.g. sorbent reactions) can take hours in a real process 
to reach the steady-state. Another challenge to the numerical simulation 
of  gas-solid  fluidized  beds  is  the  wide  velocity  ranges.  In  the  CFB 
combustor, for example, the secondary air jets may have local velocities 
in the range of 50 m/s to 100 m/s. High local velocities will on the one 
hand  require  fine  time  steps  and  on  the  other  hand  likely  cause 
convergence problems. Last but not least, the wide range of solid volume 
fractions ranges from nearly zero up to the packing density. 

Conventional  numerical  formulations  such  as  homogeneous  as-
sumptions in hydrodynamic, thermochemical reactions, mass, and heat 
transfer cannot reproduce the real process underlying the complexity of 
gas-solid  flows,  resulting  in  the  incorrect  prediction  of  flow  regimes. 
Advanced  simulation  approaches  that  take  into  account  gas-particle, 
particle-particle,  and  particle-wall  interactions  (four-way  coupling 
approach) are more suitable. Examples include the two-fluid model and 
the discrete-particle model. While both phases - the gas and solid phases 
- are treated as continua in the first model, in the second model the solid 
phase is approximated by discrete particles, each of which has its own 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930186F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

computed trajectory. The two-fluid approach loses the information on 
single  particles  and  closures,  based  on  the  kinetic  theory  of  granular 
flows and used to close the system of equations. In the discrete-particle 
model,  the  particle-particle/wall  interactions  are  computed  either  by 
stochastic  or  deterministic  algorithms  using  the  soft-sphere  or  hard- 
sphere model. The difficulties arise in defining the appropriate numer-
ical model to simulate the fluidized-bed systems, providing acceptable 
accuracy  and  reproducible  results  within  a  reasonable  computational 
time. The most common approach is the two-fluid model, which can be 
applied  to  large-scale  applications  with  a  reasonable  computational 
time. The next step is to use the hybrid model or the discrete-particle 
model  in  combination  with  models  based  on  representative  particles 
(parcels)  when  very  large  particle  numbers  are  of  interest.  However, 
these  approaches  still  have  difficulty  reliably  describing  many 

phenomena such as complex particle shapes, wide particle size distri-
butions, segregation, agglomeration, attrition, comminution processes 
(e.g. abrasion, chipping, grinding, breaking due to thermal shocks, and 
devolatilization due to overpressure inside particle). 

A  comprehensive  summary  of  the  mathematical  formulations,  ad-
vantages,  and  disadvantages  will  be  of  great  benefit  for  the  readers. 
Therefore,  in  this  study  and  the  existing  body  of  literature,  the  chal-
lenges  and  unresolved  questions  on  the  developments  of  3D-CFD 
mathematical  models  and  their  applications  to  various  fluidized-bed 
systems are summarized as follows (see Table 4.1):  

• Two-fluid model: In the field of multiphase simulations, the two-fluid 
model  has  a  large  role,  if  not  the  largest.  More  than  a  thousand 
studies were found during this review, around 80 % of which are cold 

Table 4.1 
Evaluation of the numerical models, applied to chemical and energy processes: Scaling applied: very high (+ + + + +), high (+ + + +), medium (+ + +), low (+ +), 
very low (+).   

Application to energetic, chemical, and metallurgical processes (including complex phenomena such as 

pyrolysis, oxidation, shrinking, segregation, agglomeration, attrition, and/or cohesive behavior) 

Particulate systems with PSDs taken into account 

Non-spherical particles taken into account 

Model accuracya 

Computing efforta 

Available softwareb 

Progress made  

Challenges ahead  

a Assuming same reactor geometry, configurations, and numerical setups 
b Including in-house codes and commercial CFD programs 

Two-fluid model 
(TFM) 

Hybrid model 
(HM) 

Discrete-particle model (DPM) 
Hard-sphere 
Soft-sphere 
model 
model 

+ + + + +

+ + +

+ + +

+

+ +

+

+ +

+ +

+ + + +

+ + + + +

+ + +

+

+ + +

+ + +

+ + + + +

+

+ + + +

+ + + + +

+ + + +

+ + + + +

+ + + + +

+ +

+ + + +

+ +

• The results of the numerical models were validated against 

measurements  

• Closures for gas↔particle and particle↔particle interactions were 

developed, e.g. aerodynamic surface forces (e.g. drag, Saffman, and 
Magnus force) and adhesive forces with and without physical contact (e. 
g. electrostatic force and solid bridge)  

• Complex processes were performed such as pyrolysis, gasification, and 
combustion considering phenomena such as particle shapes, wide 
particle size distributions, segregation, agglomeration, and attrition  

• Large-scale parallelization on multi-CPUs and/or multi-GPUs was 

realized 

• Two-fluid model (e.g. simulations of complicated industrial-scale re-
actors, progress in the field of heterogeneous drag models, and popu-
lation balance modeling)  

• Discrete-particle model (e.g. simulations of various fluidized bed 

systems (without reaction mechanisms), consideration of chemical 
reactions, heat and mass transfer, implementation of advanced models 
to increase accuracy and simulation speed such as the coarse-grained 
parcel model and the Eulerian-Lagrangian-Lagrangian approach)  
• Hybrid model (e.g. progress in the implementation of heterogeneous 
drag models, the use of the coarse-grained parcel model and the 
Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian approach to increase the accuracy and 
simulation speed, simulations of complicated industrial-scale reactors) 
• Accurate closures for gas↔particle and particle↔particle interactions  
• 3D simulations of reactive and turbulent gas-solid flows with non- 

spherical particles and PSDs  

• Two-fluid model (e.g. simulating the particle history to consider cycle- 
dependent reactions, considering the particle size distribution, and 
developing a generally valid drag model)  

• Discrete-particle model (e.g. reducing grid size beyond the particle 

scale; the standard approach of representing a group of similar particles 
as a representative parcel is inappropriate in the context of large eddy 
simulations; the step up to industrial-scale applications is still rather 
large, hindered by the technical feasibility of high-performance 
computers)  

• Hybrid model (e.g. solving the problem of satisfying the mass 

conservation of the solid phase for the DDPM model, including models 
to consider heat and mass transfer inside the large particles (thick 
particle models) and reducing grid size- beyond the particle scale)  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930187F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

flow simulations dealing with topics such as drag modeling and hy-
drodynamics.  One  main  reason  why  the  two-fluid  model  is 
frequently  applied  to  fluidized-bed  systems  is  the  computational 
effort.  As  all  phases  are  modeled  as  continua,  only  a  fraction  of 
equations need to be solved compared to other numerical models. 
This lowers the computational costs by several orders of magnitude. 
This review also shows that the two-fluid model has already been 
used to simulate a wide variety of reactive gas-solid flows. Most are 
found in the field of pyrolysis, gasification and combustion processes, 
or  CO2  capture  technologies,  but  other  processes  have  also  been 
simulated,  such  as  methanol-to-olefins  and  electric  or  magnetic 
assisted fluidized-bed  modeling. However,  the continuum assump-
tion  for  all  phases  leads  to  significant  simplifications,  and  closure 
models  are  needed  to  describe  the  solid  continuum  phase  such  as 
viscosity and pressure. Accordingly, several unknowns prevent the 
problem from being described precisely. One approach to overcome 
this  issue  is  the  kinetic  theory  of  granular  flows.  In  this  model,  a 
granular  temperature  representing  the  particle  fluctuations  is 
defined.  A  transport  equation  for  the  evolution  of  the  granular 
temperature  can  be  derived  and  solved  numerically  to  obtain  the 
solid pressure and solid viscosity. In almost all publications found in 
the literature, the KTGF is used within the framework of the two- 
fluid  model.  Nevertheless,  this  model  also  includes  simplifications 
and empirical approaches. An important issue that is also mentioned 
in  other  numerical  models  is  gas-solid  interaction,  in  practice  the 
drag force. The conventional drag models (i.e. homogeneous models) 
usually  over-predict  the  drag  force.  For  this  reason,  structure- 
dependent  drag  models  such  as  the  EMMS  model  are  suggested. 
The  results  reveal  that  these  models  reproduce  the  measurements 
better than the conventional drag models, with few exceptions. The 
particles  are  assumed  to  be  spherical  in  the  two-fluid  model. 
Recently, this limitation has been discussed by developing new drag 
models  that  take  into  account  non-spherical  particles.  Another 
drawback of the model compared to the discrete-particle model is the 
lack  of  possibility  for  traceability  of  particles.  Reaction  rates  that 
depend on the number of reaction cycles (e.g. calcium looping re-
actions) are thus difficult to describe. All in all, it can be concluded 
that  the  two-fluid  model  is  already  a  standard  tool  for  simulating 
multiphase flow systems, but extensive validation is necessary due to 
the  large  number  of  unknown  factors  in  the  equations.  However, 
attempts are being made to carry out scale-up studies using statistical 
models and data from experiments on the laboratory scale, enabling 
more reliable predictions to be made.  

• Hard-sphere model: In recent decades, significant efforts have been 
made to develop a coupled CFD-DPM approach with the hard-sphere 
model to acquire advanced knowledge about the complex hydrody-
namics of gas-solid flows, which are encountered in a wide range of 
technologies. In the early stage of development, the coupled CFD- 
DPM simulations with the hard-sphere model were applied to two- 
dimensional or quasi-2D flows, whereas three-dimensional simula-
tions at lab-scale have been the focus of recent advances in this field. 
Most simulations were carried out assuming cold gas-solid flows (i.e. 
heat transfer and chemical reactions were not considered). The hard- 
sphere model was successfully applied to gain insights into complex 
phenomena such as agglomeration, breakup, deposition, and droplet 
collisions,  and  coalescence,  which  are  of  great  importance  in 
fluidized-bed systems and spray systems. In the context of the present 
review,  special  attention  is  paid  to  the  state-of-the-art  modeling 
techniques and publications in this area of research. The results ob-
tained from CFD-DPM simulations show that the application of the 
hard-sphere  model  realistically  predicts  the  physical  behavior  of 
such mechanisms in turbulent gas-solid flows. In comparison to the 
two-fluid,  hybrid,  and  CFD-DEM  models,  the  hard-sphere  model 
leads  to more accurate predictions, validated against experiments. 
For  simulating  fluidized-bed  systems,  in  which  long-term  multiple 
collisions occur, the hard-sphere model is computationally more or 

less  similar  to  the  soft-sphere  model  in  regions  with  high  particle 
velocities  (e.g.  the  spout  region).  However,  the  application  of  the 
hard-sphere model becomes impractical in nearly stagnant zones (e. 
g. the annulus region) due to the high computational cost. In contrast 
to the CFD-DEM model, very few studies on reactive flows can be 
found in the literature on, for example, drying technology and in-
jectors  of  internal  combustion  engines.  The  reason  for  that  is 
attributed to the complexity of such flows; thus, their modeling and 
validation are not trivial (the experiments often cannot provide a lot 
of data to be used for a detailed comparison). This topic is recom-
mended to be considered more intensely in future studies, enabling 
the hard-sphere model to be applied for reactive flows by taking into 
account the temperature distribution inside the particles, heat, and 
mass transfer rates between gas and dispersed phases, and chemical 
reactions. In most studies on CFD-DPM simulations with the hard- 
sphere  model  in  fluidized-bed  reactors,  among  other  particulate 
flows, spherical particles are assumed to simplify the modeling of the 
forces acting on the particles and the collision detection algorithm. 
However,  industrial  fluidized-bed  systems  mostly  include  non- 
spherical particles. The application of the hard-sphere model using 
non-spherical  particles  requires  a  long  computational  time  for  ac-
curate collision detection, implying a further limitation of the hard- 
sphere approach. This topic is still at the beginning of development 
and  more  efforts  are  therefore  needed  in  the  future  to  allow  the 
simulation of such complex flow configurations.  

• Soft-sphere model: Despite the great efforts and progress achieved in 
recent years to improve the accuracy of the two-fluid model, basic 
flow  properties  are  not  taken  into  account,  such  as  mixing  and 
segregation processes in polydisperse gas-solid flows, gas-solid sys-
tems with particles of complex shapes, sizes, and compositions, or 
heat  and  mass  transfer  with  a  temperature  distribution  inside  the 
particle. The soft-sphere model tracks individual particles and their 
properties  such  as  their  chemical  composition,  density,  diameter, 
shape, etc. which might change due to chemical reactions during the 
transient simulation. Compared to other numerical approaches (the 
two-fluid and the hybrid models), the numerical results obtained by 
the  soft-sphere  model  show  better  agreement  with  the  measure-
ments. However, CFD-DEM simulations have proven computation-
ally expensive when tracking hundreds of thousands of particles in 
gas-solid  flows  due  to  the  high  computational  cost  required  to 
detect particle-particle and particle-wall collisions. This is the reason 
why the CFD-DEM model, despite its advantages, is not applied to 
simulate  large-scale  fluidization  systems  as  frequently  as  the  two- 
fluid model or hybrid model. One advantage, which the CFD-DEM 
model  has  over  the  hard-sphere  model,  is  that  it  can  simulate 
simultaneous multiple particle  collisions at  a lower computational 
cost. A review of the literature on the CFD-DEM model shows that a 
considerable number of published papers are related to cold gas-solid 
flows, focusing at the early stage of development on 2D and quasi-2D 
simulations and recently on 3D simulations at the lab-scale. Although 
many authors mention real applications in their works, the modeling 
of turbulence, chemical reaction, and heat transfer is not a part of the 
CFD-DEM  simulation  in  most  cases.  This  simplification  is  usually 
accompanied  by  taking  into  consideration  spherical  particles  and 
neglecting a certain number of volume and surface forces, as well as 
the momentum of forces that act on the particles (e.g. Basset, Saff-
man,  Magnus,  and  electrostatic  forces).  Examples  of  studies  have 
been reported on fluidization behavior, mixing, and segregation of 
spherical and non-spherical particles, considering adhesive forces. It 
was found that the hydrodynamic behavior of gas-solid flows largely 
depends on the particles with their complex geometries, size distri-
butions, and material properties. The assumption of monodisperse 
spherical  particles  is  therefore  not  valid  for  the  CFD-DEM  simula-
tions. Furthermore, as conventional drag models usually over-predict 
the  drag  forces  and  under-predict  the  slip  velocities,  structure- 
dependent  drag  models  were  recommended  in  the  literature. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930188F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Progress  has  been  made  in  recent  years  in  modeling  gas-particle, 
particle-particle,  gas-wall,  and  particle-wall  heat  transfer  through 
convection,  conduction,  and  radiation.  However,  the  CFD-DEM 
simulations  applied  to  large  or  semi-industrial  test  facilities  still 
face major challenges due to the complexity of the process and the 
computational  cost.  The  coarse-grained  parcel  model  has  found  a 
way to deal with this issue, even making it possible to simulate semi- 
industrial-scale particulate systems  in a time frame  comparable to 
the two-fluid model. However, the step up to industrial-scale appli-
cations is still rather large, hindered by the technical feasibility of 
high-performance  computers.  All  in  all,  the  CFD-DEM  model  in 
combination with chemical reactions, heat, and mass transfer may 
become a standard tool for the design and development of fluidized- 
bed systems. Nevertheless, significant research efforts are required to 
make the CFD-DEM model as competitive as the present status of the 
two-fluid model.  

• Hybrid  model:  Although  the  hybrid  model  has  a  shorter  history 
compared to other numerical approaches, considerable contributions 
to model development were found in the literature and the number of 
publications using this model is rising year by year. This is because 
the hybrid models bridge the gap between phase-averaged models 
such as the two-fluid model and the discrete-particle models to take 
advantage of the capabilities of both approaches and to open up a 
new route into the simulation of large-scale systems. On one hand, 
since there is no need for any algorithm for the costly detection of 
particle-particle  and  particle-wall  collisions  to  calculate  particle- 
particle  interactions  at  the  grid  level,  the  calculation  time  de-
creases sharply and even makes it possible to model industrial-scale 
facilities.  On  the  other  hand,  the  hybrid  models  benefit  from  the 
distribution  of  particle  properties  (such  as  composition,  solid  fuel 
spices, reaction rates, and so on) and the parcel concept of discrete- 
particle models, allowing more details to be obtained about the flow 
properties and behavior in real-scale reactors. A review of the liter-
ature  on  the  hybrid  models  reveals  that  these  models  have  been 
successfully used to simulate a wide range of applications (such as 
gasification,  combustion,  chemical-looping,  and  FFC  catalyst 
cracking)  and  scales  (from  laboratory  to  industrial  scales).  The 
hybrid models have also successfully predicted phenomena such as 
segregation, erosion, and mixing of beds of particles of different sizes 
or  densities.  Different  reaction  mechanisms,  from  simple  single 
global  reactions  to  complex  multi-step  reaction  mechanisms,  have 
been satisfactorily implemented in different publications and more 
complicated  mechanisms  have  increased  accuracy  at  the  cost  of  a 
longer  calculation  time.  In  general,  considering  the  particle  size 
distribution in the calculation increased the precision of the results. 
The accuracy of the calculation could be improved by reducing the 
number  of  particles  per  parcel;  however,  in  some  publications  in-
stabilities have been reported when the number goes below a certain 
limit. Furthermore, lower values for the particle number per parcel 
increase the calculation effort and time. In most of the literature, the 
structure-dependent  drag  models  (such  as  the  EMMS  drag  model) 
provide better results in comparison with homogeneous ones. The 
LES turbulence model has been used in the publications using the 
MP-PIC  approach;  however,  more  turbulence  options  (almost  all 
available turbulence models are in ANSYS-FLUENT) can be chosen 
for DDPM. Difficulties in satisfying the mass conservation of the solid 
phase have been reported for the DDPM model; the problem needs 
further investigation. Furthermore, the determination of crucial pa-
rameters  such  as  collision  and  restitution  coefficients  used  in  the 
particle-wall and particle-particle collision sub-models is critical. A 
suitable  experiment  using  a  representative  number  of  particles 
should be performed to determine these parameters accurately. Also, 
significant particle mass balance errors between calculated particle 
mass on the Eulerian and Lagrangian frames of references have been 
reported  by  several  researchers  during  the  DDPM  calculation.  To 
obtain a correct particle mass balance, two proposals were made: to 

use a higher number of iterations for the continuous phase per time 
step and to increase the cell size. 

A detailed review of  CFD models applied to fluidized-bed  systems 
was presented in this study. The following points should be kept in mind 
for future work:  

1)  Particle-resolved direct  numerical simulation  is essential  to gain  a 
fundamental understanding of mechanisms and to derive constitu-
tive  laws  for  complex  gas-solid  flows  (e.g.  drag  force  and  heat 
transfer correlations for meso- and macroscale models such as the 
discrete-particle and two-fluid models). So far, such laws have not 
been fully established in either theoretical or experimental works.  
2)  Drag models have a crucial influence on the characteristics of gas- 
solid  flows.  The  conventional  drag  models  (e.g.  Syamlal  and 
O’Brien,  Wen  and  Yu  and  Gidaspow)  tend  to  over-predict  the 
induced  drag  force  and  under-predict  the  slip  velocity.  Structure- 
dependent  drag  models  (e.g.  the  energy  minimization  multi-scale 
drag model) show better agreement with measurements. However, 
this assumption is not always correct since researchers show that the 
conventional drag models can predict the core-annulus structure of 
the bed, but the EMMS did not and resulted in a false fluidization 
regime (BFB instead of CFB). Furthermore, only a small section of the 
literature is devoted to calculating adhesive forces without physical 
contact (van der Waals and electrostatic forces) and adhesive forces 
with physical contact (due to liquid or solid bridges). Therefore, the 
research should be active in proposing new theories and computa-
tional formulations  for models of interaction  between the  gas and 
solid phases.  

3)  The  CFD  models  are  mainly  used  to  simulate  the  hydrodynamic 
behavior of cold gas-solid flows. Reactive CFD simulations have also 
been  presented  and  were  demonstrated  successfully.  However, 
additional  studies  (applied  to  chemical  and  energy  systems)  are 
required,  combining  the  gas  flow  and  the  homogeneous  reactions 
with the motions of particles and the heterogeneous reactions, taking 
into consideration the temperature distribution inside the particles 
and the momentum, heat, and mass transfer rates between the gas 
and solid phases.  

4)  Polydisperse systems with complex particle geometries and different 
material properties are usually simplified to monodisperse spherical 
particles with the same material properties. The research should be 
active in proposing new theories and computational formulations for 
particulate  systems  with  non-spherical  particles  with  PSDs,  which 
experience  complex  phenomena  such  as  pyrolysis,  oxidation, 
shrinking, segregation, agglomeration, and breakup.  

5)  Turbulence  in  gas-solid  flows  is  usually  disregarded  in  the  CFD 
simulations found in the literature. In fluidized-bed systems, high gas 
velocities are present, associated with the simultaneous occurrence 
of  dilute  regimes  (zones  with  locally  low  volumetric  fractions  of 
solid, and in the worst cases with a zero solid loading). Accordingly, 
the consideration of turbulence modeling is of high relevance in such 
particle-laden  flows.  Furthermore,  the  role  of  turbulence  in  dense 
gas-solid  flows  modeled  with  the  two-fluid  model  causes  some 
dispute  between  researchers.  Some  think that  it  has no  real  effect 
since the solid phase fluctuations are dominating, but another claim 
that if it is not considered, the simulation is false. Great efforts must 
be  made  in  terms  of  meaningful  experimental  and  numerical  in-
vestigations  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  turbulence-particle 
interactions.  

6)  CFD models applied to gas-solid flows, especially the coupled CFD- 
DPM  simulation  with  hard-  and  soft-sphere  models,  are  compli-
cated  due  to  the  high  computational  effort  and  memory  re-
quirements.  The  limitations  can  be  overcome  as  a  result  of  the 
continuous 
(high-performance 
computing)  and  software  (effective  parallelization  on  multi-CPUs 
and/or  multi-GPUs  clusters  and  programming  on  graphics 

development 

hardware 

of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930189F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

processing  units)  as  well  as  the  application  of  the  coarse-grained 
parcel model. Recently published studies successfully demonstrated 
the use of ultra-fine meshes (up to one billion cells), the tracking of 
150 million particles, and the application of massively parallel CFD 
solvers (e.g. 36,000 cores). However, the full-loop scale simulation of 
real fluidized-bed systems is still far from being realized. 

7) The commercial programs used for the CFD simulation are consid-
ered black boxes; there is minimal knowledge of their internal pro-
cesses.  Some  programs  provide  the  flexibility  to  implement  new 
algorithms and physical or chemical models. For example, ANSYS- 
FLUENT enables the users to write their sub-models using the pro-
gramming language “C”  and to hook them into the software as so- 
called  User-Defined  Functions.  However,  commercial  CFD  pro-
grams are related to licensing costs. In the literature, a considerable 
number of publications have shifted away from commercial software 
toward  open-source codes such as  OpenFOAM and  MFIX, a prom-
ising approach that we encourage other researchers to follow.  
8)  The documentation and even the name of the program used in the 
CFD simulation were not mentioned in many publications found in 
the  literature.  Accordingly,  the  results  cannot  be  compared  or 
reproduced.  The  authors  of  new  papers  are  strongly  requested  to 
provide brief documentation and/or the name of the program used in 
order to share views and experiences. Furthermore, we recommend 
that  upcoming  CFD  studies  follow  the  standard  terms  listed  in 
Table 1.1. 

In  conclusion,  computational  fluid  dynamics  is  a  powerful  tool 
enabling both researchers and practitioners to gain valuable insights and 
an understanding of fluidized-bed systems, never forgetting: 

“Enjoy doing Experiments! But CFB needs CFD” 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct or 
indirect  financial  interest  in  the  subject  matter  discussed  in  the 
manuscript. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to express their thanks for the support of the 
Technical  University  of  Darmstadt,  the  Technical  University  Bergaka-
demie Freiberg, the Helmut-Schmidt-University Hamburg, the German 
Federal  ministry  for  Economic  Affairs  and  Energy  (Project  Number: 
03EE5044B), the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
within  the  framework  of  the  Centre  for  Innovation  Competence  Vir-
tuhcon  (Project  Number:  03Z22FN11),  and  the  European  Regional 
Development  Fund  along  with  the  Free  State  of  Saxony  under  Opto-
VirT+ (Project Number: 100310685). 

References 

[1] Yates J. Fundamentals of fluidized-Bed chemical processes: Butterworths 
monographs in chemical engineering: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2013. 

[2] Kunii D, Levenspiel O. Fluidization Engineering. 2nd edition ed. Boston, MA, 

USA: Butterworth-Heinemann, Stoneham; 1991. 

[3] Van de Velden M, Baeyens J, Smolders K. Solids mixing in the riser of a 

circulating fluidized bed. Chemical Engineering Science 2007;62:2139–53. 
[4] Van de Velden M, Baeyens J, Seville J, Fan X. The solids flow in the riser of a 

circulating fluidised bed (CFB) viewed by positron emission particle tracking 
(PEPT). Powder Technology 2008;183:290–6. 

[5] Mahmoudi S, Baeyens J, Seville JP. NOx  formation and selective non-catalytic 
reduction (SNCR) in a fluidized bed combustor of biomass. Biomass and 
Bioenergy 2010;34:1393–409. 

[6] Mahmoudi S, Seville J, Baeyens J. The residence time distribution and mixing of 
the gas phase in the riser of a circulating fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2010; 
203:322–30. 

[7] Mahmoudi S, Chan CW, Brems A, Seville J, Baeyens J. Solids flow diagram of a 

CFB riser using Geldart B-type powders. Particuology 2012;10:51–61. 

[8] Lu L, Xu J, Ge W, Gao G, Jiang Y, Zhao M, et al. Computer virtual experiment on 
fluidized beds using a coarse-grained discrete particle method—EMMS-DPM. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2016;155:314–37. 

[9] Gidaspow D. Hydrodynamics of fiuidizatlon and heat transfer: Supercomputer 

modeling. Applied Mechanics Reviews 1986;39:1–23. 

[10] Gidaspow D. Multiphase flow and fluidization: continuum and kinetic theory 

descriptions: Academic press; 1994. 

[11] Crowe C. Review-numerical models for dilute gas-particle flows. Journal of Fluids 

Engineering 1982;104:297–303. 

[12] Deen N, Van Sint Annaland M, Van der Hoef M, Kuipers J. Review of discrete 

particle modeling of fluidized beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2007;62: 
28–44. 

[13] Zhu H, Zhou Z, Yang R, Yu A. Discrete particle simulation of particulate systems: 
a review of major applications and findings. Chemical Engineering Science 2008; 
63:5728–70. 

[14] Wang J. A review of Eulerian simulation of Geldart A particles in gas-fluidized 
beds. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2009;48:5567–77. 
[15] G´omez-Barea A, Leckner B. Modeling of biomass gasification in fluidized bed. 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2010;36:444–509. 

[16] Loha C, Gu S, De Wilde J, Mahanta P, Chatterjee PK. Advances in mathematical 
modeling of fluidized bed gasification. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews 2014;40:688–715. 

[17] Deen NG, Peters E, Padding JT, Kuipers J. Review of direct numerical simulation 

of fluid–particle mass, momentum and heat transfer in dense gas–solid flows. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2014;116:710–24. 

[18] Kuerten JG. Point-Particle DNS and LES of Particle-Laden Turbulent flow-a state- 

of-the-art review. Flow Turbulence and Combustion 2016;97:689–713. 
[19] Zhong W, Yu A, Zhou G, Xie J, Zhang H. CFD simulation of dense particulate 
reaction system: Approaches, recent advances and applications. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2016;140:16–43. 

[20] Ariyaratne WH, Manjula E, Ratnayake C, Melaaen MC. CFD approaches for 
modeling gas-solids multiphase flows–A review. Proceedings of The 9th 
EUROSIM Congress on Modelling and Simulation, EUROSIM 2016, The 57th 
SIMS Conference on Simulation and Modelling SIMS 2016: Link¨oping University 
Electronic Press; 2018. p. 680-6. 

[21] Zhang Y, Ran Z, Jin B, Zhang Y, Zhou C, Sher F. Simulation of particle mixing and 
separation in multi-component fluidized bed using Eulerian-Eulerian method: a 
review. International Journal of Chemical Reactor Engineering 2019:17. 
[22] Golshan S, Sotudeh-Gharebagh R, Zarghami R, Mostoufi N, Blais B, Kuipers J. 

Review and Implementation of CFD-DEM Applied to Chemical Process Systems. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2020:115646. 

[23] Kuang S, Zhou M, Yu A. CFD-DEM modelling and simulation of pneumatic 

conveying: A review. Powder Technology 2020;365:186–207. 

[24] Nakhaei M, Lu B, Tian Y, Wang W, Dam-Johansen K, Wu H. CFD Modeling of Gas- 
Solid Cyclone Separators at Ambient and Elevated Temperatures. Processes 2020; 
8:1–26. 

[25] Kieckhefen P, Pietsch S, Dosta M, Heinrich S. Possibilities and Limits of 

Computational Fluid Dynamics–Discrete Element Method Simulations in Process 
Engineering: A Review of Recent Advancements and Future Trends. Annual 
Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 2020;11:397–422. 
[26] Wang J. Continuum theory for dense gas-solid flow: A state-of-the-art review. 

Chemical Engineering Science 2020;215:115428. 

[27] Ngo SI, Lim Y-I. Multiscale Eulerian CFD of chemical processes: A review. 

ChemEngineering 2020;4:23. 

[28] Agency IE. World Energy Outlook 2019. 2019. p. 1-810. 
◦
[29] Change. IPoC. Global warming of 1.5
[30] Rossiter AP, Jones BP. Energy management and efficiency for the process 

C. 2018. p. 1-32. 

industries: John Wiley & Sons; 2015. 

[31] Alobaid F, Mertens N, Starkloff R, Lanz T, Heinze C, Epple B. Progress in dynamic 
simulation of thermal power plants. Progress in Energy Combustion Science 
2017;59:79–162. 

[32] Alobaid F. Process Simulation. Numerical Simulation for Next Generation 

Thermal Power Plants: Springer; 2018. p. 15-86. 

[33] Xu L, Cheng L, Ji J, Wang Q. Fang M. A comprehensive CFD combustion model for 

supercritical CFB boilers. Particuology 2019;43:29–37. 

[34] Cheng L, Ji J, Wei Y, Wang Q, Fang M, Luo Z, et al. A note on large-size 

supercritical CFB technology development. Powder Technology 2020;363: 
398–407. 

[35] Rackley SA. Carbon capture and storage: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2017. 
[36] Heinze C, May J, Peters J, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Techno-economic assessment of 
polygeneration based on fluidized bed gasification. Fuel 2019;250:285–91. 

[37] Alobaid F, Str¨ohle J. Special Issue “Thermochemical Conversion Processes for 
Solid Fuels and Renewable Energies”. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing 
Institute; 2021. 

[38] Ratliff P, Garbett P, Fischer W. The new Siemens gas turbine SGT5-8000H for 

more customer benefit. VGB Powertech 2007;87:128–32. 

[39] Scholz C, Zimmermann H, an der Ruhr M. First long-term experience with the 

operational flexibility of the SGT5-8000H. 8 VDI Symposium. Germany 2012. p. 
1-12. 

[40] Vandervort C, Wetzel T, Leach D. Engineering And Validating A World Record 

Gas Turbine. Mechanical Engineering Magazine Select Articles 2017;139:48–50. 

[41] Vandervort C, Leach D, Scholz M. Advancements in H Class Gas Turbines for 
Combined Cycle Power Plants for High Efficiency, Enhanced Operational 
Capability and Broad Fuel Flexibility. The Future of Gas Turbine Technology, 8th 
International Gas Turbine Congress2016. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930190F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[42] Vandervort C, Leach D, Walker D, Sasser J. Commercialization and Fleet 

[77] Chen S, He B, He D, Cao Y, Ding G, Liu X, et al. Numerical investigations on 

Experience of the 7/9HA Gas Turbine Combined Cycle. Turbo Expo: Power for 
Land. Sea, and Air: American Society of Mechanical Engineers 2019:V003T08A6. 

different tangential arrangements of burners for a 600 MW utility boiler. Energy 
2017;122:287–300. 

[43] Trudeau N, Francoeur M. Energy efficiency indicators for public electricity 

production from fossil fuels. Oil Market Report Internation Energy Agency 2008; 
1:1–23. 

[44] Walter H, Epple B. Numerical simulation of power plants and firing systems: 

Springer; 2017. 

[45] Hilz JBL. Experimental Investigation of a Semi-industrial Carbonate Looping 

Process for Scale-up: Cuvillier; 2019. 

[46] Chao C, Deng Y, Dewil R, Baeyens J, Fan X. Post-combustion carbon capture. 

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2020:110490. 

[47] Liu J, Baeyens J, Deng Y, Tan T, Zhang H. The chemical CO2  capture by 

carbonation-decarbonation cycles. Journal of environmental management 2020; 
260:110054. 

[48] Ad´anez J, Abad A, Mendiara T, Gay´an P, De Diego L, García-Labiano F. Chemical 

looping combustion of solid fuels. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 
2018;65:6–66. 

[49] Song T, Shen L. Review of reactor for chemical looping combustion of solid fuels. 

International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 2018;76:92–110. 
[50] Alobaid F. 3D Modelling and Simulation of Reactive Fluidized Beds for 

Conversion of Biomass with Discrete Element Method. Germany: tuprints 
(Technical University of Darmstadt; 2013. 

[51] Pan S-Y, Du MA, Huang I-T, Liu I-H, Chang E, Chiang P-C. Strategies on 

implementation of waste-to-energy (WTE) supply chain for circular economy 
system: a review. Journal of Cleaner Production 2015;108:409–21. 

[52] Spliethoff H. Power generation from solid fuels: Springer Science & Business 

Media; 2010. 

[53] Haaf M, Ohlemüller P, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Techno-economic assessment of 

alternative fuels in second-generation carbon capture and storage processes. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 2019:1–16. 
[54] Haaf M, Unger A, Str¨ohle J, Epple B, Hilz J. Methanol Production Via the 

Utilization of Electricity and CO2  Provided by a Waste Incineration Plant. 14th 
Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies Conference Melbourne 2018:21–6. 

[78] Laubscher R, Rousseau P. CFD study of pulverized coal-fired boiler evaporator 
and radiant superheaters at varying loads. Applied Thermal Engineering 2019; 
160:114057. 

[79] Stroh A, Alobaid F, Busch J-P, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. 3-D numerical simulation for co- 

firing of torrefied biomass in a pulverized-fired 1 MWth  combustion chamber. 
Energy 2015;85:105–16. 

[80] Chapman S, Cowling TG. The mathematical theory of non-uniform gases: 

Cambridge university press; 1970. 

[81] Nikolopoulos A, Stroh A, Zeneli M, Alobaid F, Nikolopoulos N, Str¨ohle J, et al. 
Numerical investigation and comparison of coarse grain CFD–DEM and TFM in 
the case of a 1 MWth fluidized bed carbonator simulation. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2017;163:189–205. 

[82] Neau H, Pigou M, Fede P, Ansart R, Baudry C, M´erigoux N, et al. Massively 

parallel numerical simulation using up to 36,000 CPU cores of an industrial-scale 
polydispersed reactive pressurized fluidized bed with a mesh of one billion cells. 
Powder Technology 2020;366:906–24. 

[83] Hoomans B, Kuipers J, Briels W, Van Swaaij W. Discrete particle simulation of 

bubble and slug formation in a two-dimensional gas-fluidised bed: a hard-sphere 
approach. Chemical Engineering Science 1996;51:99–118. 

[84] Almohammed N. Modeling and Simulation of Particle Agglomeration, Droplet 
Coalescence and Particle-Wall Adhesion in Turbulent Multiphase Flows. 
Germany: Helmut Schmidt University; 2018. 

[85] Yang S, Luo K, Zhang K, Qiu K, Fan J. Numerical study of a lab-scale double slot- 
rectangular spouted bed with the parallel CFD–DEM coupling approach. Powder 
Technology 2015;272:85–99. 

[86] Stroh A. Development of a 3D Model for the Numerical Simulation of a Reactive 

Fluidized Bed Carbonator: Shaker; 2019. 

[87] Message Passing Interface Forum. 
[88] Kamath S, Masterov M, Padding J, Buist K, Baltussen M, Kuipers J. Parallelization 
of a stochastic Euler-Lagrange model applied to large scale dense bubbly flows. 
Journal of Computational Physics: X 2020:100058. 

[55] Van Caneghem J, Brems A, Lievens P, Block C, Billen P, Vermeulen I, et al. 

[89] Xu J, Liu X, Hu S, Ge W. Virtual process engineering on a three-dimensional 

Fluidized bed waste incinerators: Design, operational and environmental issues. 
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2012;38:551–82. 

circulating fluidized bed with multiscale parallel computation. Journal of 
Advanced Manufacturing and Processing 2019;1:1–17. 

[56] Deng Y, Ansart R, Baeyens J, Zhang H. Flue gas desulphurization in circulating 

[90] Gao X, Yu J, Portal RJ, Dietiker J-F, Shahnam M, Rogers WA. Development and 

fluidized beds. Energies 2019;12:3908. 

[57] Peters J, May J, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Flexibility of CFB Combustion: An 

Investigation of Co-Combustion with Biomass and RDF at Part Load in Pilot Scale. 
Energies 2020;13:4665. 

[58] Haaf M, Hilz J, Peters J, Unger A, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Operation of a 1 MWth 
calcium looping pilot plant firing waste-derived fuels in the calciner. Powder 
Technology 2020;372:267–74. 

[59] Hartge E-U, Budinger S, Werther J. Spatial effects in the combustion chamber of 
the 235 MWe CFB boiler Turow No 3. 8 International Conference on Circulating 
Fluidized Beds. China2005. p. 675-82. 

[60] Geldart D. Types of gas fluidization. Powder Technology 1973;7:285–92. 
[61] Kong W, Tan T, Baeyens J, Flamant G, Zhang H. Bubbling and slugging of geldart 
group A powders in small diameter columns. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 
Research 2017;56:4136–44. 

[62] Zhang H, Degr`eve J, Dewil R, Baeyens J. Operation diagram of circulating 

fluidized beds (CFBs). Procedia Engineering 2015;102:1092–103. 

[63] Reh L. Fluid bed processing. Chemical Engineering Progress 1971;67:58–63. 
[64] Grace JR. Contacting modes and behaviour classification of gas—solid and other 
two-phase suspensions. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 1986;64: 
353–63. 

[65] Kunii D, Levenspiel O. Fluidization engineering: Elsevier; 2013. 
[66] van der Hoef MA, van Sint Annaland M, Kuipers J. Computational fluid dynamics 
for dense gas–solid fluidized beds: a multi-scale modeling strategy. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2004;59:5157–65. 

[67] Tsuji Y. Multi-scale modeling of dense phase gas–particle flow. Chemical 

Engineering Science 2007;62:3410–8. 

[68] van der Hoef MA, Ye M, van Sint Annaland M, Andrews A, Sundaresan S, 

Kuipers J. Multiscale modeling of gas-fluidized beds. Advances in Chemical 
Engineering 2006;31:65–149. 

[69] Alobaid F. Numerical Simulation for Next Generation Thermal Power Plants: 

Springer; 2018. 

[70] Ricot D, Foquet E, Touil H, L´evˆeque E, Machrouki H, Chevillotte F, et al. 

Aeroacoustic computations with new CFD solver based on Lattice Boltzmann 
Method. Automotive and Railway Comfort2012. p. 1-21. 

[71] Nikku M, My¨oh¨anen K, Ritvanen J, Hypp¨anen T. Three-dimensional modeling of 
fuel flow with a holistic circulating fluidized bed furnace model. chemical 
Engineering Science 2014;117:352–63. 

[72] Loth E, Tryggvason G, Tsuji Y, Elghobashi S, Crowe CT, Berlemont A, et al. 13.1 
Overview of Multiphase Modeling. Multiphase Flow Handbook: CRC press; 2006. 

validation of SuperDEM for non-spherical particulate systems using a 
superquadric particle method. Particuology 2021. 

[91] Grüner C. Kopplung des Einzelpartikel- und des Zwei-Kontinua-Verfahrens für die 

Simulation von Gas-Feststoff-Str¨omungen: Shaker; 2004. 

[92] Andrews M, O’rourke P. The multiphase particle-in-cell (MP-PIC) method for 

dense particulate flows. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1996;22: 
379–402. 

[93] Snider D. An incompressible three-dimensional multiphase particle-in-cell model 

for dense particle flows. Journal of Computational Physics 2001;170:523–49. 

[94] Yang Z, Zhang Y, Zhang H. CPFD simulation on effects of louver baffles in a two- 
dimensional fluidized bed of Geldart A particles. Advanced Powder Technology 
2019;30:2712–25. 

[95] Tricomi L, Melchiori T, Chiaramonti D, Boulet M, Lavoie JM. Numerical 

investigation of a cold bubbling bed throughout a dense discrete phase model 
with KTGF collisional closure. Biofuels Engineering 2017;2:32–50. 

[96] Garg R, Tenneti S, Yusof JM, Subramaniam S. Direct numerical simulation of gas- 
solids flow based on the immersed boundary method. Computational gas-solids 
flows and reacting systems: theory, methods and practice: IGI Global; 2011. p. 
245-76. 

[97] Tenneti S, Garg R, Subramaniam S. Drag law for monodisperse gas–solid systems 
using particle-resolved direct numerical simulation of flow past fixed assemblies 
of spheres. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2011;37:1072–92. 

[98] Tenneti S, Subramaniam S. Particle-resolved direct numerical simulation for gas- 
solid flow model development. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 2014;46: 
199–230. 

[99] Xiong Q, Li B, Zhou G, Fang X, Xu J, Wang J, et al. Large-scale DNS of gas–solid 

flows on Mole-8.5. Chemical Engineering Science 2012;71:422–30. 

[100] Luo K, Wang D, Jin T, Wang S, Wang Z, Tan J, et al. Analysis and development of 
novel data-driven drag models based on direct numerical simulations of fluidized 
beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2021;231:116245. 

[101] Wang XS. Fundamentals of fluid-solid interactions: analytical and computational 

approaches: Elsevier; 2008. 

[102] My¨oh¨anen K. Modelling of combustion and sorbent reactions in three- 

dimensional flow environment of a circulating fluidized bed furnace. Finland: 
Lappeenranta University of Technology; 2011. 

[103] Sommerfeld M, Van Wachem B, Oliemans R. Best practice guidelines for 

computational fluid dynamics of dispersed multi-phase flows: European Research 
Community on Flow. Turbulence and Combustion (ERCOFTAC) 2008. 

[104] Stieß M. Mechanische Verfahrenstechnik-Partikeltechnologie 1: Springer-Verlag; 

[73] Elghobashi S. On predicting particle-laden turbulent flows. Applied Scientific 

2008. 

Research 1994;52:309–29. 

[74] Pakseresht P, Apte SV. Volumetric displacement effects in euler-lagrange les of 

particle-laden jet flows. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2019;113: 
16–32. 

[75] Alobaid F. Computational Fluid Dynamics. Numerical Simulation for Next 

Generation Thermal Power Plants: Springer; 2018. p. 87-204. 

[105] Chen X, Wang J. Dynamic multiscale method for gas-solid flow via spatiotemporal 
coupling of two-fluid model and discrete particle model. AIChE Journal 2017;63: 
3681–91. 

[106] Chen X, Wang J. Mesoscale-structure-based dynamic multiscale method for gas- 

solid flow. Chemical Engineering Science 2018;192:864–81. 

[107] G¨otz S. Gekoppelte CFD-DEM-Simulation blasenbildender Wirbelschichten: 

[76] Epple B, Leithner R, Linzer W, Walter H. Simulation von Kraftwerken und 

Shaker; 2006. 

Feuerungen: Springer-Verlag; 2012. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930191F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[108] Fullmer WD, Liu G, Yin X, Hrenya CM. Clustering instabilities in sedimenting 

fluid-solid systems: critical assessment of kinetic-theory-based predictions using 
direct numerical simulation data. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2017;823:433. 
[109] Wang J, Chen X, Bian W, Zhao B, Wang J. Quantifying the non-equilibrium 

characteristics of heterogeneous gas–solid flow of smooth, inelastic spheres using 
a computational fluid dynamics–discrete element method. Journal of Fluid 
Mechanics 2019;866:776–90. 

[110] Johnson PC, Jackson R. Frictional–collisional constitutive relations for granular 
materials, with application to plane shearing. Journal of fluid Mechanics 1987; 
176:67–93. 

[140] Mellin P, Zhang Q, Kantarelis E, Yang W. An Euler–Euler approach to modeling 
biomass fast pyrolysis in fluidized-bed reactors–Focusing on the gas phase. 
Applied Thermal Engineering 2013;58:344–53. 

[141] Mellin P, Kantarelis E, Zhou C, Yang W. Simulation of bed dynamics and primary 
products from fast pyrolysis of biomass: steam compared to nitrogen as a 
fluidizing agent. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2014;53: 
12129–42. 

[142] Yan YC, Lim X, Rashmi W, Lim CH. Computational studies to investigate the fuel 
feeding point in fluidized bed reactor. Journal of Engineering Science and 
Technology 2015;10:19–31. 

[111] Marcus RD, Leung LS, Klinzing GE, F R. Pneumatic conveying of solids: Chapman 

[143] Ranganathan P, Gu S. Computational fluid dynamics modelling of biomass fast 

and Hall; 1990. 

[112] Leva M. Fluidization: McGraw–Hill; 1959. 
[113] Kolb A, Latta L, Rezk-Salama C. Hardware-based simulation and collision 

detection for large particle systems. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH/ 
EUROGRAPHICS conference on Graphics hardware: ACM; 2004. p. 123–31. 
[114] Danowitz A, Kelley K, Mao J, Stevenson JP, Horowitz M. CPU DB: recording 
microprocessor history. Communications of the ACM 2012;55:55–63. 

[115] Jajcevic D, Siegmann E, Radeke C, Khinast JG. Large-scale CFD–DEM simulations 
of fluidized granular systems. Chemical Engineering Science 2013;98:298–310. 
[116] Govender N, Rajamani RK, Kok S, Wilke DN. Discrete element simulation of mill 
charge in 3D using the BLAZE-DEM GPU framework. Minerals Engineering 2015; 
79:152–68. 

[117] Stroh A, Alobaid F, Hasenzahl MT, Hilz J, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Comparison of three 

different CFD methods for dense fluidized beds and validation by a cold flow 
experiment. Particuology 2016;29:34–47. 

[118] Klimanek A, Bigda J. CFD modelling of CO2  enhanced gasification of coal in a 
pressurized circulating fluidized bed reactor. Energy 2018;160:710–9. 
[119] Venier CM, Urrutia AR, Capossio JP, Baeyens J, Mazza G. Comparing ANSYS 

® 

® 

and OpenFOAM

Fluent
simulations of Geldart A, B and D bubbling fluidized 
bed hydrodynamics. International Journal of Numerical Methods for Heat & Fluid 
Flow 2019. 

[120] Cloete S, Johansen ST, Amini S. Investigation into the effect of simulating a 3D 
cylindrical fluidized bed reactor on a 2D plane. Powder Technology 2013;239: 
21–35. 

[121] Cloete S, Zaabout A, Johansen ST, van Sint Annaland M, Gallucci F, Amini S. The 
generality of the standard 2D TFM approach in predicting bubbling fluidized bed 
hydrodynamics. Powder technology 2013;235:735–46. 

[122] Li T, Pannala S, Shahnam M. Reprint of" CFD simulations of circulating fluidized 

bed risers, part II, evaluation of differences between 2D and 3D simulations. 
Powder technology 2014;265:13–22. 

[123] Chang J, Wu Z, Wang X, Liu W. Two-and three-dimensional hydrodynamic 

modeling of a pseudo-2D turbulent fluidized bed with Geldart B particle. Powder 
technology 2019;351:159–68. 

[124] Shi H, Komrakova A, Nikrityuk P. Fluidized beds modeling: Validation of 2D and 
3D simulations against experiments. Powder technology 2019;343:479–94. 
[125] Van Wachem B, Schouten J, Van den Bleek C, Krishna R, Sinclair J. Comparative 
analysis of CFD models of dense gas–solid systems. AIChE Journal 2001;47: 
1035–51. 

[126] Wang W, Lu B, Zhang N, Shi Z, Li J. A review of multiscale CFD for gas–solid CFB 

modeling. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2010;36:109–18. 

[127] Wang W, Ge W, Yang N, Li J. Meso-scale modeling—the key to multi-scale CFD 
simulation. Advances in Chemical Engineering: Elsevier; 2011. p. 1-58. 
[128] Lundberg J, Halvorsen BM. A review of some exsisting drag models describing the 

interaction between phases in a bubbling fluidized bed. Proc 49th Scand Conf 
Simulation and Modeling, Oslo University College, Oslo, Norway 2008. p. 7-8. 

pyrolysis in fluidised bed reactors, focusing different kinetic schemes. Bioresource 
Technology 2016;213:333–41. 

[144] Sharma A, Wang S, Pareek V, Yang H, Zhang D. Multi-fluid reactive modeling of 
fluidized bed pyrolysis process. Chemical Engineering Science 2015;123:311–21. 

[145] Eri Q, Zhao X, Ranganathan P, Gu S. Numerical simulations on the effect of 

potassium on the biomass fast pyrolysis in fluidized bed reactor. Fuel 2017;197: 
290–7. 

[146] Eri Q, Wang B, Peng J, Zhao X, Li T. Detailed CFD modelling of fast pyrolysis of 
different biomass types in fluidized bed reactors. The Canadian Journal of 
Chemical Engineering 2018;96:2043–52. 

[147] Zhong H, Zhang J, Zhu Y, Liang S. Multi-fluid modeling biomass fast pyrolysis in 

the fluidized-bed reactor including particle shrinkage effects. Energy & Fuels 
2016;30:6440–7. 

[148] Zhong H, Liang S, Zhang J, Zhu Y. Multi-fluid model with variable particle density 
and diameter based on mass conservation at the particle scale. Powder 
Technology 2016;294:43–54. 

[149] Zhong H, Zhang J, Zhu Y, Liang S. Multi-fluid modeling biomass fast pryolysis 
with particle shrinkage model for complex reaction kinetics. Chemical 
Engineering Processing-Process Intensification 2018;128:36–45. 

[150] Zhong H, Xiong Q, Zhu Y, Liang S, Zhang J, Niu B, et al. CFD modeling of the 
effects of particle shrinkage and intra-particle heat conduction on biomass fast 
pyrolysis. Renewable Energy 2019;141:236–45. 

[151] Zhong H, Xu F, Zhang J, Zhu Y, Liang S, Niu B, et al. Variation of Geldart 
classification in MFM simulation of biomass fast pyrolysis considering the 
decrease of particle density and diameter. Renewable Energy 2019;135:208–17. 

[152] He L, Schotte E, Thomas S, Schlinkert A, Herrmann A, Mosch V, et al. Wood 

gasification in a lab-scale bubbling fluidized bed: experiment and simulation. In: 
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Fluidized Bed Combustion: 
Springer; 2009. p. 686–92. 

[153] Liu H, Elkamel A, Lohi A, Biglari M. Computational fluid dynamics modeling of 

biomass gasification in circulating fluidized-bed reactor using the 
Eulerian–Eulerian approach. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2013; 
52:18162–74. 

[154] Deng Z, Xiao R, Jin B, Huang H, Shen L, Song Q, et al. Computational fluid 

dynamics modeling of coal gasification in a pressurized spout-fluid bed. Energy & 
Fuels 2008;22:1560–9. 

[155] Eri Q, Peng J, Zhao X. CFD simulation of biomass steam gasification in a fluidized 

bed based on a multi-composition multi-step kinetic model. Applied Thermal 
Engineering 2018;129:1358–68. 

[156] Couto N, Silva V, Monteiro E, Brito P, Rouboa A. Experimental and numerical 
analysis of coffee husks biomass gasification in a fluidized bed reactor. Energy 
Procedia 2013;36:591–5. 

[157] Silva V, Monteiro E, Couto N, Brito P, Rouboa A. Analysis of syngas quality from 

Portuguese biomasses: an experimental and numerical study. Energy & Fuels 
2014;28:5766–77. 

[129] Ullah A, Hong K, Gao Y, Gungor A, Zaman M. An overview of Eulerian CFD 

[158] Couto N, Silva V, Monteiro E, Brito P, Rouboa A. Using an Eulerian-granular 2-D 

modeling and simulation of non-spherical biomass particles. Renewable Energy 
2019;141:1054–66. 

multiphase CFD model to simulate oxygen air enriched gasification of 
agroindustrial residues. Renewable Energy 2015;77:174–81. 

[130] Arastoopour H. Numerical simulation and experimental analysis of gas/solid flow 
systems: 1999 Fluor-Daniel Plenary lecture. Powder Technology 2001;119:59–67. 
[131] Bao X, Du W, Xu J. An overview on the recent advances in computational fluid 
dynamics simulation of spouted beds. The Canadian Journal of Chemical 
Engineering 2013;91:1822–36. 

[132] Enwald H, Peirano E, Almstedt A-E. Eulerian two-phase flow theory applied to 
fluidization. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1996;22:21–66. 

[133] Lettieri P, Mazzei L. Challenges and issues on the CFD modeling of fluidized beds: 
a review. The Journal of Computational Multiphase Flows 2009;1:83–131. 

[134] Liu S-S, Xiao W-D. Numerical simulations of particle growth in a silicon-CVD 

fluidized bed reactor via a CFD–PBM coupled model. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2014;111:112–25. 

[135] Liu B, Papadikis K, Gu S, Fidalgo B, Longhurst P, Li Z, et al. CFD modelling of 
particle shrinkage in a fluidized bed for biomass fast pyrolysis with quadrature 
method of moment. Fuel Processing Technology 2017;164:51–68. 

[136] Ghadirian E, Abbasian J, Arastoopour H. CFD simulation of particle size change 
during the coal char gasification process using the population balance model with 
FCMOM. Powder Technology 2018;323:128–38. 

[137] Xue Q, Dalluge D, Heindel T, Fox R, Brown R. Experimental validation and CFD 
modeling study of biomass fast pyrolysis in fluidized-bed reactors. Fuel 2012;97: 
757–69. 

[138] Boateng A, Mtui P. CFD modeling of space-time evolution of fast pyrolysis 

products in a bench-scale fluidized-bed reactor. Applied Thermal Engineering 
2012;33:190–8. 

[139] Mellin P, Kantarelis E, Yang W. Computational fluid dynamics modeling of 

biomass fast pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor, using a comprehensive chemistry 
scheme. Fuel 2014;117:704–15. 

[159] Couto ND, Silva VB, Monteiro E, Rouboa A. Assessment of municipal solid wastes 

gasification in a semi-industrial gasifier using syngas quality indices. Energy 
2015;93:864–73. 

[160] Couto N, Silva V, Monteiro E, Teixeira S, Chacartegui R, Bouziane K, et al. 
Numerical and experimental analysis of municipal solid wastes gasification 
process. Applied Thermal Engineering 2015;78:185–95. 

[161] Couto N, Silva V, Rouboa A. Municipal solid waste gasification in semi-industrial 

conditions using air-CO2  mixtures. Energy 2016;104:42–52. 

[162] Couto ND, Silva VB, Monteiro E, Rouboa A, Brito P. An experimental and 

numerical study on the Miscanthus gasification by using a pilot scale gasifier. 
Renewable Energy 2017;109:248–61. 

[163] Couto ND, Silva VB, Rouboa A. Assessment on steam gasification of municipal 

solid waste against biomass substrates. Energy Conversion and Management 
2016;124:92–103. 

[164] Monteiro E, Ismail TM, Ramos A, El-Salam MA, Brito P, Rouboa A. Assessment of 

the miscanthus gasification in a semi-industrial gasifier using a CFD model. 
Applied Thermal Engineering 2017;123:448–57. 

[165] Silva V, Rouboa A. Combining a 2-D multiphase CFD model with a Response 

Surface Methodology to optimize the gasification of Portuguese biomasses. 
Energy Conversion and Management 2015;99:28–40. 

[166] Gao K, Wu J, Wang Y, D-k Zhang. Bubble dynamics and its effect on the 

performance of a jet fluidised bed gasifier simulated using CFD. Fuel 2006;85: 
1221–31. 

[167] Wang X, Jin B, Zhong W. Three-dimensional simulation of fluidized bed coal 

gasification. Chemical Engineering and Processing-Process Intensification 2009; 
48:695–705. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930192F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[168] Cornejo P, Farias O. Mathematical modeling of coal gasification in a fluidized bed 
reactor using a Eulerian granular description. International Journal of Chemical 
Reactor Engineering 2011;9:1–32. 

[169] Cubero A, S´anchez-Insa A, Fueyo N. The effect of particle polydispersion in a 
gasifier bed dynamics using Eulerian-Eulerian models. Fuel Processing 
Technology 2020;198:106216. 

[170] Ismail TM, El-Salam MA, Monteiro E, Rouboa A. Eulerian–Eulerian CFD model on 

fluidized bed gasifier using coffee husks as fuel. Applied Thermal Engineering 
2016;106:1391–402. 

[171] Zhou W, Zhao C, Duan L, Qu C, Chen X. Two-dimensional computational fluid 

dynamics simulation of coal combustion in a circulating fluidized bed combustor. 
Chemical Engineering Journal 2011;166:306–14. 

[172] Zhou W, Zhao C, Duan L, Liu D, Chen X. CFD modeling of oxy-coal combustion in 
circulating fluidized bed. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 2011; 
5:1489–97. 

[173] Zhou W, Zhao C, Duan L, Chen X, Liu D. A simulation study of coal combustion 

under O2/CO2  and O2/RFG atmospheres in circulating fluidized bed. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2013;223:816–23. 

[174] Xie J, Zhong W, Jin B, Shao Y, Liu H. Three-dimensional Eulerian–Eulerian 
modeling of gaseous pollutant emissions from circulating fluidized-bed 
combustors. Energy & Fuels 2014;28:5523–33. 

[175] Wu Y, Liu D, Ma J, Chen X. Three-Dimensional Eulerian–Eulerian Simulation of 
Coal Combustion under Air Atmosphere in a Circulating Fluidized Bed 
Combustor. Energy & Fuels 2017;31:7952–66. 

[176] Wu Y, Liu D, Duan L, Ma J, Xiong J, Chen X. Three-dimensional CFD simulation of 

oxy-fuel combustion in a circulating fluidized bed with warm flue gas recycle. 
Fuel 2018;216:596–611. 

[177] Wu Y, Liu D, Ma J, Chen X. Effects of gas-solid drag model on Eulerian-Eulerian 
CFD simulation of coal combustion in a circulating fluidized bed. Powder 
Technology 2018;324:48–61. 

[178] Veps¨al¨ainen A, Shah S, Ritvanen J, Hypp¨anen T. Bed Sherwood number in 
fluidised bed combustion by Eulerian CFD modelling. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2013;93:206–13. 

[179] Veps¨al¨ainen A, Shah S, Ritvanen J, Hypp¨anen T. Interphase mass transfer 

coefficient in fluidized bed combustion by Eulerian CFD modeling. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2014;106:30–8. 

[180] Nikolopoulos A, Malgarinos I, Nikolopoulos N, Grammelis P, Karrelas S, 

Kakaras E. A decoupled approach for NOx–N2O 3-D CFD modeling in CFB plants. 
Fuel 2014;115:401–15. 

[181] Soria J, Gauthier D, Flamant G, Rodriguez R, Mazza G. Coupling scales for 

modelling heavy metal vaporization from municipal solid waste incineration in a 
fluid bed by CFD. Waste management 2015;43:176–87. 

[182] Li W, Zhang Y, Shao Y, Zhu J. A rigorous model for the simulation of chemical 

reaction in gas-particle bubbling fluidized bed: I. Modeling and validation. 
Powder Technology 2018;327:399–407. 

[183] Zhang Y, Li W, Shao Y, Zhu J. A rigorous model for the simulation of chemical 
reaction in gas-particle bubbling fluidized bed: II. Application to gas combustion 
case. Powder Technology 2018;327:392–8. 

[184] Ji J, Cheng L, Nie L, Li L, Wei Y. Sodium transformation simulation with a 2-D 
CFD model during circulating fluidized bed combustion. Fuel 2020;267:117175. 
[185] Wang S, Gao J, Lu H, Liu G, Xu P, Sun L. Simulation of flow behavior of particles 
by cluster structure-dependent drag coefficient model for chemical looping 
combustion process: Air reactor modeling. Fuel processing technology 2012;104: 
219–33. 

[186] Wang S, Lu H, Tang Y, Li D. Modeling of a Chemical Looping Combustion Process 

in Interconnected Fluidized Beds with a Cu-Based Oxygen Carrier. Chemical 
Engineering & Technology 2013;36:1503–10. 

[187] Shuai W, Huilin L, Feixiang Z, Guodong L. CFD studies of dual circulating 

fluidized bed reactors for chemical looping combustion processes. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2014;236:121–30. 

[188] Ryan EM, DeCroix D, Breault R, Xu W, Huckaby ED, Saha K, et al. Multi-phase 

CFD modeling of solid sorbent carbon capture system. Powder Technology 2013; 
242:117–34. 

[189] Zeneli M, Nikolopoulos A, Nikolopoulos N, Grammelis P, Kakaras E. Application 
of an advanced coupled EMMS-TFM model to a pilot scale CFB carbonator. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2015;138:482–98. 

[190] Alobaid F, Ohlemüller P, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Extended Euler–Euler model for the 
simulation of a 1 MWth chemical–looping pilot plant. Energy 2015;93:2395–405. 
[191] Wang S, Chen J, Lu H, Liu G, Sun L. Multi-scale simulation of chemical looping 
combustion in dual circulating fluidized bed. Applied energy 2015;155:719–27. 

[192] Yin W, Wang S, Zhang K, He Y. Numerical investigation of in situ gasification 
chemical looping combustion of biomass in a fluidized bed reactor. Renewable 
Energy 2020;151:216–25. 

[193] Deng Z, Xiao R, Jin B, Song Q, Huang H. Multiphase CFD modeling for a chemical 

looping combustion process (fuel reactor). Chemical engineering & technology 
2008;31:1754–66. 

[194] Wang X, Jin B, Zhang Y, Zhong W, Yin S. Multiphase computational fluid 

dynamics (CFD) modeling of chemical looping combustion using a CuO/Al2O3 
oxygen carrier: effect of operating conditions on coal gas combustion. Energy & 
Fuels 2011;25:3815–24. 

[195] Wang X, Jin B, Zhang Y, Zhang Y, Liu X. Three dimensional modeling of a coal- 

fired chemical looping combustion process in the circulating fluidized bed fuel 
reactor. Energy & Fuels 2013;27:2173–84. 

[196] Chen L, Yang X, Li G, Li X, Snape C. Prediction of bubble fluidisation during 
chemical looping combustion using CFD simulation. Computers & Chemical 
Engineering 2017;99:82–95. 

[197] Su M, Zhao H, Ma J. Computational fluid dynamics simulation for chemical 

looping combustion of coal in a dual circulation fluidized bed. Energy Conversion 
and Management 2015;105:1–12. 

[198] Lin J, Luo K, Sun L, Wang S, Hu C, Fan J. Numerical Investigation of 

Nickel–Copper Oxygen Carriers in Chemical-Looping Combustion Process with 
Zero Emission of CO and H2. Energy & Fuels 2019;33:12096–105. 

[199] Mahalatkar K, Kuhlman J, Huckaby ED, O’Brien T. Computational fluid dynamic 

simulations of chemical looping fuel reactors utilizing gaseous fuels. Chemical 
engineering science 2011;66:469–79. 

[200] Mahalatkar K, Kuhlman J, Huckaby ED, O’Brien T. CFD simulation of a chemical- 
looping fuel reactor utilizing solid fuel. Chemical engineering science 2011;66: 
3617–27. 

[201] Jung J, Gamwo IK. Multiphase CFD-based models for chemical looping 

combustion process: fuel reactor modeling. Powder Technology 2008;183:401–9. 
[202] Kruggel-Emden H, Rickelt S, Stepanek F, Munjiza A. Development and testing of 

an interconnected multiphase CFD-model for chemical looping combustion. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2010;65:4732–45. 

[203] Kruggel-Emden H, Stepanek F, Munjiza A. A study on the role of reaction 

modeling in multi-phase CFD-based simulations of chemical looping combustion. 
Oil & Gas Science and Technology–Revue d’IFP Energies nouvelles 2011;66: 
313–31. 

[204] Zhang Y, Chao Z, Jakobsen HA. Modelling and simulation of chemical looping 

combustion process in a double loop circulating fluidized bed reactor. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2017;320:271–82. 

[205] Sharma R, May J, Alobaid F, Ohlemüller P, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Euler-Euler CFD 
simulation of the fuel reactor of a 1MW th chemical-looping pilot plant: Influence 
of the drag models and specularity coefficient. Fuel 2017;200:435–46. 

[206] Tritippayanon R, Piemjaiswang R, Piumsomboon P, Chalermsinsuwan B. 

Computational fluid dynamics of sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide capture using 
mixed feeding of calcium carbonate/calcium oxide in an industrial scale 
circulating fluidized bed boiler. Applied Energy 2019;250:493–502. 

[207] Atsonios K, Zeneli M, Nikolopoulos A, Nikolopoulos N, Grammelis P, Kakaras E. 
Calcium looping process simulation based on an advanced thermodynamic model 
combined with CFD analysis. Fuel 2015;153:370–81. 

[208] Lai C, Xu Z, Pan W, Sun X, Storlie C, Marcy P, et al. Hierarchical calibration and 
validation of computational fluid dynamics models for solid sorbent-based carbon 
capture. Powder Technology 2016;288:388–406. 

[209] Lai C, Xu Z, Li T, Lee A, Dietiker J-F, Lane W, et al. Effects of heat exchanger tubes 

on hydrodynamics and CO2  capture of a sorbent-based fluidized bed reactor. 
Powder technology 2017;322:202–13. 

[210] Wang C, Singh RK, Xu Z. Device-scale computational fluid dynamics modeling of 
carbon dioxide absorption using encapsulated sorbents. Powder technology 2019; 
344:590–7. 

[211] Nouri M, Rahpaima G, Nejad MM, Imani M. Computational simulation of CO2 
capture process in a fluidized-bed reactor. Computers & Chemical Engineering 
2018;108:1–10. 

[212] Yan W-C, Li J, Luo Z-H. A CFD-PBM coupled model with polymerization kinetics 
for multizone circulating polymerization reactors. Powder Technology 2012;231: 
77–87. 

[213] Yao Y, He Y-J, Luo Z-H, Shi L. 3D CFD-PBM modeling of the gas–solid flow field in 
a polydisperse polymerization FBR: The effect of drag model. Advanced Powder 
Technology 2014;25:1474–82. 

[214] Yao Y, Su J-W, Luo Z-H. CFD-PBM modeling polydisperse polymerization FBRs 
with simultaneous particle growth and aggregation: the effect of the method of 
moments. Powder technology 2015;272:142–52. 

[215] Che Y, Tian Z, Liu Z, Zhang R, Gao Y, Zou E, et al. A CFD-PBM model considering 

ethylene polymerization for the flow behaviors and particle size distribution of 
polyethylene in a pilot-plant fluidized bed reactor. Powder Technology 2015;286: 
107–23. 

[216] Che Y, Tian Z, Liu Z, Zhang R, Gao Y, Zou E, et al. An insight into the temperature 

field and particle flow patterns in a fluidized bed reactor for nonpelletizing 
polyethylene process using a 3D CFD-PBM model. Industrial & Engineering 
Chemistry Research 2016;55:8258–70. 

[217] Akbari V, Borhani TNG, Shamiri A, Hamid MKA. A CFD–PBM coupled model of 
hydrodynamics and mixing/segregation in an industrial gas-phase polymerization 
reactor. Chemical Engineering Research and Design 2015;96:103–20. 

[218] Wang S, Song X, Chen J, Wang Q, Lu H. Insights in steam reforming of glycerol in 
a fluidized bed by computational fluid dynamics modeling. Energy & Fuels 2016; 
30:8335–42. 

[219] Yang X, Wang S, Li Z, Zhang K, Li B. Enhancement of membrane hydrogen 

separation on glycerol steam reforming in a fluidized bed reactor. International 
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:18863–72. 

[220] Wang S, Yang X, Xu S, Zhang K, Li B. Assessment of sorption-enhanced crude 
glycerol steam reforming process via CFD simulation. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:14996–5004. 

[221] Dou B, Dupont V, Williams PT. Computational fluid dynamics simulation of gas(cid:0)

solid flow during steam reforming of glycerol in a fluidized bed reactor. Energy & 
Fuels 2008;22:4102–8. 

[222] Elewuwa FA, Makkawi YT. Hydrogen production by steam reforming of DME in a 

large scale CFB reactor. Part I: Computational model and predictions. 
international journal of hydrogen energy 2015;40:15865–76. 

[223] Elewuwa FA, Makkawi YT. A computational model of hydrogen production by 

steam reforming of dimethyl ether in a large scale CFB reactor. Part II: Parametric 
analysis. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2016;41:19819–28. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930193F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[224] Herce C, Cort´es C, Stendardo S. Computationally efficient CFD model for scale-up 
of bubbling fluidized bed reactors applied to sorption-enhanced steam methane 
reforming. Fuel Processing Technology 2017;167:747–61. 

[225] Herce C, Cort´es C, Stendardo S. Numerical simulation of a bubbling fluidized bed 
reactor for sorption-enhanced steam methane reforming under industrially 
relevant conditions: Effect of sorbent (dolomite and CaO-Ca12Al14O33) and 
operational parameters. Fuel processing technology 2019;186:137–48. 
[226] Phuakpunk K, Chalermsinsuwan B, Putivisutisak S, Assabumrungrat S. Factorial 

design analysis of parameters for the sorption-enhanced steam reforming of 
ethanol in a circulating fluidized bed riser using CFD. RSC advances 2018;8: 
24209–30. 

[252] Rokkam RG, Fox RO, Muhle ME. Computational fluid dynamics and electrostatic 

modeling of polymerization fluidized-bed reactors. Powder Technology 2010; 
203:109–24. 

[253] Rokkam RG, Fox RO, Muhle ME. CFD modeling of electrostatic forces in gas-solid 
fluidized beds. The Journal of Computational Multiphase Flows 2010;2:189–205. 

[254] Rokkam R, Sowinski A, Fox R, Mehrani P, Muhle M. Computational and 

experimental study of electrostatics in gas–solid polymerization fluidized beds. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2013;92:146–56. 

[255] Wang H, Lungu M, Huang Z, Wang J, Yang Y, Yang Y. CFD simulation of 

electrostatic effect on gas interchange, vortex and heat transfer in the gas-solid 
fluidized bed. Advanced Powder Technology 2018;29:1617–31. 

[227] Lan X, Xu C, Wang G, Wu L, Gao J. CFD modeling of gas–solid flow and cracking 
reaction in two-stage riser FCC reactors. Chemical Engineering Science 2009;64: 
3847–58. 

[256] Ge S, Lou Z, Yang Y, Huang Z, Sun J, Wang J, et al. Electrostatic effects on 

hydrodynamics in the riser of the circulating fluidized bed for polypropylene. 
AIChE Journal 2020;66:e16916. 

[228] Trujillo WR, De Wilde J. Computational fluid dynamics simulation of fluid 

[257] Tan Z, Liang C, Chen X, Li J. Comparisons of TFM and DEM-CFD simulation 

catalytic cracking in a rotating fluidized bed in a static geometry. Industrial & 
Engineering Chemistry Research 2010;49:5288–98. 

analyses on the influence mechanism of electrostatics on single bubble in gas- 
solid fluidized bed. Powder technology 2019;351:238–58. 

[229] Trujillo WR, De Wilde J. Fluid catalytic cracking in a rotating fluidized bed in a 
static geometry: a CFD analysis accounting for the distribution of the catalyst coke 
content. Powder technology 2012;221:36–46. 

[230] Ahsan M. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) prediction of mass fraction 

[258] Busciglio A, Vella G, Micale G, Brandani S. Modeling of magnetic-field-assisted 
fluidization: model development and CFD simulation of magnetically stabilized 
fluidized beds. KONA Powder and Particle Journal 2015:2015012. 

[259] Liu S-S, models Xiao W-DCFD–PBM coupled simulation of silicon CVD growth in a 

profiles of gas oil and gasoline in fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) riser. Ain Shams 
Engineering Journal 2012;3:403–9. 

fluidized bed reactor: effect of silane pyrolysis kinetic. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2015;127:84–94. 

[231] Ahsan M. Prediction of gasoline yield in a fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) riser 
using k-epsilon turbulence and 4-lump kinetic models: A computational fluid 
dynamics (CFD) approach. Journal of King Saud University-Engineering Sciences 
2015;27:130–6. 

[232] Chang J, Wang G, Lan X, Gao J, Zhang K. Computational investigation of a 
turbulent fluidized-bed FCC regenerator. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 
Research 2013;52:4000–10. 

[233] Jiang L, Fang-Zhi X, Zheng-Hong L. A CFD modeling of the gas–solid two-phase 

flow in an FCC riser under the electrostatic conditions. Asia-Pacific Journal of 
Chemical Engineering 2014;9:645–55. 

[234] Khongprom P, Ratchasombat S, Wanchan W, Bumphenkiattikul P, Limtrakul S. 

Scaling of a catalytic cracking fluidized bed downer reactor based on 
computational fluid dynamics simulations. RSC Advances 2020;10:2897–914. 

[260] Chua KW, Makkawi YT, Hounslow MJ. Time scale analysis for fluidized bed melt 

granulation I: Granule–granule and granule–droplet collision rates. Chemical 
engineering science 2011;66:318–26. 

[261] Jaˇso S, Arellano-Garcia H, Wozny G. Oxidative coupling of methane in a fluidized 
bed reactor: Influence of feeding policy, hydrodynamics, and reactor geometry. 
Chemical engineering journal 2011;171:255–71. 

[262] Acosta-Iborra A, Hern´andez-Jim´enez F, de Vega M, Briongos J. A novel 

methodology for simulating vibrated fluidized beds using two-fluid models. 
Chemical Engineering Journal 2012;198:261–74. 

[263] Zhu Y-P, Chen G-Q, Luo Z-H. Iterative Multiscale Computational Fluid 
Dynamics–Single-Particle Model for Intraparticle Transfer and Catalytic 
Hydrogenation Reaction of Dimethyl Oxalate in a Fluidized-Bed Reactor. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2014;53:110–22. 

[235] Tang G, Silaen AK, Wu B, Fu D, Agnello-Dean D, Wilson J, et al. Numerical 

[264] Zhu YP, Xiao FZ, Luo ZH. A CFD simulation study to evaluate the flow and 

simulation and optimization of an industrial fluid catalytic cracking regenerator. 
Applied Thermal Engineering 2017;112:750–60. 

[236] Dong W, Wang W, Li J. A multiscale mass transfer model for gas–solid riser flows: 
Part II—Sub-grid simulation of ozone decomposition. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2008;63:2811–23. 

[237] Chalermsinsuwan B, Piumsomboon P, Gidaspow D. Kinetic theory based 

computation of PSRI riser: Part I—Estimate of mass transfer coefficient. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2009;64:1195–211. 

[238] Chalermsinsuwan B, Piumsomboon P, Gidaspow D. Kinetic theory based 

computation of PSRI riser: Part II—Computation of mass transfer coefficient with 
chemical reaction. Chemical Engineering Science 2009;64:1212–22. 
[239] Prajongkan Y, Piumsomboon P, Chalermsinsuwan B. Computation of mass 

transfer coefficient and Sherwood number in circulating fluidized bed downer 
using computational fluid dynamics simulation. Chemical Engineering and 
Processing: Process Intensification 2012;59:22–35. 

[240] Chalermsinsuwan B, Piumsomboon P. Computation of the mass transfer 

coefficient of FCC particles in a thin bubbling fluidized bed using two-and three- 
dimensional CFD simulations. Chemical engineering science 2011;66:5602–13. 

[241] Kong L, Zhu J, Zhang C. Catalytic Ozone Decomposition in a Gas-Solids 

Circulating Fluidized-Bed Riser. Chemical Engineering & Technology 2014;37: 
435–44. 

[242] Li W, Yu K, Liu B, Yuan X. Computational fluid dynamics simulation of 

hydrodynamics and chemical reaction in a CFB downer. Powder Technology 
2015;269:425–36. 

[243] Chang J, Zhang K, Chen H, Yang Y, Zhang L. CFD modelling of the hydrodynamics 

and kinetic reactions in a fluidised-bed MTO reactor. Chemical Engineering 
Research and Design 2013;91:2355–68. 

[244] Chen X-M, Luo Z-H, Zhu Y-P, Xiao J, Chen X. Direct concurrent multi-scale CFD 

modeling: The effect of intraparticle transfer on the flow field in a MTO FBR. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2013;104:690–700. 

[245] Lu B, Luo H, Li H, Wang W, Ye M, Liu Z, et al. Speeding up CFD simulation of 

catalytic hydrogenation of dimethyl oxalate in a packed bed, a two-stage fluidized 
bed, and a circulating fluidized bed. Asia-Pacific Journal of Chemical Engineering 
2014;9:280–92. 

[265] Du Y, Berrouk AS, Sun L, Sun W, Fang D, Ren W. Experimental and Computational 

Fluid Dynamics Investigations of Light Alkane Dehydrogenation in a Fluidized 
Bed Reactor. Energy & Fuels 2019;33:4177–89. 

[266] Li J, Yang B. Multi-scale CFD simulations of bubbling fluidized bed methanation 

process. Chemical Engineering Journal 2019;377:119818. 

[267] Shah MT, Utikar RP, Pareek VK. CFD study: Effect of pulsating flow on gas–solid 

hydrodynamics in FCC riser. Particuology 2017;31:25–34. 

[268] Pan H, Liang X-F, Zhu L-T, Luo Z-H. Important analysis of liquid vaporization 

modeling scheme in computational fluid dynamics modeling of gas–liquid–solid 
polyethylene fluidized bed reactors. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 
2017;56:10199–213. 

[269] Ye X, Gao Y, Cheng J, Chu D, Ye Z-L, Chen S. Numerical simulation of struvite 

crystallization in fluidized bed reactor. Chemical Engineering Science 2018;176: 
242–53. 

[270] Dash S, Mohanty S, Mishra B. CFD modelling and simulation of an industrial scale 
continuous fluidized bed roaster. Advanced Powder Technology 2019;31:658–69. 

[271] Silva V, Couto N, Eus´ebio D, Rouboa A, Brito P, Cardoso J, et al. Multi-stage 

optimization in a pilot scale gasification plant. International Journal of Hydrogen 
Energy 2017;42:23878–90. 

[272] Couto N, Silva V, Monteiro E, Brito P, Rouboa A. Modeling of fluidized bed 

gasification: Assessment of zero-dimensional and CFD approaches. Journal of 
Thermal Science 2015;24:378–85. 

[273] Yang X, Wang S, Liu S, He Y. CFD analysis on sorption-enhanced glycerol 

reforming in a membrane-assisted fluidized bed reactor. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:21424–33. 

[274] Armstrong L-M, Gu S, Luo KH. CFD modelling of the gasification of coal particles 
in fluidised beds. International Heat Transfer Conference (IHTC-14). Washington, 
United States 2010. 

fluidized bed reactor for MTO by coupling CRE model. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2016;143:341–50. 

[275] Armstrong L-M, Gu S, Luo KH. Effects of limestone calcination on the gasification 
processes in a BFB coal gasifier. Chemical Engineering Journal 2011;168:848–60. 

[246] Lu B, Zhang J, Luo H, Wang W, Li H, Ye M, et al. Numerical simulation of scale-up 
effects of methanol-to-olefins fluidized bed reactors. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2017;171:244–55. 

[247] Zhang J, Lu B, Chen F, Li H, Ye M, Wang W. Simulation of a large methanol-to- 

olefins fluidized bed reactor with consideration of coke distribution. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2018;189:212–20. 

[248] Zhao Y, Li H, Ye M, Liu Z. 3D numerical simulation of a large scale MTO fluidized 

bed reactor. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2013;52:11354–64. 

[249] Karlsson S, Rasmuson A, van Wachem B, Bj¨orn IN. CFD modeling of the Wurster 

bed coater. AIChE journal 2009;55:2578–90. 

[250] Ranjbaran M, Zare D. CFD modeling of microwave-assisted fluidized bed drying 

of moist particles using two-fluid model. Drying Technology 2012;30:362–76. 

[251] Jang J, Arastoopour H. CFD simulation of a pharmaceutical bubbling bed drying 

process at three different scales. Powder technology 2014;263:14–25. 

[276] Shuai W, Huang L, Zhenhua H, Huilin L, Guodong L, Dan L, et al. Numerical 
modeling of a bubbling fluidized bed coal gasifier by kinetic theory of rough 
spheres. Fuel 2014;130:197–202. 

[277] Mahalatkar K, Kuhlman J, Huckaby E, O’brien T. Simulations of a circulating 

fluidized bed chemical looping combustion system utilizing gaseous fuel. Oil & 
Gas Science and Technology–Revue d’IFP Energies nouvelles 2011;66:301–11. 

[278] Kongkitisupchai S, Gidaspow D. Carbon dioxide capture using solid sorbents in a 

fluidized bed with reduced pressure regeneration in a downer. AIChE Journal 
2013;59:4519–37. 

[279] Lopes GC, Rosa LM, Mori M, Nunhez JR, Martignoni WP. CFD study of industrial 

FCC risers: the effect of outlet configurations on hydrodynamics and reactions. 
International Journal of Chemical Engineering 2012;2012:1–16. 

[280] Cardoso J, Silva V, Eus´ebio D, Brito P, Boloy RM, Tarelho L, et al. Comparative 2D 
and 3D analysis on the hydrodynamics behaviour during biomass gasification in a 
pilot-scale fluidized bed reactor. Renewable Energy 2019;131:713–29. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930194F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[281] Lee JM, Lim EWC. Heat Transfer in a Pulsating Turbulent Fluidized Bed. Applied 

[309] Adnan M, Zhang N, Sun F, WJTCJoCE Wang. Numerical simulation of a semi- 

Thermal Engineering 2020:115321. 

[282] Li Z, Xu H, Yang W, Zhou A, Xu M. CFD simulation of a fluidized bed reactor for 
biomass chemical looping gasification with continuous feedstock. Energy 
Conversion and Management 2019;201:112143. 

[283] Chen C, Zhao L, Wu X, Wang J. Numerical and Experimental Study on Oxy-fuel 
Coal and Biomass Co-firing in a. Bubbling Fluidized Bed. Energy & Fuels. 2019; 
33:5829–39. 

[284] Ding K, Xiong Q, Zhong Z, Zhong D, Zhang Y. CFD simulation of combustible solid 
waste pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor. Powder Technology 2020;362:177–87. 
[285] Zhong H, Xiong Q, Yin L, Zhang J, Zhu Y, Liang S, et al. CFD-based reduced-order 
modeling of fluidized-bed biomass fast pyrolysis using artificial neural network. 
Renewable Energy 2020;152:613–26. 

[286] Ji J, Cheng L. CFD modeling of sodium transformation during high-alkali coal 

combustion in a large-scale circulating fluidized bed boiler. Fuel 2020;279: 
118447. 

[287] Sharma V, Agarwal VK. Effect of process parameters on circulating fluidized bed 

coal gasification using 3D full-loop CFD simulation. The Canadian Journal of 
Chemical Engineering 2020;98:1708–28. 

[288] Xie L, Zhu J, Hu J, Jiang C. CFD modeling and simulation of gas-phase extraction 
processes in fluidized bed reactor. Minerals Engineering 2020;149:106238. 
[289] Sia SQ, Wang W-C. Numerical simulations of fluidized bed fast pyrolysis of 

biomass through computational fluid dynamics. Renewable Energy 2020;155: 
248–56. 

[290] Ji J, Cheng L, Wei Y, Wang J, Gao X, Fang M, et al. Predictions of NOx/N2O 

emissions from an ultra-supercritical CFB boiler using a 2-D comprehensive CFD 
combustion model. Particuology 2020;49:77–87. 

[291] Zhou Y, Han Y, Lu Y, Bai H, Hu X, Zhang X, et al. Numerical simulations and 

comparative analysis of two-and three-dimensional circulating fluidized bed 
reactors for CO2  capture. Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering 2020. 
[292] Zou Z, Zhu J, Yan D, Wang Y, Zhu Q, Li H. CFD simulation of fluidized magnetic 
roasting coupled with random nucleation model. Chemical Engineering Science 
2021;229:116148. 

[293] Ngo SI, Lim Y-I, Lee D, Seo MW. Flow behavior and heat transfer in bubbling 

fluidized-bed with immersed heat exchange tubes for CO2  methanation. Powder 
Technology 2021;380:462–74. 

[294] R¨oßger P, Richter A. Numerical modeling of a batch fluidized-bed gasifier: 

Interaction of chemical reaction, particle morphology development and 
hydrodynamics. Powder Technology 2021;384:148–59. 

[295] Du J, Hui Z, Wu F, Yan Y, Yue K, Ma X. CFD Analysis of a Water Vaporization 
Process in a Three-Dimensional Spouted Bed for Flue Gas Desulfurization. ACS 
omega 2021;6:2759–66. 

[296] Dabbagh F, Pirker S, Schneiderbauer S. A fast modeling of chemical reactions in 
industrial-scale olefin polymerization fluidized beds using recurrence CFD. AIChE 
Journal.1-16. 

[297] Soanuch C, Korkerd K, Phupanit J, Piemjaiswang R, Piumsomboon P, 

Chalermsinsuwan B. Computational fluid dynamics simulation of methanol to 
olefins in stage circulating fluidized bed riser: Effect of reactor stage parameters 
on product yields. Korean Journal of Chemical Engineering 2021;38:540–51. 

[298] Ngo SI, Lim Y-I, Lee D, Seo MW, Kim S. Experiment and numerical analysis of 

catalytic CO2  methanation in bubbling fluidized bed reactor. Energy Conversion 
and Management 2021;233:113863. 

[299] Adnan M, Sun J, Ahmad N, Wei JJ. Comparative CFD modeling of a bubbling bed 

using a Eulerian–Eulerian two-fluid model (TFM) and a Eulerian-Lagrangian 
dense discrete phase model (DDPM). Powder Technology 2021;383:418–42. 

[300] Chaiwang P, Sakaunnapaporn C, Sema T, Piumsomboon P, Chalermsinsuwan B. 
Statistical Experimental Design for Carbon Dioxide Capture in Circulating 
Fluidized Bed using Computational Fluid Dynamics Simulation: Effect of 
Operating Parameters. Journal of Applied Science and Engineering 2020;23: 
303–17. 

[301] Shen J, Liu X, Ho WH. CFD simulation of a fluidized bed as a solar receiver. AIP 

Conference Proceedings: AIP Publishing LLC; 2019. p. 030055. 

[302] Sin EML, Lim EWC. Heat transfer from immersed tubes in a pulsating fluidized 

bed. Powder Technology 2018;327:500–11. 

[303] Bellan S, Gokon N, Matsubara K, Cho HS, Kodama T. Numerical and experimental 

study on granular flow and heat transfer characteristics of directly-irradiated 
fluidized bed reactor for solar gasification. International Journal of Hydrogen 
Energy 2018;43:16443–57. 

[304] Boujjat H, Rodat S, Chuayboon S, Abanades S. Experimental and numerical study 
of a directly irradiated hybrid solar/combustion spouted bed reactor for 
continuous steam gasification of biomass. Energy 2019;189:116118. 

[305] Matsubara K, Kazuma Y, Sakurai A, Suzuki S, Soon-Jae L, Kodama T, et al. High- 
temperature fluidized receiver for concentrated solar radiation by a beam-down 
reflector system. Energy Procedia 2014;49:447–56. 

[306] Hooshdaran B, Haghshenasfard M, Hosseini SH, Esfahany MN, Lopez G. Olazar M. 
CFD modeling and experimental validation of biomass fast pyrolysis in a conical 
spouted bed reactor. Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 2021;154: 
105011. 

[307] Ostermeier P, DeYoung S, Vandersickel A, Gleis S, Spliethoff H. Comprehensive 
investigation and comparison of TFM, DenseDPM and CFD-DEM for dense 
fluidized beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2019;196:291–309. 
[308] Adamczyk WP, Klimanek A, Białecki RA, Węcel G, Kozołub P, Czakiert T. 

Comparison of the standard Euler–Euler and hybrid Euler–Lagrange approaches 
for modeling particle transport in a pilot-scale circulating fluidized bed. 
Particuology 2014;15:129–37. 

industrial scale CFB riser using coarse-grained DDPM-EMMS modelling. The 
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 2018;96:1403–16. 

[310] Adamczyk WP, Kozołub P, Kruczek G, Pilorz M, Klimanek A, Czakiert T, et al. 

Numerical approach for modeling particle transport phenomena in a closed loop 
of a circulating fluidized bed. Particuology 2016;29:69–79. 

[311] Yang M, Banerjee S, Agarwal RK. Transient Cold Flow Simulation of Fast 

Fluidized Bed Fuel Reactors for Chemical-Looping Combustion. Journal of Energy 
Resources Technology 2018;140:1–7. 

[312] Muhammad A, Zhang N, Wang W. CFD simulations of a full-loop CFB reactor 

using coarse-grained Eulerian–Lagrangian dense discrete phase model: Effects of 
modeling parameters. Powder Technology 2019;354:615–29. 

[313] Hashemisohi A, Wang L, Shahbazi A. Dense Discrete Phase Model Coupled with 
Kinetic Theory of Granular Flow to Improve Predictions of Bubbling Fluidized Bed 
Hydrodynamics. KONA Powder and Particle Journal 2019;36:215–23. 
[314] Zhang K, Wang S, Tang Y, Liu G, behaviors He YGas pulsation effect on flow, 
bed heat transfer in a tapered fluidized. Powder Technology 2020;361:540–7. 

[315] Schneiderbauer S, Puttinger S, Pirker S. Numerical study of a bi-disperse gas-solid 
fluidized bed using an Eulerian and Lagrangian hybrid model. Procedia 
Engineering 2015;102:1539–45. 

[316] Adnan M, Sun J, Nouman A, Wei JJ. Multiscale modeling of bubbling fluidized 
bed reactors using a hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian dense discrete phase approach. 
Powder Technology 2020;376:296–319. 

[317] Adnan M, Sun J, Nouman A, Wei JJ. Verification and validation of the DDPM- 
EMMS model for numerical simulations of bubbling, turbulent and circulating 
fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2020. 

[318] Kumar P, Parwani AK, Gupta DK, Vitankar V. Transient Cold Flow Simulation of 
Fast-Fluidized Bed Air Reactor with Hematite as an Oxygen Carrier for Chemical 
Looping Combustion. Applied Sciences 2021;11:2288. 

[319] Fanelli E. CFD Hydrodynamics Investigations for Optimum Biomass Gasifier 

Design. Processes. 2020;8:1323. 

[320] Wu Y, Liu D, Hu J, Ma J, Chen X. Comparative study of two fluid model and dense 
discrete phase model for simulations of gas–solid hydrodynamics in circulating 
fluidized beds. Particuology 2021;55:108–17. 

[321] Adamczyk WP, Węcel G, Klajny M, Kozołub P, Klimanek A, Białecki RA. Modeling 

of particle transport and combustion phenomena in a large-scale circulating 
fluidized bed boiler using a hybrid Euler–Lagrange approach. Particuology 2014; 
16:29–40. 

[322] Adamczyk WP, Kozołub P, Węcel G, Klimanek A, Białecki RA, Czakiert T. 

Modeling oxy-fuel combustion in a 3D circulating fluidized bed using the hybrid 
Euler–Lagrange approach. Applied Thermal Engineering 2014;71:266–75. 
[323] Adamczyk WP, Kozołub P, Klimanek A, Białecki RA, Andrzejczyk M, Klajny M. 

Numerical simulations of the industrial circulating fluidized bed boiler under air- 
and oxy-fuel combustion. Applied Thermal Engineering 2015;87:127–36. 
[324] Klimanek A, Adamczyk W, Katelbach-Wo´zniak A, Węcel G, Szlęk A. Towards a 
hybrid Eulerian–Lagrangian CFD modeling of coal gasification in a circulating 
fluidized bed reactor. Fuel 2015;152:131–7. 

[325] Massoudi Farid M, Jeong HJ, Kim KH, Lee J, Kim D, Hwang J. Numerical 

investigation of particle transport hydrodynamics and coal combustion in an 
industrial-scale circulating fluidized bed combustor: Effects of coal feeder 
positions and coal feeding rates. Fuel 2017;192:187–200. 

[326] Adamczyk WP. Application of the numerical techniques for modelling fluidization 

process within industrial scale boilers. Archives of Computational Methods in 
Engineering 2017;24:669–702. 

[327] Adamczyk WP, My¨oh¨anen K, Hartge E-U, Ritvanen J, Klimanek A, Hypp¨anen T, 
et al. Generation of data sets for semi-empirical models of circulated fluidized bed 
boilers using hybrid Euler-Lagrange technique. Energy 2018;143:219–40. 
[328] Wu Y, Liu D, Zheng D, Ma J, Duan L, Chen X. Numerical simulation of circulating 
fluidized bed oxy-fuel combustion with Dense Discrete Phase Model. Fuel 
Processing Technology 2019;195:106129. 

[329] Wang S, Hu B, Jin C, Yang X, Zhang K. Dense discrete phase model simulations of 
CO2  capture process in a fluidized bed absorber with potassium-based solid 
sorbent. Powder Technology 2019;345:260–6. 

[330] Gu J, Liu Q, Zhong W, Yu A. Study on scale-up characteristics of oxy-fuel 

combustion in circulating fluidized bed boiler by 3D CFD simulation. Advanced 
Powder Technology 2020;31:2136–51. 

[331] Schneiderbauer S, Kinaci ME, Hauzenberger F, Pirker S. A Lagrangian-Eulerian 

hybrid model for the simulation of direct reduction of iron ore in fluidized beds. 
Progress in Applied CFD – CFD2017: Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on Computational Fluid Dynamics in the Oil & Gas, Metallurgical and 
Process Industries 2017. p. 97–105. 

[332] Schneiderbauer S, Kinaci ME, Hauzenberger F. Computational Fluid Dynamics 

Simulation of Iron Ore Reduction in Industrial-Scale Fluidized Beds. Steel 
Research International 2020;91:2000232. 

[333] Yang X, Wang S, Li B, Liu H, He Y. Evaluation of sorption-enhanced reforming 

over catalyst-sorbent bi-functional particles in an internally circulating fluidized 
bed. Advanced Powder Technology 2020;31:2566–72. 

[334] Stroh A, Daikeler A, Nikku M, May J, Alobaid F, von Bohnstein M, et al. Coarse 

grain 3D CFD-DEM simulation and validation with capacitance probe 
measurements in a circulating fluidized bed. Chemical Engineering Science 2019; 
196:37–53. 

[335] Liu D, Bu C, Chen X. Development and test of CFD–DEM model for complex 
geometry: A coupling algorithm for Fluent and DEM. Computers & Chemical 
Engineering 2013;58:260–8. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930195F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[336] Peng Z, Doroodchi E, Alghamdi YA, Shah K, Luo C, systems Moghtaderi 

BCFD–DEM simulation of solid circulation rate in the cold flow model of chemical 
looping. Chemical Engineering Research and Design 2015;95:262–80. 
[337] Breuninger P, Weis D, Behrendt I, Grohn P, Krull F, tube Antonyuk SCFD–DEM 
simulation of fine particles in a spouted bed apparatus with a Wurster. 
Particuology 2019;42:114–25. 

[338] Banerjee S, Agarwal R. Transient reacting flow simulation of spouted fluidized 

bed for coal-direct chemical looping combustion with different Fe-based oxygen 
carriers. Applied Energy 2015;160:552–60. 

[364] Wu C, Berrouk A, Nandakumar K. Three-dimensional discrete particle model for 

gas–solid fluidized beds on unstructured mesh. Chemical Engineering Science 
2009;152:514–29. 

[365] Wu C, Zhan J, Li Y, Lam K, Berrouk A. Accurate void fraction calculation for 

three-dimensional discrete particle model on unstructured mesh. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2009;64:1260–6. 

[366] Mezhericher M, Levy A, Borde I. Three-dimensional spray-drying model based on 
comprehensive formulation of drying kinetics. Drying Technology 2012;30: 
1256–73. 

[339] Zhang Z, Zhou L, Agarwal R. Transient simulations of spouted fluidized bed for 

[367] Mezhericher M, Levy A, Borde I. Probabilistic hard-sphere model of binary 

coal-direct chemical looping combustion. Energy & Fuels 2014;28:1548–60. 

[340] Marchelli F, Moliner C, Bosio B, Arato E. A CFD-DEM sensitivity analysis: The case 

of a pseudo-2D spouted bed. Powder Technology 2019;353:409–25. 
[341] El-Emam MA, Shi W, Zhou L. CFD-DEM simulation and optimization of gas- 

cyclone performance with realistic macroscopic particulate matter. Advanced 
Powder Technology 2019;30:2686–702. 

[342] Chu K, Wang B, Xu D, Chen Y, Yu A. CFD–DEM simulation of the gas–solid flow in 

a cyclone separator. Chemical Engineering Science 2011;66:834–47. 

[343] Chen X, Wang J. A comparison of two-fluid model, dense discrete particle model 
and CFD-DEM method for modeling impinging gas–solid flows. Powder 
Technology 2014;254:94–102. 

[344] Zhou L, Zhang L, Bai L, Shi W, Li W, Wang C, et al. Experimental study and 

transient CFD/DEM simulation in a fluidized bed based on different drag models. 
RSC Advances 2017;7:12764–74. 

[345] Herzog N, Schreiber M, Egbers C, Krautz HJ. A comparative study of different 
CFD-codes for numerical simulation of gas–solid fluidized bed hydrodynamics. 
Computers & Chemical Engineering 2012;39:41–6. 

[346] Moliner C, Marchelli F, Spanachi N, Martinez-Felipe A, Bosio B, Arato E. CFD 

simulation of a spouted bed: Comparison between the Discrete Element Method 
(DEM) and the Two Fluid Model (TFM). Chemical Engineering Journal 2019;377: 
120466. 

[347] Stroh A, Alobaid F, von Bohnstein M, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Numerical CFD 

simulation of 1 MW th circulating fluidized bed using the coarse grain discrete 
element method with homogenous drag models and particle size distribution. 
Fuel Processing Technology 2018;169:84–93. 

[348] May J, Alobaid F, Stroh A, Daikeler A, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Euler-Lagrange Model 

for the Simulation of Carbonate Looping Process. Chemie Ingenieur Technik 
2020;92:648–58. 

[349] Hobbs A. Simulation of an aggregate dryer using coupled CFD and DEM methods. 
International Journal of Computational Fluid Dynamics 2009;23:199–207. 
[350] Sudbrock F, Kruggel-Emden H, Wirtz S, Scherer V. Convective drying of agitated 

silica gel and beech wood particle beds—experiments and transient DEM-CFD 
simulations. Drying Technology 2015;33:1808–20. 

[351] Scherer V, M¨onnigmann M, Berner MO, Sudbrock F. Coupled DEM–CFD 

simulation of drying wood chips in a rotary drum–baffle design and model 
reduction. Fuel 2016;184:896–904. 

[352] Khomwachirakul P, Devahastin S, Swasdisevi T, Soponronnarit S. Simulation of 
flow and drying characteristics of high-moisture particles in an impinging stream 
dryer via CFD-DEM. Drying Technology 2016;34:403–19. 

[353] Buss F, Wirtz S, Scherer V. Simulation of a reacting agitated bed of straw pellets 
by a resolved coupled DEM/CFD method using a blocked-off approach. 
International Journal of Thermal Sciences 2020;152:106332. 

[354] Wiese J, Wissing F, H¨ohner D, Wirtz S, Scherer V, Ley U, et al. DEM/CFD 

modeling of the fuel conversion in a pellet stove. Fuel Processing Technology 
2016;152:223–39. 

[355] Bambauer F, Wirtz S, Scherer V, Bartusch H. Transient DEM-CFD simulation of 
solid and fluid flow in a three dimensional blast furnace model. Powder 
Technology 2018;334:53–64. 

[356] Scherer V, Wirtz S, Krause B, Wissing F. Simulation of Reacting Moving Granular 
Material in Furnaces and Boilers An Overview on the Capabilities Of the Discrete 
Element Method. Energy Procedia 2017;120:41–61. 

[357] Krause B, Liedmann B, Wiese J, Bucher P, Wirtz S, Piringer H, et al. 3D-DEM-CFD 
simulation of heat and mass transfer, gas combustion and calcination in an 
intermittent operating lime shaft kiln. International Journal of Thermal Sciences 
2017;117:121–35. 

[358] Simsek E, Brosch B, Wirtz S, Scherer V, Krüll F. Numerical simulation of grate 

firing systems using a coupled CFD/discrete element method (DEM). Powder 
Technology 2009;193:266–73. 

[359] B¨orner M, Bück A, Tsotsas E. DEM-CFD investigation of particle residence time 
distribution in top-spray fluidised bed granulation. Chemical Engineering Science 
2017;161:187–97. 

[360] Zhuang Y-Q, Chen X-M, Luo Z-H, flow Xiao JCFD–DEM modeling of gas–solid, 
reactor catalytic MTO reaction in a fluidized bed. Computers & Chemical 
Engineering 2014;60:1–16. 

[361] Wu C, Cheng Y, Ding Y, Jin Y. CFD–DEM simulation of gas–solid reacting flows in 

fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) process. Chemical Engineering Science 2010;65: 
542–9. 

[362] Ostermeier P, Fischer F, Fendt S, DeYoung S, Spliethoff H. Coarse-grained CFD- 
DEM simulation of biomass gasification in a fluidized bed reactor. Fuel 2019;255: 
115790. 

[363] Bellan S, Matsubara K, Cho HS, Gokon N, Kodama T. A CFD-DEM study of 

particle–particle interactions in multiphase flow of spray dryers. International 
Journal of Multiphase Flow 2012;43:22–38. 

[368] Jubaer H, Afshar S, Mejean S, Jeantet R, Xiao J, Chen XD, et al. Computationally 
inexpensive simulation of agglomeration in spray drying while preserving 
structure related information using CFD. Powder Technology 2020;372:372–93. 
[369] Nikku M, Daikeler A, Stroh A, My¨oh¨anen K. Comparison of solid phase closure 

models in Eulerian-Eulerian simulations of a circulating fluidized bed riser. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2019;195:39–50. 

[370] Jiang Y, Chen X, Kolehmainen J, Kevrekidis IG, Ozel A, Sundaresan S. 

Development of Data-Driven Filtered Drag Model for Industrial-Scale Fluidized 
Beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2020:116235. 

[371] Xiong Q, Aramideh S, Passalacqua A, Kong S-C. BIOTC: an open-source CFD code 
for simulating biomass fast pyrolysis. Computer Physics Communications 2014; 
185:1739–46. 

[372] Xiong Q, Kong S-C. Modeling effects of interphase transport coefficients on 
biomass pyrolysis in fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2014;262:96–105. 
[373] Ismail TM, El-Salam MA, Monteiro E, Rouboa A. Fluid dynamics model on 

fluidized bed gasifier using agro-industrial biomass as fuel. Waste Management 
2018;73:476–86. 

[374] Liu Y, Hinrichsen O. CFD simulation of hydrodynamics and methanation reactions 
in a fluidized-bed reactor for the production of synthetic natural gas. Industrial & 
Engineering Chemistry Research 2014;53:9348–56. 

[375] Vandewalle LA, Marin GB, Van Geem KM. catchyFOAM: Euler–Euler CFD 

Simulations of Fluidized Bed Reactors with Microkinetic Modeling of Gas-Phase 
and Catalytic Surface Chemistry. Energy & Fuels 2020;35:2545–61. 

[376] Yuan X, Li H, Ye M, Liu Z. Study of the coke distribution in MTO fluidized bed 
reactor with MP-PIC approach. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 
2019;97:500–10. 

[377] Yang S, Wang S. Shape Effect of the Riser Cross Section on the Full-Loop 

Hydrodynamics of a Three-Dimensional Circulating Fluidized Bed. ACS Omega 
2020;5:5784–95. 

[378] Jiang Y, Li F, Ge W, Wang W. EMMS-based solid stress model for the multiphase 

particle-in-cell method. Powder Technology 2020;360:1377–87. 

[379] Verma V, Padding JT. A novel approach to MP-PIC: Continuum particle model for 
dense particle flows in fluidized beds. Chemical Engineering Science: X 2020;6: 
100053. 

[380] Yang S, Wang S, Wang H. Impact of polydispersity on the flow dynamics in the 

riser of a circulating fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2021;381:489–502. 

[381] Caliskan U, Miskovic S. A chimera approach for MP-PIC simulations of dense 

particulate flows using large parcel size relative to the computational cell size. 
Chemical Engineering Journal Advances 2021;5:100054. 

[382] Yan L, Lim CJ, Yue G, He B, Grace JR. Simulation of biomass-steam gasification in 

fluidized bed reactors: Model setup, comparisons and preliminary predictions. 
Bioresource Technology 2016;221:625–35. 

[383] Wang S, Luo K, Hu C, Sun L, Fan J. Impact of operating parameters on biomass 
gasification in a fluidized bed reactor: An Eulerian-Lagrangian approach. Powder 
Technology 2018;333:304–16. 

[384] Yang S, Zhou T, Wei Y, Hu J, Wang H. Influence of size-induced segregation on 

the biomass gasification in bubbling fluidized bed with continuous lognormal 
particle size distribution. Energy Conversion and Management 2019;198:111848. 
[385] Yang S, Zhou T, Wei Y, Hu J, Wang H. Dynamical and thermal property of rising 
bubbles in the bubbling fluidized biomass gasifier with wide particle size 
distribution. Applied Energy 2020;259:114178. 

[386] Yang S, Liu X, Wang S. CFD simulation of air-blown coal gasification in a fluidized 

bed reactor with continuous feedstock. Energy Conversion and Management 
2020;213:112774. 

[387] Yang S, Fan F, Wei Y, Hu J, Wang H, Wu S. Three-dimensional MP-PIC simulation 
of the steam gasification of biomass in a spouted bed gasifier. Energy Conversion 
and Management 2020;210:112689. 

[388] Wan Z, Yang S, Wei Y, Hu J, Wang H. CFD modeling of the flow dynamics and 

gasification in the combustor and gasifier of a dual fluidized bed pilot plant. 
Energy 2020:117366. 

[389] Wan Z, Yang S, Sun Y, Wei Y, Hu J, Wang H. Distribution and particle-scale 

thermochemical property of biomass in the gasifier of a dual fluidized bed. Energy 
Conversion and Management 2020;209:112672. 

[390] Zhou T, Yang S, Wei Y, Hu J, Wang H. Impact of wide particle size distribution on 

the gasification performance of biomass in a bubbling fluidized bed gasifier. 
Renewable Energy 2020;148:534–47. 

[391] Wan Z, Hu J, Qi X. Numerical analysis of hydrodynamics and thermochemical 

property of biomass gasification in a pilot-scale circulating fluidized bed. Energy 
2021;225:120254. 

hydrodynamics with heat transfer in a gas-solid fluidized bed reactor for solar 
thermal applications. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2018;116: 
377–92. 

[392] Yang S, Wan Z, Wang S, Wang H. Reactive MP-PIC investigation of heat and mass 
transfer behaviors during the biomass pyrolysis in a fluidized bed reactor. Journal 
of Environmental Chemical Engineering 2021;9:105047. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930196F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[393] Lu Y, Huang J, Zheng P, Jing D. Flow structure and bubble dynamics in 

supercritical water fluidized bed and gas fluidized bed: A comparative study. 
International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2015;73:130–41. 

[394] Takabatake K, Mori Y, Khinast JG, Sakai M. Numerical investigation of a coarse- 
grain discrete element method in solid mixing in a spouted bed. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2018;346:416–26. 

[395] Liu D, van Wachem B. Comprehensive assessment of the accuracy of CFD-DEM 
simulations of bubbling fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2019;343:145–58. 

[396] Norouzi H, Zarghami R, Mostoufi N. New hybrid CPU-GPU solver for CFD-DEM 

simulation of fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2017;316:233–44. 
[397] Kerst K, de Souza LM, Bartz A, Seidel-Morgenstern A, Janiga G. CFD-DEM 

simulation of a fluidized bed crystallization reactor. Computer Aided Chemical 
Engineering: Elsevier; 2015. p. 263-8. 

[398] Askarishahi M, Salehi MS, Radl S. Full-physics simulations of spray-particle 

interaction in a bubbling fluidized bed. AIChE journal 2017;63:2569–87. 
[399] Xie J, Zhong W, Shao Y, Li K. Coupling of CFD-DEM and reaction model for 3D 

fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2019;353:72–83. 

[400] Kerst K, Roloff C, de Souza LGM, Bartz A, Seidel-Morgenstern A, Th´evenin D, et al. 
CFD-DEM simulations of a fluidized bed crystallizer. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2017;165:1–13. 

[401] Pe˜na-Monferrer C, Monr´os-Andreu G, Chiva S, Martínez-Cuenca R, Mu˜noz- 

Cobo J-L. A CFD-DEM solver to model bubbly flow. Part I: Model development 
and assessment in upward vertical pipes. Chemical Engineering Science 2018; 
176:524–45. 

[402] Pe˜na-Monferrer C, Monr´os-Andreu G, Chiva S, Martínez-Cuenca R, Mu˜noz- 

Cobo J-L. A CFD-DEM solver to model bubbly flow. Part II: Critical validation in 
upward vertical pipes including axial evolution. Chemical Engineering Science 
2018;177:537–56. 

[403] Han Q, Yang N, Zhu J, Liu M. Onset velocity of circulating fluidization and 

particle residence time distribution: a CFD–DEM study. Particuology 2015;21: 
187–95. 

[424] Xiong Q, Xu F, Ramirez E, Pannala S, Daw CS. Modeling the impact of bubbling 
bed hydrodynamics on tar yield and its fluctuations during biomass fast pyrolysis. 
Fuel 2016;164:11–7. 

[425] Xiong Q, Zhang J, Xu F, Wiggins G. Daw CS. Coupling DAEM and CFD for 

simulating biomass fast pyrolysis in fluidized beds. Journal of Analytical and 
Applied Pyrolysis 2016;117:176–81. 

[426] Lee YR, Choi HS, Park HC, Lee JE. A numerical study on biomass fast pyrolysis 

process: A comparison between full lumped modeling and hybrid modeling 
combined with CFD. Computers & Chemical Engineering 2015;82:202–15. 
[427] Azizi S, Mowla D. Cfd modeling of algae flash pyrolysis in the batch fluidized bed 
reactor including heat carrier particles. International Journal of Chemical Reactor 
Engineering 2016;14:463–80. 

[428] Lee JE, Park HC, Choi HS. Numerical study on fast pyrolysis of lignocellulosic 
biomass with varying column size of bubbling fluidized bed. ACS Sustainable 
Chemistry and Engineering 2017;5:2196–204. 

[429] Gerber S, Behrendt F, Oevermann M. An Eulerian modeling approach of wood 

gasification in a bubbling fluidized bed reactor using char as bed material. Fuel 
2010;89:2903–17. 

[430] Deng Z, Xiao R, Jin B, Song Q. Numerical simulation of chemical looping 

combustion process with CaSO4  oxygen carrier. International Journal of 
Greenhouse Gas Control 2009;3:368–75. 

[431] Wang X, Jin B, Zhong W, Zhang Y, Song M. Three-dimensional simulation of a 
coal gas fueled chemical looping combustion process. International Journal of 
Greenhouse Gas Control 2011;5:1498–506. 

[432] Banerjee S, Agarwal RK. An Eulerian Approach to Computational Fluid Dynamics 
Simulation of a Chemical-Looping Combustion Reactor With Chemical Reactions. 
Journal of Energy Resources Technology 2016;138. 042201-. 

[433] Zhang Y, Langørgen Ø, Saanum I, Chao Z, Jakobsen HA. Modeling and simulation 
of chemical looping combustion using a copper-based oxygen carrier in a double- 
loop circulating fluidized bed reactor system. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 
Research 2017;56:14754–65. 

[404] Kieckhefen P, Lichtenegger T, Pietsch S, Pirker S, Heinrich S. Simulation of spray 

[434] Cloete S, Johansen ST, Amini S. An assessment of the ability of computational 

coating in a spouted bed using recurrence CFD. Particuology 2019;42:92–103. 

[405] Jiang Z, Rieck C, Bück A, Tsotsas E. Modeling of inter-and intra-particle coating 
uniformity in a Wurster fluidized bed by a coupled CFD-DEM-Monte Carlo 
approach. Chemical Engineering Science 2020;211:115289. 

[406] Che H, Liu D, Tian W, Gao S, Sun J, Xu L. CFD-DEM study of gas-solid flow 

regimes in a Wurster type fluidized bed with experimental validation by electrical 
capacitance tomography. Chemical Engineering Journal 2020;389:124280. 
[407] Mostafaei F, Golshan S, Zarghami R, Gharebagh RS, Mostoufi N. Investigating the 

bubble dynamics in fluidized bed by CFD-DEM. Powder Technology 2020;366: 
938–48. 

[408] Kieckhefen P, Pietsch S, H¨ofert M, Sch¨onherr M, Heinrich S, J¨ager FK. Influence of 

gas inflow modelling on CFD-DEM simulations of three-dimensional prismatic 
spouted beds. Powder Technology 2018;329:167–80. 

[409] Gu Y, Ozel A, Sundaresan S. A modified cohesion model for CFD–DEM simulations 

of fluidization. Powder Technology 2016;296:17–28. 

[410] Li L, Li B, Liu Z. Modeling of spout-fluidized beds and investigation of drag 
closures using OpenFOAM. Powder Technology 2017;305:364–76. 

[411] Ku X, Li T, Løvås T. Influence of drag force correlations on periodic fluidization 
behavior in Eulerian–Lagrangian simulation of a bubbling fluidized bed. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2013;95:94–106. 

[412] Wang Z, Liu M, Yang X. A four-way coupled CFD-DEM modeling framework for 
charged particles under electrical field with applications to gas insulated 
switchgears. Powder Technology 2020;373:433–45. 

[413] Zhao P, Xu J, Ge W, Wang J. A CFD-DEM-IBM method for Cartesian grid 
simulation of gas-solid flow in complex geometries. Chemical Engineering 
Journal 2020;389:124343. 

[414] Oevermann M, Gerber S, Behrendt F. Euler–Lagrange/DEM simulation of wood 

gasification in a bubbling fluidized bed reactor. Particuology 2009;7:307–16. 
[415] Gerber S, Oevermann M. A two dimensional Euler-Lagrangian model of wood 

gasification in a charcoal bed—Particle histories. Powder Technology 2018;324: 
5–15. 

[416] Gerber S, Oevermann M. A two dimensional Euler–Lagrangian model of wood 
gasification in a charcoal bed–Part I: model description and base scenario. Fuel 
2014;115:385–400. 

[417] Sutkar VS, Deen NG, Salikov V, Antonyuk S, Heinrich S, Kuipers J. Experimental 
and numerical investigations of a pseudo-2D spout fluidized bed with draft plates. 
Powder Technology 2015;270:537–47. 

[418] Wang Z, Liu M. Semi-resolved CFD–DEM for thermal particulate flows with 

applications to fluidized beds. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 
2020;159:120150. 

[419] Ku X, Jin H, Lin J. Comparison of gasification performances between raw and 

torrefied biomasses in an air-blown fluidized-bed gasifier. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2017;168:235–49. 

[420] Lungu M, Siame J, Mukosha L. Comparison of CFD-DEM and TFM approaches for 
the simulation of the small scale challenge problem 1. Powder Technology 2020; 
378:85–103. 

[421] Askaripour H, Dehkordi AM. Simulation of 3D freely bubbling gas–solid fluidized 
beds using various drag models: TFM approach. Chemical Engineering Research 
and Design 2015;100:377–90. 

fluid dynamic models to predict reactive gas–solid flows in a fluidized bed. 
Powder Technology 2012;215:15–25. 

[435] Yu G, Dai B, Chen J, Liu D, Yu X, Shao J, et al. CFD Modeling of a Carbonation 

Reactor with a K-Based Dry Sorbent for CO2  Capture. Chemical Engineering & 
Technology 2014;37:1705–12. 

[436] Yu G, Zhao L, Chen J, Hu T, Dai B, Liu D, et al. Numerical studies for the CO2 
capture process in a fluidized-bed absorber. Energy & Fuels 2014;28:4705–13. 

[437] Ghadirian E, Abbasian J, Arastoopour H. CFD simulation of gas and particle flow 

and a carbon capture process using a circulating fluidized bed (CFB) reacting 
loop. Powder technology 2019;344:27–35. 

[438] Chen XZ, Luo ZH, Yan WC, Lu YH. Ng IS. Three-dimensional CFD-PBM coupled 
model of the temperature fields in fluidized-bed polymerization reactors. AIChE 
Journal 2011;57:3351–66. 

[439] Yan WC, Luo ZH, Lu YH, Chen XD. A CFD-PBM-PMLM integrated model for the 

gas–solid flow fields in fluidized bed polymerization reactors. AIChE journal 
2012;58:1717–32. 

[440] Dou B, Song Y. A CFD approach on simulation of hydrogen production from steam 
reforming of glycerol in a fluidized bed reactor. International journal of hydrogen 
energy 2010;35:10271–84. 

[441] Di Carlo A, Aloisi I, Jand N, Stendardo S, Foscolo PU. Sorption enhanced steam 
methane reforming on catalyst-sorbent bifunctional particles: A CFD fluidized bed 
reactor model. Chemical Engineering Science 2017;173:428–42. 

[442] da Silva FRGB, de Souza M, da Costa AMdS, de Matos Jorge LM, Paraíso PR. 
Experimental and numerical analysis of soybean meal drying in fluidized bed. 
Powder technology 2012;229:61–70. 

[443] Reuge N, Cadoret L, Caussat B. Multifluid Eulerian modelling of a silicon 

Fluidized Bed Chemical Vapor Deposition process: Analysis of various kinetic 
models. Chemical Engineering Journal 2009;148:506–16. 

[444] Zhang X, Qian W, Zhang H, Sun Q, Ying W. Effect of the operation parameters on 
the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis in fluidized bed reactors. Chinese Journal of 
Chemical Engineering 2018;26:245–51. 

[445] Chen J, Yu G, Dai B, Liu D, Zhao L. CFD simulation of a bubbling fluidized bed 

gasifier using a bubble-based drag model. Energy & Fuels 2014;28:6351–60. 

[446] Jin B, Xiao R, Deng Z, Song Q. Computational fluid dynamics modeling of 

chemical looping combustion process with calcium sulphate oxygen carrier. 
International Journal of Chemical Reactor Engineering 2009;7:1–22. 

[447] Wang S, Yang X, Xu S, Zhang K, Li B. Evaluation of sorption-enhanced reforming 
of biodiesel by-product in fluidized beds by means of CFD approach. Fuel 2018; 
214:115–22. 

[448] Verissimo GL, Leiroz AJK, Cruz ME. Influence of the pyrolysis and heterogeneous 
char reactions modeling in the simulation of sugarcane bagasse gasification in a 
bubbling fluidized bed reactor. Fuel 2020;281:118750. 

[449] Li F, Song F, Benyahia S, Wang W, Li J. MP-PIC simulation of CFB riser with 

EMMS-based drag model. Chemical Engineering Science 2012;82:104–13. 
[450] Panday R, Shadle LJ, Shahnam M, Cocco R, Issangya A, Spenik JS, et al. Challenge 

problem: 1. Model validation of circulating fluidized beds. Powder Technology 
2014;258:370–91. 

[451] Feng M, Li F, Wang W, Li J. Parametric study for MP-PIC simulation of bubbling 

fluidized beds with Geldart A particles. Powder Technology 2018;328:215–26. 

[422] Xue Q, Heindel T, Fox R. A CFD model for biomass fast pyrolysis in fluidized-bed 

[452] Kadyrov T, Li F, Wang W. Impacts of solid stress model on MP-PIC simulation of a 

reactors. Chemical Engineering Science 2011;66:2440–52. 

CFB riser with EMMS drag. Powder Technology 2019;354:517–28. 

[423] Xue Q, Fox RO. Computational modeling of biomass thermochemical conversion 
in fluidized beds: particle density variation and size distribution. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry Research 2015;54:4084–94. 

[453] Gopalakrishnan P, Tafti D. Development of parallel DEM for the open source code 

MFIX. Powder Technology 2013;235:33–41. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930197F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[454] Li T, Zhang Y, Hern´andez-Jim´enez F. Investigation of particle–wall interaction in 

[483] Shi X, Wu Y, Lan X, Liu F, Gao J. Effects of the riser exit geometries on the 

a pseudo-2D fluidized bed using CFD-DEM simulations. Particuology 2016;25: 
10–22. 

hydrodynamics and solids back-mixing in CFB risers: 3D simulation using CPFD 
approach. Powder Technology 2015;284:130–42. 

[455] Koralkar NV, Bose M. Performance of drag models for simulation of fluidized beds 
with Geldart D particles. Advanced Powder Technology 2016;27:2377–98. 
[456] Xu Y, Li T, Musser J, Liu X, Xu G, Rogers WA. CFD-DEM modeling the effect of 
column size and bed height on minimum fluidization velocity in micro fluidized 
beds with Geldart B particles. Powder Technology 2017;318:321–8. 

[457] Li T, Rabha S, Verma V, Dietiker J-F, Xu Y, Lu L, et al. Experimental study and 
discrete element method simulation of Geldart Group A particles in a small-scale 
fluidized bed. Advanced Powder Technology 2017;28:2961–73. 

[484] Wang Q, Niemi T, Peltola J, Kallio S, Yang H, Lu J, et al. Particle size distribution 
in CPFD modeling of gas–solid flows in a CFB riser. Particuology 2015;21:107–17. 
[485] Shi X, Sun R, Lan X, Liu F, Zhang Y, Gao J. CPFD simulation of solids residence 
time and back-mixing in CFB risers. Powder Technology 2015;271:16–25. 
[486] Qiu G, Ye J, Wang H. Investigation of gas–solids flow characteristics in a 

circulating fluidized bed with annular combustion chamber by pressure 
measurements and CPFD simulation. Chemical Engineering Science 2015;134: 
433–47. 

[458] Farivar F, Zhang H, Tian ZF, Gupte A. CFD-DEM simulation of fluidization of 

[487] Lim J-H, Bae K, Shin J-H, Kim J-H, Lee D-H, Han J-H, et al. Effect of 

multisphere-modelled cylindrical particles. Powder Technology 2020;360: 
1017–27. 

[459] Zhang Q, Cai W, Lu C, Gidaspow D, Lu H. Modified MFIX code to simulate 

hydrodynamics of gas-solids bubbling fluidized beds: A model of coupled kinetic 
theory of granular flow and discrete element method. Powder Technology 2019; 
357:417–27. 

[460] Yu Y, Li Y, Jiang M, Zhou Q. Meso-Scale Drag Model designed for coarse-grid 

particle–particle interaction on the bed pressure drop and bubble flow by 
computational particle-fluid dynamics simulation of bubbling fluidized beds with 
shroud nozzle. Powder Technology 2016;288:315–23. 

[488] Thapa RK, Pfeifer C, Halvorsen BM. Flow regime identification in a fluidized bed 
combustion reactor. International Journal of Modeling and Optimization 2016;6: 
188. 

[489] Wang H, Qiu G, Ye J, Yang W. Experimental study and modelling on gas–solid 

Eulerian-Lagrangian simulation of gas-solid flows. Chemical Engineering Science 
2020;223:115747. 

flow in a lab-scale fluidised bed with Wurster tube. Powder Technology 2016;300: 
14–27. 

[461] Lu L, Konan A, Benyahia S. Influence of grid resolution, parcel size and drag 
models on bubbling fluidized bed simulation. Chemical Engineering Journal 
2017;326:627–39. 

[462] Wang S, Luo K, Fan J. CFD-DEM coupled with thermochemical sub-models for 
biomass gasification: Validation and sensitivity analysis. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2020;217:115550. 

[490] Adkins BD, Kapur N, Dudley T, Webb S, Blaser P. Experimental validation of CFD 
hydrodynamic models for catalytic fast pyrolysis. Powder Technology 2017;316: 
725–39. 

[491] Wang L, Jia L, Li X, Cai W. Numerical and experimental study of a novel compact 

micro fluidized beds reactor for CO2  capture in HVAC. Energy and Buildings 
2016;135:128–36. 

[463] Li T, Guenther C. MFIX-DEM simulations of change of volumetric flow in fluidized 

[492] Ma Q, Lei F, Xu X, Xiao Y. Three-dimensional full-loop simulation of a high- 

beds due to chemical reactions. Powder Technology 2012;220:70–8. 

[464] Finn JR, Galvin JE, Hornbostel K. CFD investigation of CO2 absorption/desorption 
by a fluidized bed of micro-encapsulated solvents. Chemical Engineering Science: 
X 2020;6:100050. 

[465] Wang S, Shen Y. CFD-DEM study of biomass gasification in a fluidized bed 
reactor: Effects of key operating parameters. Renewable Energy 2020;159: 
1146–64. 

[466] Blaser PJ, Corina G. Validation and application of computational modeling to 

reduce erosion in a circulating fluidized bed boiler. International Journal of 
Chemical Reactor Engineering 2012;10:1–17. 

[467] Karimipour S, Pugsley T. Application of the particle in cell approach for the 

density CFB with standpipe aeration experiments. Powder Technology 2017;320: 
574–85. 

[493] Liu H, Li J, Wang Q. Simulation of gas–solid flow characteristics in a circulating 
fluidized bed based on a computational particle fluid dynamics model. Powder 
Technology 2017;321:132–42. 

[494] Cho H, Kim J, Park C, Lee K, Kim M, Moon I. Uneven distribution of particle flow 

in RFCC reactor riser. Powder Technology 2017;312:113–23. 

[495] Upadhyay M, Park HC, Hwang JG, Choi HS, Jang H-N, Seo Y-C. Computational 
particle-fluid dynamics simulation of gas-solid flow in a circulating fluidized bed 
with air or O2/CO2  as fluidizing gas. Powder Technology 2017;318:350–62. 
[496] Zhang Y, Wei Q. CPFD simulation of bed-to-wall heat transfer in a gas-solids 

simulation of bubbling fluidized beds of Geldart A particles. Powder Technology 
2012;220:63–9. 

bubbling fluidized bed with an immersed vertical tube. Chemical Engineering and 
Processing-Process Intensification 2017;116:17–28. 

[468] Vivacqua V, Vashisth S, Hebrard G, Grace J, Epstein N. Characterization of 

[497] Dong L, Zhang B, Zhang Y, Zhao Y, Zhou E, Lv P, et al. Kinetic characteristics of 

fluidized bed layer inversion in a 191-mm-diameter column using both 
experimental and CPFD approaches. Chemical Engineering Science 2012;80: 
419–28. 

[469] Clark S, Snider DM, Spenik J. CO2  Adsorption loop experiment with 

Eulerian–Lagrangian simulation. Powder Technology 2013;242:100–7. 
[470] Weber JM, Layfield KJ, Van Essendelft DT, Mei JS. Fluid bed characterization 

using electrical capacitance volume tomography (ECVT), compared to CPFD 
software’s barracuda. Powder Technology 2013;250:138–46. 

[471] Lan X, Shi X, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Xu C, Gao J. Solids back-mixing behavior and 
effect of the mesoscale structure in CFB risers. Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry Research 2013;52:11888–96. 

[472] Parker J, LaMarche K, Chen W, Williams K, Stamato H, Thibault S. CFD 

simulations for prediction of scaling effects in pharmaceutical fluidized bed 
processors at three scales. Powder technology 2013;235:115–20. 

[473] Cheng C, Joachim W, Stefan H, Hai-Ying Q, Ernst-Ulrich H. CPFD simulation of 
circulating fluidized bed risers. Powder Technology 2013;235:238–47. 
[474] Wang Q, Yang H, Wang P, Lu J, Liu Q, Zhang H, et al. Application of CPFD 
method in the simulation of a circulating fluidized bed with a loop seal Part 
II—Investigation of solids circulation. Powder Technology 2014;253:822–8. 
[475] Wang Q, Yang H, Wang P, Lu J, Liu Q, Zhang H, et al. Application of CPFD 

method in the simulation of a circulating fluidized bed with a loop seal, part 
I—Determination of modeling parameters. Powder Technology 2014;253: 
814–21. 

[476] O’Rourke PJ, Snider DM. A new blended acceleration model for the particle 

contact forces induced by an interstitial fluid in dense particle/fluid flows. 
Powder Technology 2014;256:39–51. 

[477] Shi X, Lan X, Liu F, Zhang Y, Gao J. Effect of particle size distribution on 

hydrodynamics and solids back-mixing in CFB risers using CPFD simulation. 
Powder Technology 2014;266:135–43. 

[478] Yin S, Zhong W, Jin B, Fan J. Modeling on the hydrodynamics of pressurized high- 

flux circulating fluidized beds (PHFCFBs) by Eulerian–Lagrangian approach. 
Powder Technology 2014;259:52–64. 

[479] Jiang Y, Qiu G, Wang H. Modelling and experimental investigation of the full-loop 
gas–solid flow in a circulating fluidized bed with six cyclone separators. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2014;109:85–97. 

the particles in a dense-phase pulsed fluidized bed for dry beneficiation. The 
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 2017;95:1133–40. 

[498] Tu Q, Wang H. CPFD study of a full-loop three-dimensional pilot-scale circulating 
fluidized bed based on EMMS drag model. Powder Technology 2018;323:534–47. 
[499] Ma Q, Lei F, Xiao Y. Numerical analysis of operating conditions for establishing 

high-density circulating fluidized bed by CPFD method. Powder Technology 
2018;338:446–57. 

[500] Omer A, Weng M. Effect of primary air maldistribution due to nozzle wear on 

CFBC performance. Fuel Processing Technology 2018;173:191–6. 

[501] Gu J, Zhong W, Shao Y, Liu X. Particle-Motion Behaviors in a Dual Circulating 
Fluidized Bed by a Multiphase Particle-in-Cell Method. Industrial & Engineering 
Chemistry Research 2018;57:14809–21. 

[502] Chladek J, Jayarathna CK, Moldestad BM, Tokheim L-A. Fluidized bed 

classification of particles of different size and density. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2018;177:151–62. 

[503] Yang S, Wu H, Lin W, Li H, Zhu Q. An exploratory study of three-dimensional MP- 
PIC-based simulation of bubbling fluidized beds with and without baffles. 
Particuology 2018;39:68–77. 

[504] Zhang L, Wang Z, Li S, Qin H. Effect of a draft tube on oil shale particle drying 
process of a spouted bed: CPFD simulation studies. Advanced Powder Technology 
2018;29:2255–67. 

[505] Park HC, Choi HS. Numerical study of the segregation of pyrolized char in a 
bubbling fluidized bed according to distributor configuration. Powder 
Technology 2019;355:637–48. 

[506] Zhang Y, Liang Y, Wang M, Bi X, Lu C. Experimental study and CPFD simulation 
on circumferential flow heterogeneity in a disc-donut catalyst stripper. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2019:123567. 

[507] Jayarathna CK, Balfe M, Moldestad BM, Tokheim L-A. Improved multi-stage 

cross-flow fluidized bed classifier. Powder Technology 2019;342:621–9. 
[508] Timsina R, Thapa RK, Moldestad BME, Eikeland MS. Effect of particle size on flow 
behavior in fluidized beds. International Journal of Energy Production and 
Management 2019;4:287–97. 

[509] Zhang H, Lu Y. A computational particle fluid-dynamics simulation of 

hydrodynamics in a three-dimensional full-loop circulating fluidized bed: Effects 
of particle-size distribution. Particuology 2020;49:134–45. 

[480] Fotovat F, Abbasi A, Spiteri RJ, de Lasa H, Chaouki J. A CPFD model for a bubbly 

[510] Kraft S, Kirnbauer F, Hofbauer H. Influence of drag laws on pressure and bed 

biomass–sand fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2015;275:39–50. 
[481] Vashisth S, Motlagh AA, Tebianian S, Salcudean M, Grace J. Comparison of 

numerical approaches to model FCC particles in gas–solid bubbling fluidized bed. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2015;134:269–86. 

[482] Solnordal CB, Kenche V, Hadley TD, Feng Y, Witt PJ, Lim K-S. Simulation of an 

internally circulating fluidized bed using a multiphase particle-in-cell method. 
Powder Technology 2015;274:123–34. 

material recirculation rate in a cold flow model of an 8 MW dual fluidized bed 
system by means of CPFD. Particuology 2018;36:70–81. 

[511] Ma Q, Lei F, Xiao Y. Intensification of high-density CFB by standpipe aeration 
under elevated pressure. Chemical Engineering and Processing-Process 
Intensification 2020;147:107723. 

[512] Chen Q, Hu J, Yang H, Wang D, Liu H, Wang X, et al. Experiment and simulation 
of the pneumatic classification and drying of coking coal in a fluidized bed dryer. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2020;214:115364. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930198F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[513] Zhu X, Dong P, Tu Q, Zhu Z, Yang W, Wang H. Investigation of gas-solids flow 

[541] Chen X, Ma J, Tian X, Wan J, Zhao H. CPFD simulation and optimization of a 50 

characteristics in a pressurised circulating fluidised bed by experiment and 
simulation. Powder Technology 2020;366:420–33. 

[514] Sulzgruber V, Wünsch D, Haider M, Walter H. Numerical investigation on the 

kWth  dual circulating fluidized bed reactor for chemical looping combustion of 
coal. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 2019;90:102800. 
[542] Chen X, Ma J, Tian X, Xu Z, Zhao H. Numerical investigation on the improvement 

flow behavior of a novel fluidization based particle thermal energy storage (FP- 
TES). Energy. 2020:117528. 

of carbon conversion in a dual circulating fluidized bed reactor for chemical 
looping combustion of coal. Energy & Fuels 2019;33:12801–13. 

[515] Liu Y, Wu Y, Shi X, Wang C, Gao J, Lan X. 3D CPFD Simulation of Circulating 

Fluidized Bed Downer and Riser: Comparisons of Flow Structure and Solids Back- 
Mixing Behavior. Processes 2020;8:161. 

[516] Raheem DG, Yilmaz B, 

¨
Ozdo˘gan S. Cold Flow Simulation of a 30 kW (th) CFB 

Riser with CPFD. Journal of Applied Fluid Mechanics 2020;13:603–14. 
[517] Jaiswal R, Furuvik NC, Thapa RK, Moldestad BM. Method of identifying an 

operating regime in a bubbling fluidized bed gasification reactor. International 
Journal of Energy Production and Management 2020;5:24–34. 

[518] Tu Q, Wang H. Effects of riser geometry on gas–solid flow characteristics in 

circulating fluidized beds. Particuology 2020;49:205–17. 

[519] Wu Y, Shi X, Liu Y, Wang C, Gao J, Lan X. 3D CPFD simulations of gas-solids flow 
in a CFB downer with cluster-based drag model. Powder Technology 2020;361: 
400–13. 

[520] Yang Z, Zhang Y, Oloruntoba A, Yue J. MP-PIC simulation of the effects of spent 
catalyst distribution and horizontal baffle in an industrial FCC regenerator. Part I: 
Effects on hydrodynamics. Chemical Engineering Journal 2021;412:128634. 

[543] Liu Q, Zhong W, Yu A. Oxy-fuel combustion behaviors in a fluidized bed: A 
combined experimental and numerical study. Powder Technology 2019;349: 
40–51. 

[544] Reinking Z, Shim H-S, Whitty KJ, Lighty JS. Computational simulation of a 100 

kW dual circulating fluidized bed reactor processing coal by chemical looping 
with oxygen uncoupling. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 2019; 
90:102795. 

[545] Du Y, Zhang L, Berrouk AS. Exergy analysis of propane dehydrogenation in a 

fluidized bed reactor: Experiment and MP-PIC simulation. Energy Conversion and 
Management 2019;202:112213. 

[546] Jia C, Li J, Chen J, Cui S, Liu H, Wang Q. Simulation and prediction of co- 

combustion of oil shale retorting solid waste and cornstalk in circulating fluidized 
bed using CPFD method. Applied Thermal Engineering 2020;165:113574. 
[547] Ahmed I, de Lasa H. CO2  Capture Using Chemical Looping Combustion from a 

Biomass-Derived Syngas Feedstock: Simulation of a Riser–Downer Scaled-Up 
Unit. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2020;59:6900–13. 

[521] Pal K, Theuerkauf J. Multiphase Particle in Cell Simulations of Fluidized Beds: 

[548] Cui Y, Liu X, Zhong W. Simulations of Coal Combustion in a Pressurized 

Studies on Bubble Rise Velocity and Minimum Fluidization Velocity. Chemie 
Ingenieur Technik 2021;93:237–46. 

[522] Zafiryadis F, Jensen AD, Laxminarayan Y, Lin W, Hove EA, Larsen MB, et al. 

Predicting cold gas-solid flow in a pilot-scale dual-circulating fluidized bed: 
Validation of computational particle fluid dynamics model. Powder Technology 
2021;381:25–43. 

[523] Snider D, Banerjee S. Heterogeneous gas chemistry in the CPFD 

Eulerian–Lagrangian numerical scheme (ozone decomposition). Powder 
Technology 2010;199:100–6. 

[524] Snider DM, Clark SM, O’Rourke PJ. Eulerian–Lagrangian method for three- 

dimensional thermal reacting flow with application to coal gasifiers. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2011;66:1285–95. 

[525] Parker JM. Validation of CFD model for polysilicon deposition and production of 
silicon fines in a silane deposition FBR. International Journal of Chemical Reactor 
Engineering 2011;9:1–20. 

[526] Abbasi A, Ege PE, De Lasa H. CPFD simulation of a fast fluidized bed steam coal 
gasifier feeding section. Chemical Engineering Journal 2011;174:341–50. 
[527] Breault RW, Huckaby ED. Parametric behavior of a CO2  capture process: CFD 
simulation of solid-sorbent CO2  absorption in a riser reactor. Applied Energy 
2013;112:224–34. 

[528] Thapa R, Frohner A, Tondl G, Pfeifer C, Halvorsen B. Circulating fluidized bed 

combustion reactor: Computational Particle Fluid Dynamic model validation and 
gas feed position optimization. Computers & Chemical Engineering 2016;92: 
180–8. 

[529] Kraft S, Kuba M, Kirnbauer F, Bosch K, Hofbauer H. Optimization of a 50 MW 

bubbling fluidized bed biomass combustion chamber by means of computational 
particle fluid dynamics. Biomass & Bioenergy 2016;89:31–9. 

[530] Kraft S, Kirnbauer F, Hofbauer H. CPFD simulations of an industrial-sized dual 

fluidized bed steam gasification system of biomass with 8 MW fuel input. Applied 
Energy 2017;190:408–20. 

[531] Berrouk AS, Pornsilph C, Bale S, Du Y, Nandakumar K. Simulation of a large-scale 

FCC riser using a combination of MP-PIC and four-lump oil-cracking kinetic 
models. Energy & Fuels 2017;31:4758–70. 

Supercritical CO2  Circulating Fluidized Bed. Energy & Fuels 2020;34:4977–92. 

[549] Díaz-Heras M, C´orcoles J, Belmonte J. Almendros-Ib´a˜nez J. 3D Numerical 

simulation of a directly irradiated bubbling fluidized bed with SiC particles. 
Applied Thermal Engineering 2021:116812. 

[550] Cui Y, Zhong W, Liu X, Hydrodynamics Xiang JGas–Solid, Cycles Combustion 

Characteristics in a 600 MW Annular CFB Boiler for Supercritical CO2. Industrial 
& Engineering Chemistry Research 2020;59:21617–29. 

[551] Liu Q, Zhong W, Gu J, Yu A. Three-dimensional simulation of the co-firing of coal 
and biomass in an oxy-fuel fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2020;373:522–34. 
[552] Gu J, Shao Y, Zhong W. 3D simulation on pressurized oxy-fuel combustion of coal 

in fluidized bed. Advanced Powder Technology 2020;31:2792–805. 
[553] Kong D, Wang S, Luo K, Hu C, Li D, Fan J. Three-dimensional simulation of 

biomass gasification in a full-loop pilot-scale dual fluidized bed with complex 
geometric structure. Renewable Energy 2020;157:466–81. 

[554] Xie J, Zhong W, Shao Y, Zhou G. Simulation of co-gasification of coal and wood in 
a dual fluidized bed system. Advanced Powder Technology 2021;32:52–71. 
[555] Goniva C, Kloss C, Deen NG, Kuipers JA, Pirker S. Influence of rolling friction on 

single spout fluidized bed simulation. Particuology 2012;10:582–91. 
[556] Goniva C, Kloss C, Hager A, Pirker S. An open source CFD-DEM perspective. 

Proceedings of OpenFOAM Workshop, G¨oteborg 2010. p. 22-4. 

[557] Wei H, Zhao Y, Zhang J, Sax´en H, Yu Y. LIGGGHTS and EDEM application on 

charging system of ironmaking blast furnace. Advanced Powder Technology 
2017;28:2482–7. 

[558] Ateu SH. Numerical investigations on the hydrodynamic behaviour of gas-solid 
flows in a fluidized bed using COMSOL Multiphysics [Bachelor Thesis]: Technical 
University of Darmstadt; 2014. 

[559] Seyedin SH, Ardjmand M, Safekordi AA, Raygan S. Experimental Investigation 

and CFD Simulation of Top Spray Fluidized Bed Coating System. Periodica 
Polytechnica Chemical Engineering 2017;61:117–27. 

[560] Granda Neto RA. Acoustic fluidized bed hydrodynamics simulation: Quito; 2017. 
[561] Zheng C, Zhou Y, Liu W, Li Y, Zhu W. Numerical Simulation of the Force Analysis 
of Gas-Solid Two-Phase Sepiolite Particles in a Horizontal Pipe. MS&E 2020;782: 
1–14. 

[532] Berrouk AS, Huang A, Bale S, Thampi P, Nandakumar K. Numerical simulation of 

[562] Uribe S, Qi B, Farid O, Al-Dahhan M. Mathematical Modeling and Pointwise 

a commercial FCC regenerator using Multiphase Particle-in-Cell methodology 
(MP-PIC). Advanced Powder Technology 2017;28:2947–60. 

Validation of a Spouted Bed Using an Enhanced Bed Elasticity Approach. Energies 
2020;13:4738. 

[533] Xie J, Zhong W, Shao Y, Liu Q, Liu L, Liu G. Simulation of combustion of 

[563] Balaji S, Du J, White C, Ydstie BE. Multi-scale modeling and control of fluidized 

municipal solid waste and coal in an industrial-scale circulating fluidized bed 
boiler. Energy & Fuels 2017;31:14248–61. 

beds for the production of solar grade silicon. Powder Technology 2010;199: 
23–31. 

[534] Amblard B, Singh R, Gbordzoe E, Raynal L. CFD modeling of the coke combustion 
in an industrial FCC regenerator. Chemical Engineering Science 2017;170: 
731–42. 

[535] Singh R, Gbordzoe E. Modeling FCC spent catalyst regeneration with 
computational fluid dynamics. Powder Technology 2017;316:560–8. 

[536] Di Nardo A, Calchetti G, Stendardo S. Modeling and Simulation of an Oxygen- 
Blown Bubbling Fluidized Bed Gasifier using the Computational Particle-Fluid 
Dynamics (CPFD) Approach. Journal of Applied Fluid Mechanics 2018;11: 
825–34. 

[537] Bandara J, Moldestad BME, Eikeland MS. Analysing the effect of temperature for 
steam fluidized-bed gasification of biomass with MP-PIC simulation. The 
International Journal of Energy and Environment 2018;9:529–42. 
[538] Liu H, Li J, Wang Q. Three-dimensional numerical simulation of the co- 

combustion of oil shale retorting solid waste with cornstalk particles in a 
circulating fluidized bed reactor. Applied Thermal Engineering 2018;130: 
296–308. 

[564] Jia D, Bi X, Lim CJ, Sokhansanj S, Tsutsumi A. Heat transfer in a tapered fluidized 
bed of biomass particles with pulsed gas flow. Particuology 2019;42:2–14. 
[565] Uribe S, Cordero ME, Reyes EP, Regalado-M´endez A, Z´arate LG. Multiscale CFD 
modelling and analysis of TBR behavior for an HDS process: Deviations from ideal 
behaviors. Fuel 2019;239:1162–72. 

[566] Pirnia P, Duhaime F, Ethier Y, Dub´e J-S. ICY: An interface between COMSOL 

multiphysics and discrete element code YADE for the modelling of porous media. 
Computers & Geosciences 2019;123:38–46. 

[567] Guo Y, Yu XB. Comparison of the implementation of three common types of 

coupled CFD-DEM model for simulating soil surface erosion. International 
Journal of Multiphase Flow 2017;91:89–100. 

[568] Guo Y, Yang Y, Yu XB. Influence of particle shape on the erodibility of non- 

cohesive soil: Insights from coupled CFD–DEM simulations. Particuology 2018; 
39:12–24. 

[569] Tandon MP, Karnik AU. Simulation of rectangular fluidised bed with Geldart D 

particles 2014:509–16. 

[539] Wu Y, Peng L, Qin L, Wang M, Gao J, Lan X. Validation and application of CPFD 
models in simulating hydrodynamics and reactions in riser reactor with Geldart A 
particles. Powder Technology 2018;323:269–83. 

[540] Park HC, Choi HS. Fast pyrolysis of biomass in a spouted bed reactor: 

Hydrodynamics, heat transfer and chemical reaction. Renewable Energy 2019; 
143:1268–84. 

[570] Saha S, Dewangan G, Gadhewal R. Gas-Liquid-Solid Fluidized Bed Simulation by 

Computational Fluid Dynamics. International Journal of Advanced Research in 
Chemical Science 2016;3. 

[571] Fernandes TG, Fiorot GH, Pereira FM. CFD SIMULATION AND VALIDATION OF A 
FLUIDIZED BED EXPERIMENT USING DIFFERENTS DRAG MODELS. 2019. 

[572] Karnik A, Tandon M. Numerical Investigation of the Hydrodynamics of 

Cylindrical Fluidized Bed. 2013. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930199F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[573] Devarampally DR. Development of two-way coupled CFD–DEM model for top 

spray fluid bed granulator using star CCM+: Rutgers University-Graduate School- 
New Brunswick; 2017. 

[601] Lathouwers D, Bellan J. Modeling of dense gas–solid reactive mixtures applied to 

biomass pyrolysis in a fluidized bed. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 
2001;27:2155–87. 

[574] Eppinger T, Han K. DEM Simulation of Cylinders and Capsules in a Fluidized Bed. 

[602] Xiong Q, Aramideh S, Kong S-C. Modeling effects of operating conditions on 

World Congress on Particle Technology. Orlando 2018:1–11. 

[575] Ricklick M, Baran O. Analytical scaling of DEM particles for efficient packed-bed 

simulations. 10th International Conference on Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics 
and Thermodynamics. Orlando 2014. p. 1-8. 

[576] Baran O, Kodl P, Aglave R. DEM simulations of fluidized bed using a scaled 

particle approach. Particle Technology Forum—2013 Annual Meetingm 2013: 
1–9. 

[577] Qi T, Lei T, Yan B, Chen G, Li Z, Fatehi H, et al. Biomass steam gasification in 
bubbling fluidized bed for higher-H2 syngas: CFD simulation with coarse grain 
model. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:6448–60. 

[578] Baran O, Newale A, Greening D. DEM simulations of industrial size fluidized bed 

biomass fast pyrolysis in bubbling fluidized bed reactors. Energy & Fuels 2013;27: 
5948–56. 

[603] Xiong Q, Aramideh S, Kong SC. Assessment of devolatilization schemes in 

predicting product yields of biomass fast pyrolysis. Environmental Progress and 
Sustainable Energy 2014;33:756–61. 

[604] Dong N, Luo K, Wang Q. Modeling of biomass pyrolysis in a bubbling fluidized 
bed reactor: Impact of intra-particle heat conduction. Fuel Processing Technology 
2017;161:199–203. 

[605] Xue Q, Fox R. Reprint of: Multi-fluid CFD modeling of biomass gasification in 

polydisperse fluidized-bed gasifiers. Powder Technology 2014;265:23–34. 
[606] Yu L, Lu J, Zhang X, Zhang S. Numerical simulation of the bubbling fluidized bed 

using coarse grain model with particle size distribution. 2014 AIChE Annual 
Meeting, Atlanta 2014. 

coal gasification by the kinetic theory of granular flow (KTGF). Fuel 2007;86: 
722–34. 

[579] Eppinger T. INVESTGATING COARSE-GRAINING EFFECTS ON CFD-DEM 

SIMULATIONS OF FLUIDIZED AND SPOUTED BED REACTORS. 

[580] Dong Z, Wang J, Zuo H, She X, Xue Q. Analysis of gas–solid flow and shaft- 
injected gas distribution in an oxygen blast furnace using a discrete element 
method and computational fluid dynamics coupled model. Particuology 2017;32: 
63–72. 

[581] Spogis N. Multiphase modeling using EDEM–CFD coupling for FLUENT. CFD OIL 

2008:1–24. 

[582] Chen M, Chen Z, Gong M, Tang Y, bed Liu MCFD–DEM–VDGM method for 

simulation of particle fluidization behavior in multi-ring inclined-hole spouted 
fluidized. Particuology 2021;57:112–26. 

[583] Fries L, Dosta M, Antonyuk S, Heinrich S, Palzer S. Moisture distribution in 

fluidized beds with liquid injection. Chemical engineering & technology 2011;34: 
1076–84. 

[584] Cheng Y, Lau DYJ, Guan G, Fushimi C, Tsutsumi A, Wang C-H. Experimental and 

numerical investigations on the electrostatics generation and transport in the 
downer reactor of a triple-bed combined circulating fluidized bed. Industrial & 
engineering chemistry research 2012;51:14258–67. 

[585] Hou Q, Zhou Z, Curtis JS, Yu A. Statistical analysis of monodispersed coarse 
particle motion in a gas-fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2020;363:107–11. 

ˇ
Cerm´ak M, Rozbroj J, ˇZurovec D. CFD-DEM numerical model of 

[586] Hlosta J, 

laboratory scale fluidized bed coffee roaster. AIP Conference Proceedings: AIP 
Publishing LLC; 2019. p. 320004. 

[587] Zhao L, Lu Y. Hydrogen production by biomass gasification in a supercritical 

water fluidized bed reactor: a CFD-DEM study. The Journal of Supercritical Fluids 
2018;131:26–36. 

[588] My¨oh¨anen K, Tanskanen V, Hypp¨anen T, Kyrki-Rajam¨aki R, Nevalainen T. CFD 
modelling of fluidized bed systems. Lappeenranta University of Technology, FI- 
53851 Lappeenranta, Finland. 2006:1-7. 

[589] Peirano E, Delloume V, Leckner B. Two-or three-dimensional simulations of 

turbulent gas–solid flows applied to fluidization. Chemical Engineering Science 
2001;56:4787–99. 

[590] Yu W, Fede P, Yazdanpanah M, Amblard B, Euzenat F, Simonin O. Gas-solid 

fluidized bed simulations using the filtered approach: Validation against pilot- 
scale experiments. Chemical Engineering Science 2020;217:115472. 
[591] Sabatier F, Ansart R, Zhang H, Baeyens J, Simonin O. Experiments support 

simulations by the NEPTUNE_CFD code in an Upflow Bubbling Fluidized Bed 
reactor. Chemical Engineering Journal 2020;385:123568. 

[592] Wang L, Weller CL, Hanna MA. An integrated mathematical model of fluid 

dynamics, heat transfer and reaction kinetics for fluidized bed gasification of 
sorghum DDG. Gas 2005;2:O2. 

[593] Chalermsinsuwan B, Kuchonthara P, Piumsomboon P. CFD modeling of tapered 
circulating fluidized bed reactor risers: hydrodynamic descriptions and chemical 
reaction responses. Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification 
2010;49:1144–60. 

[594] Zhou W, Zhao C, Duan L, Chen X, Liang C. Two-dimensional computational fluid 

dynamics simulation of nitrogen and sulfur oxides emissions in a circulating 
fluidized bed combustor. Chemical engineering journal 2011;173:564–73. 
[595] Chalermsinsuwan B, Piumsomboon P, Gidaspow D. A computational fluid 

dynamics design of a carbon dioxide sorption circulating fluidized bed. AIChE 
journal 2010;56:2805–24. 

[596] Thummakul T, Gidaspow D, Piumsomboon P, Chalermsinsuwan B. CFD 

simulation of CO2 sorption on K2CO3 solid sorbent in novel high flux circulating- 
turbulent fluidized bed riser: parametric statistical experimental design study. 
Applied energy 2017;190:122–34. 

[597] Wang Y, Chao Z, Jakobsen HA. Effects of gas–solid hydrodynamic behavior on the 
reactions of the sorption enhanced steam methane reforming process in bubbling 
fluidized bed reactors. Industrial & engineering chemistry research 2011;50: 
8430–7. 

[598] Di Carlo A, Bocci E, Zuccari F, Dell’Era A. Numerical investigation of sorption 

enhanced steam methane reforming process using computational fluid dynamics 
Eulerian(cid:0) Eulerian code. Industrial & engineering chemistry research 2010;49: 
1561–76. 

[607] Monteiro E, Couto N, Silva V, Rouboa A. Assessment of Municipal Solid Wastes 
Gasification Through CFD Simulation. International Conference on Innovation, 
Engineering and Entrepreneurship: Springer; 2018. p. 662-7. 

[608] Bougamra A, Huilin L. Modeling of chemical looping combustion of methane 

using a Ni-based oxygen carrier. Energy & Fuels 2014;28:3420–9. 
[609] Behjat Y, Shahhosseini S, Marvast MA. CFD analysis of hydrodynamic, heat 

transfer and reaction of three phase riser reactor. Chemical engineering research 
and design 2011;89:978–89. 

[610] Therdthianwong A, Pantaraks P, Therdthianwong S. Modeling and simulation of 

circulating fluidized bed reactor with catalytic ozone decomposition reaction. 
Powder technology 2003;133:1–14. 

[611] Salehi M-S, Askarishahi M, Godini HR, Schom¨acker R, Gn Wozny. CFD simulation 
of oxidative coupling of methane in fluidized-bed reactors: a detailed analysis of 
flow-reaction characteristics and operating conditions. Industrial & Engineering 
Chemistry Research 2016;55:1149–63. 

[612] Yang X, Wang S, Hu B, Zhang K, He Y. Estimation of concentration polarization in 
a fluidized bed reactor with Pd-based membranes via CFD approach. Journal of 
Membrane Science 2019;581:262–9. 

[613] Monteiro E, Ismail TM, Ramos A, El-Salam MA, Brito P, Rouboa A. Experimental 
and modeling studies of Portuguese peach stone gasification on an autothermal 
bubbling fluidized bed pilot plant. Energy 2018;142:862–77. 

[614] Dong W, Wang W, Li J. A multiscale mass transfer model for gas–solid riser flows: 
Part 1—Sub-grid model and simple tests. Chemical Engineering Science 2008;63: 
2798–810. 

[615] Flour I, Boucker M. Numerical simulation of the gas–solid flow in the furnace of a 

CFB cold rig with ESTET-ASTRID code. Circulating Fluidized Bed Technology 
VII—Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Circulating 
Fluidized Beds, Canadian Society of Chemical Engineers, Ottawa 2002. p. 467-74. 
[616] Flour I, Balzer G. Numerical simulation of the gas-solid flow in the boiler of a 250 
MWe CFB plant with ESTET-ASTRID code. Conference: 6 international conference 
on circulating fluidized beds (CFB-6). Germany 1999. p. 275-80. 

[617] Hamidouche Z, Masi E, Fede P, Simonin O, Mayer K, Penthor S. Unsteady three- 
dimensional theoretical model and numerical simulation of a 120-kW chemical 
looping combustion pilot plant. Chemical Engineering Science 2019;193:102–19. 

[618] Askaripour H. CFD modeling of gasification process in tapered fluidized bed 

gasifier. Energy 2020;191:116515. 

[619] Diba MF, Karim MR, Naser J. Numerical modelling of a bubbling fluidized bed 

combustion: A simplified approach. Fuel 2020;277:118170. 

[620] Ismail TM, Ramos A, Monteiro E, Abd El-Salam M, Rouboa A. Parametric studies 
in the gasification agent and fluidization velocity during oxygen-enriched 
gasification of biomass in a pilot-scale fluidized bed: Experimental and numerical 
assessment. Renewable Energy 2020;147:2429–39. 

[621] Micale D, Uglietti R, Bracconi M, Maestri M. Coupling Euler–Euler and 
Microkinetic Modeling for the Simulation of Fluidized Bed Reactors: an 
Application to the Oxidative Coupling of Methane. Industrial & Engineering 
Chemistry Research 2021. 

[622] Peters B, Baniasadi M, Baniasadi M. The extended discrete element method 

(XDEM): An advanced approach to model blast furnace. Iron Ores and Iron Oxide 
Materials 2018. 

[623] Fu D, Chen Y, Zhao Y, D’Alessio J, Ferron KJ, Zhou CQ. CFD modeling of 

multiphase reacting flow in blast furnace shaft with layered burden. Applied 
Thermal Engineering 2014;66:298–308. 

[624] Ansart R, García-Tri˜nanes P, Boissi`ere B, Benoit H, Seville JP, Simonin O. Dense 
gas-particle suspension upward flow used as heat transfer fluid in solar receiver: 
PEPT experiments and 3D numerical simulations. Powder Technology 2017;307: 
25–36. 

[625] Rhodes MJ, Wang X, Nguyen M, Stewart P, Liffman K. Use of discrete element 
method simulation in studying fluidization characteristics: influence of 
interparticle force. Chemical Engineering Science 2001;56:69–76. 
[626] Mikami T, Kamiya H, Horio M. Numerical simulation of cohesive powder 

behavior in a fluidized bed. Chemical Engineering Science 1998;53:1927–40. 

[627] Mikami T, Kamiya H, Horio M. The mechanism of defluidization of iron particles 

in a fluidized bed. Powder Technology 1996;89:231–8. 

[599] Yusuf R, Halvorsen B, Melaaen MC. Computational fluid dynamic simulation of 
ethylene hydrogenation in a fluidised bed of porous catalyst particles. The 
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 2012;90:544–57. 

[628] Link J, Zeilstra C, Deen N, Kuipers H. Validation of a discrete particle model in a 
2D spout-fluid bed using non-intrusive optical measuring techniques. The 
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 2004;82:30–6. 

[600] Lathouwers D, Bellan J. Yield optimization and scaling of fluidized beds for tar 

[629] Van Buijtenen MS, Deen NG, Heinrich S, Antonyuk S, Kuipers J. A discrete 

production from biomass. Energy & Fuels 2001;15:1247–62. 

element study of wet particle–particle interaction during granulation in a spout 
fluidized bed. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 2009;87:308–17. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930200F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[630] Sutkar VS, Deen NG, Patil AV, Salikov V, Antonyuk S, Heinrich S, et al. CFD–DEM 

[662] Ho CA. Modellierung der Partikelagglomeration im Rahmen des Euler-Lagrange- 

model for coupled heat and mass transfer in a spout fluidized bed with liquid 
injection. Chemical Engineering Journal 2016;288:185–97. 

Verfahrens und Anwendung zur Berechnung der Staubabscheidung im Zyklon: 
Verlag nicht ermittelbar; 2004. 

[631] Varas AC, Peters E, Kuipers J. CFD-DEM simulations and experimental validation 
of clustering phenomena and riser hydrodynamics. Chemical Engineering Science 
2017;169:246–58. 

[663] Blei S. On the interaction of non-uniform particles during the spray drying 

process: Experiments and modelling with the Euler-Lagrange approach: Shaker; 
2006. 

[632] Ma H, Zhao Y. CFD-DEM investigation of the fluidization of binary mixtures 

[664] Sommerfeld M. Modelling particle collisions and agglomeration in gas-particle 

containing rod-like particles and spherical particles in a fluidized bed. Powder 
Technology 2018;336:533–45. 

[633] Ma H, Zhao Y, Cheng Y. CFD-DEM modeling of rod-like particles in a fluidized bed 

with complex geometry. Powder Technology 2019;344:673–83. 

[634] Ren B, Zhong W, Chen Y, Chen X, Jin B, Yuan Z, et al. CFD-DEM simulation of 

spouting of corn-shaped particles. Particuology 2012;10:562–72. 

[635] Wang H, Zhong Z. A Mixing Behavior Study of Biomass Particles and Sands in 
Fluidized Bed Based on CFD-DEM Simulation. Energies 2019;12:1801. 

[636] Salikov V, Antonyuk S, Heinrich S, Sutkar VS, Deen NG, Kuipers J. 

Characterization and CFD-DEM modelling of a prismatic spouted bed. Powder 
Technology 2015;270:622–36. 

flows. Int Conf on Multiphase Flow, ICMF 2010. 

[665] Stübing S, Sommerfeld M. Lagrangian modelling of agglomerate structures in a 
homogeneous isotropic turbulence. International Conference on Multiphase Flow 
2010. 

[666] Breuer M, Almohammed N. Modeling and simulation of particle agglomeration in 
turbulent flows using a hard-sphere model with deterministic collision detection 
and enhanced structure models. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2015; 
73:171–206. 

[667] Almohammed N, Breuer M. Modeling and simulation of particle–wall adhesion of 
aerosol particles in particle-laden turbulent flows. International Journal of 
Multiphase Flow 2016;85:142–56. 

[637] Link J, Godlieb W, Tripp P, Deen N, Heinrich S, Kuipers J, et al. Comparison of 

[668] Breuer M, Alletto M. Efficient simulation of particle-laden turbulent flows with 

fibre optical measurements and discrete element simulations for the study of 
granulation in a spout fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2009;189:202–17. 

high mass loadings using LES. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2012; 
35:2–12. 

[638] Hamidouche Z, Dufresne Y, Pierson J-L, Brahem R, Lartigue G, Moureau V. DEM/ 

[669] Breuer M, Alletto M, Langfeldt F. Sandgrain roughness model for rough walls 

CFD Simulations of a Pseudo-2D Fluidized Bed: Comparison with Experiments. 
Fluids. 2019;4:51. 

within Eulerian–Lagrangian predictions of turbulent flows. International Journal 
of Multiphase Flow 2012;43:157–75. 

[639] Liu G, Liao P, Zhao J, Wang S, Wu Y, Yin X, et al. CFD-DEM study of the effects of 

[670] Almohammed N, Breuer M. Modeling and simulation of agglomeration in 

direct current electric field on gas-solid fluidization. Powder Technology 2020; 
362:416–27. 

[640] PyGran Abi-Mansour A. An object-oriented library for DEM simulation and 

turbulent particle-laden flows: A comparison between energy-based and 
momentum-based agglomeration models. Powder Technology 2016;294: 
373–402. 

analysis. SoftwareX 2019;9:168–74. 

[641] Alobaid F. A particle–grid method for Euler–Lagrange approach. Powder 

Technology 2015;286:342–60. 

[671] Almohammed N, Breuer M. Towards a deterministic composite collision outcome 

model for surface-tension dominated droplets. International Journal of 
Multiphase Flow 2019;110:1–17. 

[642] Alobaid F. An offset-method for Euler–Lagrange approach. Chemical Engineering 

[672] Breuer M, Hoppe F. Influence of a cost–efficient Langevin subgrid-scale model on 

Science 2015;138:173–93. 

[643] Almohammed N, Alobaid F, Breuer M, Epple B. A comparative study on the 
influence of the gas flow rate on the hydrodynamics of a gas–solid spouted 
fluidized bed using Euler–Euler and Euler–Lagrange/DEM models. Powder 
Technology 2014;264:343–64. 

[644] Alobaid F, Baraki N, Epple B. Investigation into improving the efficiency and 

accuracy of CFD/DEM simulations. Particuology 2014;16:41–53. 

[645] Alobaid F, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Extended CFD/DEM model for the simulation of 
circulating fluidized bed. Advanced Powder Technology 2013;24:403–15. 
[646] Alobaid F, Epple B. Improvement, validation and application of CFD/DEM model 
to dense gas–solid flow in a fluidized bed. Particuology 2013;11:514–26. 
[647] Li Z, van Sint Annaland M, Kuipers J, Deen N. Effect of operating pressure on 

particle temperature distribution in a fluidized bed with heat production. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2017;169:299–309. 

[648] Mu L, Buist KA, Kuipers J, Deen NG. Hydrodynamic and Heat Transfer Study of a 

Fluidized Bed by Discrete Particle Simulations. Processes 2020;8:463. 

[649] Azmir J, Hou Q, Yu A. CFD-DEM simulation of drying of food grains with particle 

shrinkage. Powder Technology 2019;343:792–802. 

[650] Li Z, Janssen T, Buist K, Deen N, van Sint Annaland M, Kuipers J. Experimental 

and simulation study of heat transfer in fluidized beds with heat production. 
Chemical Engineering Journal 2017;317:242–57. 

[651] Kuipers J. Multi-scaling Modelling of Mass, Momentum and Heat Transfer in 

Dense Gas-Particle Flows. Workshop on Fluidized Bed Modeling. Freiberg, 
Germany: TU Bergakademie Freiberg; 2017. p. 1-51. 

[652] Li Z, van Sint Annaland M, Kuipers J, Deen N. Effect of superficial gas velocity on 

the particle temperature distribution in a fluidized bed with heat production. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2016;140:279–90. 

[653] Patil A, Peters E, Kuipers J. Comparison of CFD–DEM heat transfer simulations 

with infrared/visual measurements. Chemical Engineering Journal 2015;277: 
388–401. 

[654] Mohseni M, Peters B. Effects of particle size distribution on drying characteristics 

in a drum by XDEM: A case study. Chemical Engineering Science 2016;152: 
689–98. 

the dispersed phase of large–eddy simulations of turbulent bubble–laden and 
particle–laden flows. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2017;89:23–44. 

[673] Hoppe F. Euler-Lagrange Simulationen von turbulenten, blasenbeladenen 

Str¨omungen unter Berücksichtigung von Koaleszenz und Aufbrechen 2020. 

[674] Hoppe F, Breuer M. A deterministic and viable coalescence model for 

Euler–Lagrange simulations of turbulent microbubble-laden flows. International 
Journal of Multiphase Flow 2018;99:213–30. 

[675] Breuer M, Khalifa A. Refinement of breakup models for compact powder 
agglomerates exposed to turbulent flows considering relevant time scales. 
Computers and Fluids 2019;194:104315. 

[676] Breuer M, Khalifa A. Revisiting and improving models for the breakup of compact 
dry powder agglomerates in turbulent flows within Eulerian–Lagrangian 
simulations. Powder technology 2019;348:105–25. 

[677] Breuer M, Khalifa A. Breakup of Agglomerates in Turbulent Flows: An 

Euler–Lagrange LES Study. ERCOFTAC Workshop Direct and Large Eddy 
Simulation: Springer; 2019. p. 127-33. 

[678] Jürgens D. Modellierung und Simulation der Partikelagglomeration in 

turbulenten, dispersen Mehrphasenstr¨omungen: Master’s thesis, Professur für 
Str¨omungsmechanik, Helmut-Schmidt-Universit¨at …; 2012. 

[679] Alletto M. Numerical Investigation of the Influence of Particle–Particle and 

Particle–Wall Collisions in Turbulent Wall–Bounded Flows at High Mass 
Loadings. Germany: Universit¨atsbibliothek der Helmut-Schmidt-Universit¨at; 
2014. 

[680] Breuer M, Baytekin HT, Matida EA. Prediction of aerosol deposition in 90∘ bends 
using LES and an efficient Lagrangian tracking method. Journal of Aerosol 
Science 2006;37:1407–28. 

[681] Khalifa A, Breuer M. Data-driven model for the breakage of dry monodisperse 

agglomerates by wall impact applicable for multiphase flow simulations. Powder 
Technology 2020;376:241–53. 

[682] Wang T, He Y, Ren A, Gao Q. Region-dependent analysis on particle behaviours in 
a spout-fluidized bed using the discrete hard sphere particle method. The 
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 2020;98:1097–114. 

[683] Goldschmidt M, Beetstra R, Kuipers J. Hydrodynamic modelling of dense gas- 

[655] Mahmoudi AH, Hoffmann F, Markovic M, Peters B, Brem G. Numerical modeling 
of self-heating and self-ignition in a packed-bed of biomass using XDEM. 
Combustion and Flame 2016;163:358–69. 

fluidised beds: comparison of the kinetic theory of granular flow with 3D hard- 
sphere discrete particle simulations. Chemical Engineering Science 2002;57: 
2059–75. 

[656] Sommerfeld M, Stübing S. A novel Lagrangian agglomerate structure model. 

[684] Goldschmidt M, Beetstra R, Kuipers J. Hydrodynamic modelling of dense gas- 

Powder Technology 2017;319:34–52. 

[657] Hoomans B, Kuipers J, van Swaaij WPM. Granular dynamics simulation of 

fluidised beds: comparison and validation of 3D discrete particle and continuum 
models. Powder Technology 2004;142:23–47. 

segregation phenomena in bubbling gas-fluidised beds. Powder Technology 2000; 
109:41–8. 

[685] Deen N, Annaland MVS, Kuipers J. Detailed computational and experimental fluid 
dynamics of fluidized beds. Applied Mathematical Modelling 2006;30:1459–71. 

[658] Ho CA, Sommerfeld M. Modelling of micro-particle agglomeration in turbulent 

[686] Jenkins JT, Savage SB. Theory for the rapid flow of identical, smooth, nearly 

flows. Chemical Engineering Science 2002;57:3073–84. 

[659] Ho C, Sommerfeld M. Numerical calculation of dust separation in a gas cyclone 
paying due attention to particle agglomeration. Chemie Ingenieur Technik 2005; 
77:282–90. 

elastic, spherical particles. Journal of fluid mechanics 1983;130:187–202. 
[687] Gidaspow D, Bezburuah R, Ding J. Hydrodynamics of circulating fluidized beds, 

kinetic theory approach in fluidization. In: Proceedings of the 7th Engineering 
Foundation Conference on Fluidization; 1992. p. 75–82. 

[660] Ho CA, Sommerfeld M. Numerische Berechnung der Staubabscheidung im 

[688] Syamlal M, Rogers W, OBrien TJ. MFIX documentation theory guide. USDOE 

Gaszyklon unter Berücksichtigung der Partikelagglomeration. Chemie Ingenieur 
Technik 2005;77:282–90. 

[661] Ho C, Sommerfeld M. Numerical study on the effect of agglomeration for the 

particle separation in a gas cyclone. Fluids Engineering Division Summer Meeting 
2003:1315–7. 

Morgantown Energy Technology Center, WV (United States) 1993. 

[689] Lun C, Savage SB, Jeffrey D, Chepurniy N. Kinetic theories for granular flow: 
inelastic particles in Couette flow and slightly inelastic particles in a general 
flowfield. Journal of fluid mechanics 1984;140:223–56. 

[690] Hosseini SH, Fattahi M, Ahmadi G. CFD Study of hydrodynamic and heat transfer 

in a 2D spouted bed: Assessment of radial distribution function. Journal of the 
Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers 2016;58:107–16. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930201F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[691] Carnahan NF, Starling KE. Equation of state for nonattracting rigid spheres. The 

Journal of Chemical Physics 1969;51:635–6. 

[692] Savage SB. Streaming motions in a bed of vibrationally fluidized dry granular 

material. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1988;194:457–78. 

[693] Ogawa S, Umemura A, Oshima N. On the equations of fully fluidized granular 
materials. Zeitschrift für angewandte Mathematik und Physik ZAMP 1980;31: 
483–93. 

[694] Ding J, Gidaspow D. A bubbling fluidization model using kinetic theory of 

granular flow. AIChE journal 1990;36:523–38. 

[695] Lun C, Savage S. The effects of an impact velocity dependent coefficient of 

restitution on stresses developed by sheared granular materials. Acta Mechanica 
1986;63:15–44. 

[696] Ma D, Ahmadi G. An equation of state for dense rigid sphere gases. The Journal of 

Chemical Physics 1986;84:3449–50. 

[697] Iddir H, Arastoopour H. Modeling of multitype particle flow using the kinetic 

theory approach. AIChE Journal 2005;51:1620–32. 

[698] Ahmadi G, Ma D. A thermodynamical formulation for dispersed multiphase 

turbulent flows—1: Basic theory. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1990; 
16:323–40. 

[699] Schaeffer DG. Instability in the evolution equations describing incompressible 

granular flow. Journal of differential equations 1987;66:19–50. 

[700] Jenike A. A theory of flow of particulate solids in converging and diverging 

channels based on a conical yield function. Powder Technology 1987;50:229–36. 

[701] Zhang DZ, VanderHeyden WB. The effects of mesoscale structures on the 

macroscopic momentum equations for two-phase flows. International Journal of 
Multiphase Flow 2002;28:805–22. 

[702] Igci Y, Andrews IV AT, Sundaresan S, Pannala S, O’Brien T. Filtered two-fluid 
models for fluidized gas-particle suspensions. AIChE Journal 2008;54:1431–48. 
[703] Andrews IV AT, Loezos PN, Sundaresan S. Coarse-grid simulation of gas-particle 

flows in vertical risers. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2005;44: 
6022–37. 

[704] Milioli CC, Milioli FE, Holloway W, Agrawal K, Sundaresan S. Filtered two-fluid 
models of fluidized gas-particle flows: new constitutive relations. AIChE Journal 
2013;59:3265–75. 

[705] Igci Y, Sundaresan S. Verification of filtered two-fluid models for gas-particle 

flows in risers. AIChE Journal 2011;57:2691–707. 

[706] Kanther W. Gas-Feststoff-Str¨omungen in komplexen Geometrien: Shaker; 2003. 
[707] Marchisio DL, Fox RO. Multiphase reacting flows: modelling and simulation: 

Springer; 2007. 

[708] Jakobsen HA. Chemical reactor modeling: Springer; 2008. 
[709] McGraw R. Description of aerosol dynamics by the quadrature method of 

moments. Aerosol Science and Technology 1997;27:255–65. 
[710] Marchisio DL, Vigil RD, Fox RO. Quadrature method of moments for 

aggregation–breakage processes. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 2003; 
258:322–34. 

[726] O’Rourke PJ, Brackbill J, Larrouturou B. On particle-grid interpolation and 
calculating chemistry in particle-in-cell methods. Journal of Computational 
Physics 1993;109:37–52. 

[727] Williams FA. Combustion Theory: The Fundamental Theory of Chemically 

Reacting Flow System. The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company, Inc; 1985. 
[728] Harris S, Crighton D. Solitons, solitary waves, and voidage disturbances in gas- 

fluidized beds. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1994;266:243–76. 
[729] Popoff B, Braun M. A Lagrangian approach to dense particulate flows. 
International Conference on Multiphase Flow, Leipzig, Germany 2007. 
[730] Chen X, Wang J. Hybrid discrete-continuum model for granular flow. Procedia 

Engineering 2015;102:661–7. 

[731] Chen X, Wang J, Li J. Multiscale modeling of rapid granular flow with a hybrid 

discrete-continuum method. Powder Technology 2016;304:177–85. 
[732] Schlichting H, Gersten K. Boundary-layer theory: Springer Verlag; 2000. 
[733] Sommerfeld M. Modellierung und numerische Berechnung von partikelbeladenen 
turbulenten Str¨omungen mit Hilfe des Euler. Shaker: Lagrange-Verfahrens; 1996. 
[734] Brock JR. On the theory of thermal forces acting on aerosol particles. Journal of 

Colloid Science 1962;17:768–80. 

[735] Anderson TB, Jackson R. Fluid mechanical description of fluidized beds. 

Equations of motion. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Fundamentals 1967;6: 
527–39. 

[736] Zhu H, Zhou Z, Yang R, Yu A. Discrete particle simulation of particulate systems: 
theoretical developments. Chemical Engineering Science 2007;62:3378–96. 

[737] Sommerfeld M. Analysis of collision effects for turbulent gas–particle flow in a 

horizontal channel: Part I. Particle transport. International journal of multiphase 
flow 2003;29:675–99. 

[738] Tsuji Y, Morikawa Y, Mizuno O. Experimental measurement of the Magnus force 

on a rotating sphere at low Reynolds numbers. Journal of Fluids Engineering 
1985;107:484–8. 

[739] Crowe CT, Schwarzkopf JD, Sommerfeld M, Tsuji Y. Multiphase flows with 

droplets and particles: CRC press; 2011. 

[740] Crowe CT. Multiphase flow handOther: CRC press; 2005. 
[741] Fan L-S, Zhu C. Principles of gas-solid flows: Cambridge University Press; 2005. 
[742] Soo S-l, Deyan T. Multiphase fluid dynamics: Science Press Brookfield; 1990. 
[743] Schubert H. Grundlagen des agglomerierens. Chemie Ingenieur Technik 1979;51: 

266–77. 

[744] Lian G, Thornton C, Adams MJ. A theoretical study of the liquid bridge forces 

between two rigid spherical bodies. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 
1993;161:138–47. 

[745] Muguruma Y, Tanaka T, Tsuji Y. Numerical simulation of particulate flow with 
liquid bridge between particles (simulation of centrifugal tumbling granulator). 
Powder Technology 2000;109:49–57. 

[746] Kuwagi K, Mikami T, Horio M. Numerical simulation of metallic solid bridging 
particles in a fluidized bed at high temperature. Powder Technology 2000;109: 
27–40. 

[711] Marchisio DL, Fox RO. Solution of population balance equations using the direct 

[747] Kuczynski GC. Self-diffusion in sintering of metallic particles. AIME TRANS 1949; 

quadrature method of moments. Journal of Aerosol Science 2005;36:43–73. 

185:169–78. 

[712] Zhou Z, Kuang S, Chu K, Yu A. Discrete particle simulation of particle-fluid flow: 
model formulations and their applicability. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2010;661: 
482. 

[713] Bird G. Molecular gas dynamics, Clarendon. Oxford; 1976. 
[714] Lu L, Xu Y, Li T, Benyahia S. Assessment of different coarse graining strategies to 

[748] Rubinow S, Keller JB. The transverse force on a spinning sphere moving in a 

viscous fluid. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1961;11:447–59. 

[749] Dennis S, Singh S, Ingham D. The steady flow due to a rotating sphere at low and 
moderate Reynolds numbers. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1980;101:257–79. 

[750] Beer FP, Johnston ER. Mechanics for engineers: statics and dynamics. McGraw- 

simulate polydisperse gas-solids flow. chemical Engineering Science 2018;179: 
53–63. 

[715] Sutkar VS, Deen NG, Mohan B, Salikov V, Antonyuk S, Heinrich S, et al. 

Numerical investigations of a pseudo-2D spout fluidized bed with draft plates 
using a scaled discrete particle model. Chemical Engineering Science 2013;104: 
790–807. 

[716] Hilton JE, Cleary PW. Comparison of non-cohesive resolved and coarse grain DEM 
models for gas flow through particle beds. Applied Mathematical Modelling 2014; 
38:4197–214. 

[717] Sakai M, Takahashi H, Pain CC, Latham J-P, Xiang J. Study on a large-scale 

discrete element model for fine particles in a fluidized bed. Advanced Powder 
Technology 2012;23:673–81. 

[718] Bierwisch C, Kraft T, Riedel H, Moseler M. Three-dimensional discrete element 

models for the granular statics and dynamics of powders in cavity filling. Journal 
of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 2009;57:10–31. 

[719] Lu L, Xu J, Ge W, Yue Y, Liu X, Li J. EMMS-based discrete particle method 

(EMMS–DPM) for simulation of gas–solid flows. Chemical Engineering Science 
2014;120:67–87. 

[720] Sakai M, Yamada Y, Shigeto Y, Shibata K, Kawasaki VM, Koshizuka S. Large-scale 
discrete element modeling in a fluidized bed. International Journal for Numerical 
Methods in Fluids 2010;64:1319–35. 

[721] Sakai M, Koshizuka S. Large-scale discrete element modeling in pneumatic 

conveying. Chemical Engineering Science 2009;64:533–9. 

[722] Di Renzo A, Napolitano ES, Di Maio FP. Coarse-Grain DEM Modelling in Fluidized 

Bed Simulation: A Review. Processes 2021;9:279. 

[723] Apte S, Gorokhovski M. Moin P. LES of atomizing spray with stochastic modeling 
of secondary breakup. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2003;29: 
1503–22. 

Hill; 1967. 

[751] Iwashita K, Oda M. Rolling resistance at contacts in simulation of shear band 

development by DEM. Journal of Engineering Mechanics 1998;124:285–92. 
[752] Iwashita K, Oda M. Micro-deformation mechanism of shear banding process based 

on modified distinct element method. Powder Technology 2000;109:192–205. 

[753] Brilliantov NV, P¨oschel T. Rolling friction of a viscous sphere on a hard plane. EPL 

(Europhysics Letters) 1998;42:511–6. 

[754] Zhou Y, Wright B, Yang R, Xu B, Yu A. Rolling friction in the dynamic simulation 
of sandpile formation. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 1999; 
269:536–53. 

[755] Zhu H, Yu A. Averaging method of granular materials. Physical Review E 2002; 

66:21–32. 

[756] Musser JM. Modeling of heat transfer and reactive chemistry for particles in gas- 
solid flow utilizing continuum-discrete methodology. (CDM): West Virginia 
University; 2011. 

[757] O’Rourke PJ. Collective Drop Effects on Vaporizing Liquid Sprays: Princeton 

University; 1981. 

[758] Oesterle B, Petitjean A. Simulation of particle-to-particle interactions in gas solid 

flows. International journal of multiphase flow 1993;19:199–211. 
[759] Hußmann B. Modellierung und numerische Simulation der zweiphasigen 

Str¨omungs- und Verbrennungsvorg¨ange in einem Staustrahltriebwerk mit Bor als 
Festtreibstoff: VDI-Verlag; 2009. 

[760] Nanbu K. Direct simulation scheme derived from the Boltzmann equation. I. 

Monocomponent gases. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 1980;49:2042–9. 

[761] Babovsky H. A convergence proof for Nanbu’s Boltzmann simulation scheme. 

European journal of mechanics B, Fluids. 1989;8:41–55. 

[762] Cundall PA, Strack OD. A discrete numerical model for granular assemblies. 

Geotechnique 1979;29:47–65. 

[724] Lu L, Gopalan B, Benyahia S. Assessment of different discrete particle methods 

[763] Tsuji Y, Kawaguchi T, Tanaka T. Discrete particle simulation of two-dimensional 

ability to predict gas-particle flow in a small-scale fluidized bed. Industrial & 
Engineering Chemistry Research 2017;56:7865–76. 

fluidized bed. Powder Technology 1993;77:79–87. 

[764] Tsuji Y. Discrete particle simulation of gas-solid flows (From dilute to dense 

[725] Lu L, Benyahia S, Li T. An efficient and reliable predictive method for fluidized 

flows). KONA Powder and Particle Journal 1993;11:57–68. 

bed simulation. AIChE Journal 2017;63:5320–34. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930202F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[765] Buist KA, Seelen L, Deen N, Padding J, Kuipers J. On an efficient hybrid soft and 
hard sphere collision integration scheme for DEM. Chemical Engineering Science 
2016;153:363–73. 

[766] Allen MP, Tildesley DJ. Computer simulation of liquids: Oxford university press; 

[799] Kravets B, Rosemann T, Reinecke S. Kruggel-Emden H. A new drag force and heat 

transfer correlation derived from direct numerical LBM-simulations of flown 
through particle packings. Powder Technology 2019;345:438–56. 
[800] L S, A N. A drag coefficient correlation. Zeitschrift des Vereins Deutscher 

1989. 

[767] Hockney RW, Eastwood JJW. Computer simulation using particles: Taylor & 

Francis Group; 1988. 

[768] Baraff D. Interactive simulation of solid rigid bodies. Computer Graphics and 

Applications, IEEE. 1995;15:63–75. 

[769] Cohen JD, Lin MC, Manocha D, Ponamgi M. I-COLLIDE: An interactive and exact 
collision detection system for large-scale environments. Proceedings of the 1995 
Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics: ACM; 1995. p. 189-96. 

[770] Schinner A. Fast algorithms for the simulation of polygonal particles. Granular 

Matter 1999;2:35–43. 

[771] Campbell CS, Brennan C. Computer simulation of granular shear flows. Journal of 

Fluid Mechanics 1985;151:167–88. 

Ingenieure 1933;77:318–20. 

[801] Garside J, Al-Dibouni MR. Velocity-voidage relationships for fluidization and 

sedimentation in solid-liquid systems. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Process 
Design and Development 1977;16:206–14. 

[802] Foscolo P, Gibilaro L, Waldram S. A unified model for particulate expansion of 

fluidised beds and flow in fixed porous media. Chemical Engineering Science 
1983;38:1251–60. 

[803] Gibilaro L, Di Felice R, Waldram S, Foscolo PU. Generalized friction factor and 

drag coefficient correlations for fluid-particle interactions. Chemical Engineering 
Science 1985;40:1817–23. 

[804] Dalla Valle J. Micromeritics. London, UK: Pitman; 1948. 
[805] Ganser GH. A rational approach to drag prediction of spherical and nonspherical 

[772] Link JM. Development and Validation of a Discrete Particle Model of a Spout-fluid 

particles. Powder Technology 1993;77:143–52. 

Bed Granulator: PrintPartners Ipskamp; 2006. 

[773] Kosinski P, Hoffmann AC. An extension of the hard-sphere particle–particle 

collision model to study agglomeration. Chemical Engineering Science 2010;65: 
3231–9. 

[774] Stübing S, Sommerfeld M. Collisions of highly viscous droplets and structure 

modelling. ERCOFTAC Summerschool. Modelling of Atomisation and Sprays for 
Technical and Industrial Applications. Germany 2008. 

[775] Hertz H. Über die Berührung fester elastischer K¨orper. Journal für die reine und 

angewandte Mathematik 1882;92:156–71. 

[806] Huilin L, Gidaspow D. Hydrodynamics of binary fluidization in a riser: CFD 

simulation using two granular temperatures. Chemical Engineering Science 2003; 
58:3777–92. 

[807] Benyahia S, Syamlal M, O’Brien TJ. Extension of Hill–Koch–Ladd drag correlation 
over all ranges of Reynolds number and solids volume fraction. Powder 
Technology 2006;162:166–74. 

[808] Beetstra R, Van der Hoef M, Kuipers J. Drag force of intermediate Reynolds 

number flow past mono-and bidisperse arrays of spheres. AIChE Journal 2007;53: 
489–501. 

[776] Maw N, Barber J, Fawcett J. The oblique impact of elastic spheres. Wear 1976;38: 

[809] Bian W, Chen X, Wang J. A critical comparison of two-fluid model, discrete 

101–14. 

[777] Di Renzo A, Di Maio FP. Comparison of contact-force models for the simulation of 
collisions in DEM-based granular flow codes. Chemical Engineering Science 2004; 
59:525–41. 

[778] Kruggel-Emden H, Simsek E, Rickelt S, Wirtz S, Scherer V. Review and extension 

of normal force models for the discrete element method. Powder Technology 
2007;171:157–73. 

[779] Lungfiel A. Ermittlung von Belastungsgr¨oßen mittels der Diskrete-Elemente- 
Methode für die Auslegung von Sturzmühlen: Eigenverlag der Technischen 
Universit¨at Bergakademie Freiberg; 2002. 

[780] Sun R, Xiao H. Diffusion-based coarse graining in hybrid continuum–discrete 

solvers: Theoretical formulation and a priori tests. International Journal of 
Multiphase Flow 2015;77:142–57. 

[781] Clarke DA, Sederman AJ, Gladden LF, Holland DJ. Investigation of void fraction 
schemes for use with CFD-DEM simulations of fluidized beds. Industrial & 
Engineering Chemistry Research 2018;57:3002–13. 

[782] Peng Z, Doroodchi E, Luo C, Moghtaderi B. Influence of void fraction calculation 

on fidelity of CFD-DEM simulation of gas-solid bubbling fluidized beds. AIChE 
Journal 2014;60:2000–18. 

[783] Link J, Cuypers L, Deen N, Kuipers J. Flow regimes in a spout–fluid bed: A 
combined experimental and simulation study. Chemical Engineering Science 
2005;60:3425–42. 

[784] Peng Z, Moghtaderi B, Doroodchi E. A modified direct method for void fraction 

calculation in CFD–DEM simulations. Advanced Powder Technology 2016;27: 
19–32. 

[785] Farzaneh M, Sasic S, Almstedt A-E, Johnsson F, Pallar`es D. A novel multigrid 
technique for Lagrangian modeling of fuel mixing in fluidized beds. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2011;66:5628–37. 

particle method and direct numerical simulation for modeling dense gas-solid 
flow of rough spheres. Chemical Engineering Science 2019;210:115233. 
[810] Rong LW, Dong KJ, Yu A. Lattice-Boltzmann simulation of fluid flow through 

packed beds of uniform spheres: Effect of porosity. Chemical Engineering Science 
2013;99:44–58. 

[811] Zaidi AA, Tsuji T, Tanaka T. A new relation of drag force for high Stokes number 
monodisperse spheres by direct numerical simulation. Advanced Powder 
Technology 2014;25:1860–71. 

[812] Tang YY, Peters EF, Kuipers JH, Kriebitzsch SS, van der Hoef MM. A new drag 

correlation from fully resolved simulations of flow past monodisperse static arrays 
of spheres. AIChE journal 2015;61:688–98. 

[813] Zhou Q, Fan L-S. Direct numerical simulation of moderate-Reynolds-number flow 

past arrays of rotating spheres. Physics of Fluids 2015;27:073306. 

[814] Sheikh B, Qiu T. Pore-scale simulation and statistical investigation of velocity and 
drag force distribution of flow through randomly-packed porous media under low 
and intermediate Reynolds numbers. Computers & Fluids 2018;171:15–28. 
[815] Li J, Kwauk M. Exploring complex systems in chemical engineering—the multi- 

scale methodology. Chemical Engineering Science 2003;58:521–35. 

[816] Tang Y, Lau Y, Deen N, Peters E, Kuipers J. Direct numerical simulations and 
experiments of a pseudo-2D gas-fluidized bed. Chemical Engineering Science 
2016;143:166–80. 

[817] Bian W, Chen X, Wang J. Assessment of the interphase drag coefficients 

considering the effect of granular temperature or solid concentration fluctuation 
via comparison of DNS, DPM, TFM and experimental data. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2020;223:115722. 

[818] Wylie JJ, Koch DL, Ladd AJ. Rheology of suspensions with high particle inertia 

and moderate fluid inertia. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2003;480:95. 

[819] Huang Z, Wang H, Zhou Q, Li T. Effects of granular temperature on inter-phase 

[786] Deb S, Tafti DK. A novel two-grid formulation for fluid–particle systems using the 

drag in gas-solid flows. Powder Technology 2017;321:435–43. 

discrete element method. Powder Technology 2013;246:601–16. 
[787] Zhang J, Li T, Str¨om H, Løvås T. Grid-independent Eulerian-Lagrangian 
approaches for simulations of solid fuel particle combustion. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2020;387:123964. 

[788] Strobl S, Formella A, P¨oschel T. Exact calculation of the overlap volume of spheres 
and mesh elements. Journal of Computational Physics 2016;311:158–72. 
[789] Lim EWC, Wang CH, Yu AB. Discrete element simulation for pneumatic conveying 

of granular material. AIChE Journal 2006;52:496–509. 

[790] Kuang S, Chu K, Yu A, Zou Z, Feng Y. Computational investigation of horizontal 
slug flow in pneumatic conveying. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 
2008;47:470–80. 

[791] Khawaja HA, Scott SA, Virk MS, Moatamedi M. Quantitative analysis of accuracy 
of voidage computations in CFD-DEM simulations. The Journal of Computational 
Multiphase Flows 2012;4:183–92. 

[792] Feng Y, Yu A. Assessment of model formulations in the discrete particle 

simulation of gas(cid:0) solid flow. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2004; 
43:8378–90. 

[793] Wen C, Yu Y. Mechanics of fluidization. AIChE Journal 1966;62:100–11. 
[794] Syamlal M, O’Brien TJ. Computer simulation of bubbles in a fluidized bed. AIChE 

Symposium Series 1989:22–31. 

[795] Syamlal M, O’Brien T. Derivation of a drag coefficient from velocity-voidage 
correlation. US Dept of Energy, Office of Fossil Energy, National Energy 
Technology Laboratory, Morgantown, West Virginia April. 1987. 
[796] Di Felice R. The voidage function for fluid-particle interaction systems. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1994;20:153–9. 

[820] Müller CR, Holland DJ, Sederman AJ, Scott SA, Dennis JS, Gladden LF. Granular 

temperature: comparison of magnetic resonance measurements with discrete 
element model simulations. Powder Technology 2008;184:241–53. 

[821] Luo K, Tan J, Wang Z, Fan J. Particle-resolved direct numerical simulation of 

gas–solid dynamics in experimental fluidized beds. AIChE Journal 2016;62: 
1917–32. 

[822] Tang Y, Peters E, Kuipers J. Direct numerical simulations of dynamic gas-solid 

suspensions. AIChE Journal 2016;62:1958–69. 

[823] Gao X, Wu C, Cheng Y-w, Wang L-j, Li X. Experimental and numerical 

investigation of solid behavior in a gas–solid turbulent fluidized bed. Powder 
Technology 2012;228:1–13. 

[824] Gidaspow D, Syamlal M, Seo Y. Hydrodynamics of fluidization of single and 

binary size particles: supercomputer modeling. In: Proceedings of Fluidization V; 
1986. 

[825] Syamlal M. The particle-particle drag term in a multiparticle model of 

fluidization. Morgantown, WV (USA): EG and G Washington Analytical Services 
Center, Inc.; 1987. 

[826] Bell RA. Numerical modelling of multi-particle flows in bubbling gas-solid 

fluidised beds: Swinburne University of Technology; 2000. 

[827] Lathouwers D, Bellan J. Modeling and simulation of bubbling fluidized beds 

containing particle mixtures. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 2000;28: 
2297–304. 

[828] Huilin L, Wenti L, Rushan B, Lidan Y, Gidaspow D. Kinetic theory of fluidized 
binary granular mixtures with unequal granular temperature. Physica A: 
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 2000;284:265–76. 

[797] Koch DL, Hill RJ. Inertial effects in suspension and porous-media flows. Annual 

[829] Huilin L, Yunhua Z, Ding J, Gidaspow D, Wei L. Investigation of mixing/ 

Review of Fluid Mechanics 2001;33:619–47. 

[798] Hill RJ, Koch DL, Ladd AJ. Moderate-Reynolds-number flows in ordered and 

random arrays of spheres. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2001;448:243–78. 

segregation of mixture particles in gas–solid fluidized beds. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2007;62:301–17. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930203F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[830] Iddir H, Arastoopour H, Hrenya CM. Analysis of binary and ternary granular 

[860] Zhang Y, Jiang M, Chen X, Yu Y, Zhou Q. Modeling of the filtered drag force in 

mixtures behavior using the kinetic theory approach. Powder Technology 2005; 
151:117–25. 

[831] Chao Z, Wang Y, Jakobsen JP, Fernandino M, Jakobsen HA. Derivation and 

validation of a binary multi-fluid Eulerian model for fluidized beds. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2011;66:3605–16. 

[832] Chao Z, Wang Y, Jakobsen JP, Fernandino M, Jakobsen HA. Investigation of the 
particle–particle drag in a dense binary fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2012; 
224:311–22. 

[833] Duan F, Zhao L, Chen X, Zhou Q. Fluid–particle drag and particle–particle drag in 
low-Reynolds-number bidisperse gas–solid suspensions. Physics of Fluids 2020; 
32:113311. 

[834] Goldschmidt M, Link J, Mellema S, Kuipers J. Digital image analysis 

measurements of bed expansion and segregation dynamics in dense gas-fluidised 
beds. Powder Technology 2003;138:135–59. 

[835] Gan J, Zhao H, Berrouk AS, Yang C, Shan H. Impact of the drag law formulation 
on the predicted binary-particle segregation patterns in a gas–solid fluidized bed. 
Powder Technology 2012;218:69–75. 

[836] Zhou Q, Wang J. CFD study of mixing and segregation in CFB risers: extension of 
EMMS drag model to binary gas–solid flow. Chemical Engineering Science 2015; 
122:637–51. 

[837] Wang J, Liu Y. EMMS-based Eulerian simulation on the hydrodynamics of a 

bubbling fluidized bed with FCC particles. Powder Technology 2010;197:241–6. 

[838] van der Hoef MA, Beetstra R, Kuipers J. Lattice-Boltzmann simulations of low- 

Reynolds-number flow past mono-and bidisperse arrays of spheres: results for the 
permeability and drag force. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2005;528:233. 
[839] Schneiderbauer S, Puttinger S, Pirker S. Comparative analysis of subgrid drag 

modifications for dense gas-particle flows in bubbling fluidized beds. AIChE 
Journal 2013;59:4077–99. 

[840] Yang N, Wang W, Ge W, Wang L, Li J. Simulation of heterogeneous structure in a 
circulating fluidized-bed riser by combining the two-fluid model with the EMMS 
approach. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2004;43:5548–61. 

[841] Li J. Multi-scale modeling and method of energy minimization for particle-fluid 
two-phase flow: Institute of Chemical Metallurgy, Academia Sinica; 1987. 

[842] Lu B, Wang W, Li J. Eulerian simulation of gas–solid flows with particles of 
Geldart groups A, B and D using EMMS-based meso-scale model. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2011;66:4624–35. 

[843] Marzocchella A, Zijerveld RC, Schouten JC, van den Bleek CM. Chaotic behavior 
of gas-solids flow in the riser of a laboratory-scale circulating fluidized bed. AIChE 
journal 1997;43:1458–68. 

[844] Wang J, Ge W, Li J. Eulerian simulation of heterogeneous gas–solid flows in CFB 
risers: EMMS-based sub-grid scale model with a revised cluster description. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2008;63:1553–71. 

gas–solid flows via a deep learning approach. Chemical Engineering Science 
2020:115835. 

[861] Jiang Y, Kolehmainen J, Gu Y, Kevrekidis YG, Ozel A, Sundaresan S. Neural- 
network-based filtered drag model for gas-particle flows. Powder Technology 
2019;346:403–13. 

[862] Loha C, Chattopadhyay H, Chatterjee PK. Assessment of drag models in 

simulating bubbling fluidized bed hydrodynamics. Chemical Engineering Science 
2012;75:400–7. 

[863] Shah MT, Utikar RP, MO Tade, Pareek VK, Evans GM. Verification of EMMS 

formulation using lattice Boltzmann simulations. Powder technology 2014;257: 
30–9. 

[864] Shah S, My¨oh¨anen K, Kallio S, Ritvanen J, Hypp¨anen T. CFD modeling of 
gas–solids flow in a large scale circulating fluidized bed furnace. Powder 
Technology 2015;274:239–49. 

[865] Zhou Z, Yu A, Zulli P. Particle scale study of heat transfer in packed and bubbling 

fluidized beds. AIChE Journal 2009;55:868–84. 

[866] Yang R, Zou R, Yu A. Voronoi tessellation of the packing of fine uniform spheres. 

Physical Review E 2002;65:041302. 

[867] Batchelor GK, O’brien R. Thermal or electrical conduction through a granular 
material. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A Mathematical Physical 
Sciences 1977;355:313–33. 

[868] Zhou J, Yu A, Horio M. Finite element modeling of the transient heat conduction 

between colliding particles. Chemical Engineering Journal 2008;139:510–6. 

[869] Ranz W, Marshall WR. Evaporation from drops. Chemical Engineering Progress 

1952;48:141–6. 

[870] Gunn D. Transfer of heat or mass to particles in fixed and fluidised beds. 

International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 1978;21:467–76. 

[871] Whitaker S. Forced convection heat transfer correlations for flow in pipes, past 

flat plates, single cylinders, single spheres, and for flow in packed beds and tube 
bundles. AIChE Journal 1972;18:361–71. 

[872] Zhou Z, Yu A, Zulli P. A new computational method for studying heat transfer in 

fluid bed reactors. Powder Technology 2010;197:102–10. 

[873] Wang S, Luo K, Hu C, Fan J. Particle-scale investigation of heat transfer and 

erosion characteristics in a three-dimensional circulating fluidized bed. Industrial 
and Engineering Chemistry Research 2018;57:6774–89. 

[874] Versteeg HK, Malalasekera W. An introduction to computational fluid dynamics: 

the finite volume method: Pearson education; 2007. 
[875] Modest MF. Radiative heat transfer: Academic press; 2013. 
[876] Howell JR, Menguc MP, Siegel R. Thermal radiation heat transfer, 6th Edition: 

CRC press; 2015. 

[877] Prakash N, Karunanithi T. Kinetic modeling in biomass pyrolysis–a review. 

Journal of Applied Sciences Research 2008;4:1627–36. 

[845] De Wilde J. Reformulating and quantifying the generalized added mass in filtered 

[878] Basu P. Combustion of coal in circulating fluidized-bed boilers: a review. 

gas-solid flow models. Physics of Fluids 2005;17:113304. 

[846] Li J. Particle-fluid two-phase flow: the energy-minimization multi-scale method: 

Metallurgical Industry Press; 1994. 

[847] Li J, Kwauk M. Particle-Fluid Two-Phase Flow: the Energy-Minimization Multi- 

Scale Method; Minimization Multi-Scale Method. Metallurg: Beijing: Industryl 
Press; 1994. 

Chemical Engineering Science 1999;54:5547–57. 

[879] Nunes L, Matias J, Catal˜ao J. Mixed biomass pellets for thermal energy 

production: A review of combustion models. Applied Energy 2014;127:135–40. 
[880] Kaushal P, Pr¨oll T, Hofbauer H. Model for biomass char combustion in the riser of 
a dual fluidized bed gasification unit: Part 1—Model development and sensitivity 
analysis. Fuel Processing Technology 2008;89:651–9. 

[848] Zou B, Li H, Xia Y, Ma X. Cluster structure in a circulating fluidized bed. Powder 

[881] Yeoh GH, Yuen KK. Computational fluid dynamics in fire engineering: theory, 

technology 1994;78:173–8. 

modelling and practice: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2009. 

[849] Xu G, Kato K. Hydrodynamic equivalent diameter for clusters in heterogeneous 

[882] Echekki T, Mastorakos E. Turbulent combustion modeling: Advances, new trends 

gas–solid flow. Chemical Engineering Science 1999;54:1837–47. 

and perspectives: Springer Science & Business Media; 2010. 

[850] Harris A, Davidson J, Thorpe R. The prediction of particle cluster properties in the 

[883] Magnussen BF, Hjertager BH. On mathematical modeling of turbulent combustion 

near wall region of a vertical riser (200157). Powder Technology 2002;127: 
128–43. 

[851] Li J, Cheng C, Zhang Z, Yuan J, Nemet A, Fett FN. The EMMS model—its 

application, development and updated concepts. Chemical Engineering Science 
1999;54:5409–25. 

[852] Shuyan W, Zhiheng S, Huilin L, Long Y, Wentie L, Yonlong D. Numerical 

predictions of flow behavior and cluster size of particles in riser with particle 
rotation model and cluster-based approach. Chemical Engineering Science 2008; 
63:4116–25. 

[853] Yates J. Effects of temperature and pressure on gas-solid fluidization. Chemical 

Engineering Science 1996;51:167–205. 

with special emphasis on soot formation and combustion. Symposium 
(international) on Combustion: Elsevier; 1977. p. 719-29. 

[884] Bustamante F, Enick R, Cugini A, Killmeyer R, Howard B, Rothenberger K, et al. 
High-temperature kinetics of the homogeneous reverse water–gas shift reaction. 
AIChE Journal 2004;50:1028–41. 

[885] Bustamante F, Enick R, Killmeyer R, Howard B, Rothenberger K, Cugini A, et al. 
Uncatalyzed and wall-catalyzed forward water–gas shift reaction kinetics. AIChE 
journal 2005;51:1440–54. 

[886] Graven WM, Long FJ. Kinetics and mechanisms of the two opposing reactions of 
the equilibrium CO+ H2O= CO2+ H21. Journal of the American Chemical Society 
1954;76:2602–7. 

[854] Lv X, Li H, Zhu Q. Simulation of gas–solid flow in 2D/3D bubbling fluidized beds 

[887] Ergun S. Kinetics of the reactions of carbon dioxide and steam with coke: US 

by combining the two-fluid model with structure-based drag model. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2014;236:149–57. 

[855] Liu W, Yang S, Li H, Zhu Q. A transfer coefficient-based structure parameters 

method for CFD simulation of bubbling fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2016; 
295:122–32. 

[856] Ahmad N, Tong Y, Lu B, Wang W. Extending the EMMS-bubbling model to 

fluidization of binary particle mixture: Parameter analysis and model validation. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2019;200:257–67. 

[857] Qin Z, Zhou Q, Wang J. An EMMS drag model for coarse grid simulation of 

polydisperse gas–solid flow in circulating fluidized bed risers. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2019;207:358–78. 

Government Printing Office; 1962. 

[888] Molina A, Mondragon F. Reactivity of coal gasification with steam and CO2. Fuel 

1998;77:1831–9. 

[889] Johnson J. Kinetics of bituminous coal char gasification with gases containing 

steam and hydrogen. ACS Publications; 1974. 

[890] Ohlemüller P, Alobaid F, Abad A, Adanez J, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Development and 
validation of a 1D process model with autothermal operation of a 1 MWth 
chemical looping pilot plant. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 
2018;73:29–41. 

[891] Ohlemüller PG. Untersuchung von Chemical-Looping-Combustion im Megawatt- 

Maßstab: Cuvillier Verlag; 2019. 

[858] Jia J, Li H, Zou Z, Liu W, Zhu Q. Simulation of binary particle segregation for 

[892] Ouyang J, Li J. Particle-motion-resolved discrete model for simulating gas–solid 

bubbling fluidized beds using polydispersed structure-based drag model extended 
from a monodispersed model. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 
2020. 

[859] Lan B, Xu J, Zhao P, Zou Z, Zhu Q, Wang J. Long-time coarse-grained CFD-DEM 

fluidization. Chemical Engineering Science 1999;54:2077–83. 

[893] Ouyang J, Li J. Discrete simulations of heterogeneous structure and dynamic 

behavior in gas–solid fluidization. Chemical Engineering Science 1999;54: 
5427–40. 

simulation of residence time distribution of polydisperse particles in a 
continuously operated multiple-chamber fluidized bed. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2020;219:115599. 

[894] Helland E, Occelli R, Tadrist L. Numerical study of cohesive powders in a dense 
fluidized bed. Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences-Series IIB-Mechanics- 
Physics-Astronomy 1999;327:1397–403. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930204F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[895] Pope SB. Turbulent Flows: Cambridge University Press; 2000. 
[896] Oberlack M, Khujadze G, Barth S, Günther S, Frewer M, Weller T, et al. Progress in 

Turbulence II: Proceedings of the ITi Conference in Turbulence 2005: Physica- 
Verlag; 2007. 

[931] Alletto M, Breuer M. One-way, two-way and four-way coupled LES predictions of 

a particle-laden turbulent flow at high mass loading downstream of a confined 
bluff body. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2012;45:70–90. 

[932] Shotorban B, Mashayek F. Modeling subgrid-scale effects on particles by 

[897] Launchbury DR. Unsteady Turbulent Flow Modelling and Applications: Springer; 

approximate deconvolution. Physics of Fluids 2005;17:081701. 

2016. 

[898] Lumley JL. Whither turbulence? Turbulence at the crossroads: Springer; 1990. 
[899] Smagorinsky J. General circulation experiments with the primitive equations, 
part I: the basic experiment. Monthly Weather Review 1963;91:99–164. 

[900] Germano M, Piomelli U, Moin P, Cabot WH. A dynamic subgrid-scale eddy 
viscosity model. Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics 1991;3:1760–5. 

[901] Breuer M. Direkte Numerische Simulation und Large-Eddy-Simulation turbulenter 

Str¨omungen auf Hochleistungsrechnern: Shaker; 2002. 

[902] Yuan Z, Michaelides E. Turbulence modulation in particulate flows—a theoretical 

approach. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1992;18:779–85. 

[903] Crowe CT. On models for turbulence modulation in fluid–particle flows. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2000;26:719–27. 

[904] Saber A, Lundstr¨om TS, Hellstr¨om JGI. Turbulent modulation in particulate flow: 

A review of critical variables. Engineering 2015;7:597. 

[933] Fede P, Simonin O, Villedieu P, Squires K. Stochastic modeling of the turbulent 
subgrid fluid velocity along inertial particle trajectories. In: Proceedings of the 
Summer Program: Center for Turbulence Research; 2006. p. 247–58. 
[934] Kuerten J. Subgrid modeling in particle-laden channel flow. Physics of Fluids 

2006;18:025108. 

[935] Bini M, Jones W. Large-eddy simulation of particle-laden turbulent flows. Journal 

of Fluid Mechanics 2008;614:207–52. 

[936] Jin G, He G-W, Wang L-P, Zhang J. Subgrid scale fluid velocity timescales seen by 

inertial particles in large-eddy simulation of particle-laden turbulence. 
International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2010;36:432–7. 

[937] Bardina J, Ferziger J, Reynolds W. Improved subgrid-scale models for large-eddy 

simulation. 13th Fluid and Plasmadynamics Conference1980. p. 1357. 
[938] Kloeden PE, Platen E. Numerical solution of stochastic differential equations: 

Springer Science & Business Media; 2013. 

[905] Elgobashi S. An updated classification map of particle-laden turbulent flows. 

[939] Minier J-P, Chibbaro S, Pope SB. Guidelines for the formulation of Lagrangian 

IUTAM Symposium on Computational Approaches to Multiphase Flow: Springer; 
2006. p. 3-10. 

stochastic models for particle simulations of single-phase and dispersed two-phase 
turbulent flows. Physics of Fluids 2014;26:113303. 

[906] Elghobashi S. Particle-laden turbulent flows: direct simulation and closure 

[940] Peirano E, Chibbaro S, Pozorski J, Minier J-P. Mean-field/PDF numerical 

models. Computational fluid Dynamics for the Petrochemical Process Industry: 
Springer; 1991. p. 91-104. 

approach for polydispersed turbulent two-phase flows. Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science 2006;32:315–71. 

[907] Guo F-S, Wang H-F, Liu Z-H, Zheng C-G. Experimental Investigations on 

Turbulence Modulation in a Horizontal Channel Flow Using PTV. Journal of 
Engineering Thermophysics 2004;25:622–4. 

[908] Hwang W, Eaton JK. Homogeneous and isotropic turbulence modulation by small 

heavy ($ St\sim 50$) particles. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2006;564:361–93. 

[909] Balachandar S, Eaton JK. Turbulent dispersed multiphase flow. Annual Review of 

Fluid Mechanics 2010;42:111–33. 

[910] Sato Y, Sekoguchi K. Liquid velocity distribution in two-phase bubble flow. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1975;2:79–95. 

[911] Simonin C, Viollet P. Predictions of an oxygen droplet pulverization in a 
compressible subsonic coflowing hydrogen flow. Numerical Methods for 
Multiphase Flows 1990;91:65–82. 

[912] Troshko A, Hassan Y. A two-equation turbulence model of turbulent bubbly flows. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2001;27:1965–2000. 

[913] Hinze J. Turbulence: McGraw-Hill Publishing Co; 1975. 
[914] Elghobashi S. Abou-Arab T. A two-equation turbulence model for two-phase 

flows. The Physics of Fluids 1983;26:931–8. 

[915] Gryczka O, Heinrich S, Deen N, van Sint Annaland M, Kuipers J, Jacob M, et al. 
Characterization and CFD-modeling of the hydrodynamics of a prismatic spouted 
bed apparatus. Chemical Engineering Science 2009;64:3352–75. 

[916] Mandø M, Lightstone M, Rosendahl L, Yin C, Sørensen H. Turbulence modulation 
in dilute particle-laden flow. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2009; 
30:331–8. 

[917] Chen C, Wood P. A turbulence closure model for dilute gas-particle flows. The 

Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 1985;63:349–60. 

[918] Gouesbet G, Berlemont A. Eulerian and Lagrangian approaches for predicting the 
behaviour of discrete particles in turbulent flows. Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science 1999;25:133–59. 

[919] Lightstone MF, Hodgson SM. Turbulence Modulation in Gas-Particle Flows: A 

Comparison of Selected Models. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 
2004;82:209–19. 

[941] Gardiner CW. Handbook of stochastic methods: springer Berlin; 1985. 
[942] Csanady G. Turbulent diffusion of heavy particles in the atmosphere. Journal of 

the Atmospheric Sciences 1963;20:201–8. 

[943] Berrouk A, Laurence D, Riley J, Stock D. Stochastic modelling of inertial particle 
dispersion by subgrid motion for LES of high Reynolds number pipe flow. Journal 
of Turbulence 2007:N50. 

[944] Cernick MJ, Tullis S, Lightstone M. Particle subgrid scale modelling in large-eddy 
simulations of particle-laden turbulence. Journal of Turbulence 2015;16:101–35. 
[945] Wang L-P, Stock DE. Dispersion of heavy particles by turbulent motion. Journal of 

the Atmospheric Sciences 1993;50:1897–913. 

[946] Zhong W, Yu A, Liu X, Tong Z, Zhang H. DEM/CFD-DEM modelling of non- 

spherical particulate systems: theoretical developments and applications. Powder 
Technology 2016;302:108–52. 

[947] Kraume M. Transportvorg¨ange in der Verfahrenstechnik: Springer; 2004. 
[948] Yang W-c. Handbook of fluidization and fluid-particle systems: CRC press; 2003. 
[949] Hofmann M. Opto-fluidische Mikrosysteme zur Partikelanalyse: TU Ilmenau; 

2013. 

[950] Wadell H. Volume, shape, and roundness of rock particles. The Journal of Geology 

1932;40:443–51. 

[951] Wentworth CK. A laboratory and field study of cobble abrasion. The Journal of 

Geology 1919;27:507–21. 

[952] Zingg T. Beitrag zur schotteranalyse: ETH Zurich; 1935. 
[953] Di Blasi C. Physico-chemical processes occurring inside a degrading two- 

dimensional anisotropic porous medium. International journal of heat and Mass 
Transfer 1998;41:4139–50. 

[954] Gera D, Mathur M, Freeman M, Robinson A. Effect of large aspect ratio of biomass 
particles on carbon burnout in a utility boiler. Energy & Fuels 2002;16:1523–32. 
[955] Babu B, Chaurasia A. Dominant design variables in pyrolysis of biomass particles 
of different geometries in thermally thick regime. Chemical Engineering Science 
2004;59:611–22. 

[956] Favier J, Abbaspour-Fard M, Kremmer M, Raji A. Shape representation of axi- 

[920] Mostafa A, Mongia H. On the interaction of particles and turbulent fluid flow. 

International journal of heat and Mass Transfer 1988;31:2063–75. 

symmetrical, non-spherical particles in discrete element simulation using multi- 
element model particles. Engineering Computations 1999;16:467–80. 

[921] Tu J, Fletcher C. An improved model for particulate turbulence modulation in 

[957] Abbaspour-Fard H M. Theoretical validation of a multi-sphere, discrete element 

confined two-phase flows. International Communications in Heat and Mass 
Transfer 1994;21:775–83. 

model suitable for biomaterials handling simulation. Biosystems Engineering 
2004;88:153–61. 

[922] Lain S, Sommerfeld M. Turbulence modulation in dispersed two-phase flow laden 
with solids from a Lagrangian perspective. International Journal of Heat and Fluid 
Flow 2003;24:616–25. 

[923] Slack M, Cokljat D, Vasquez S. Reynolds-stress model for eulerian multiphase. 

Proc 4th Int Symp on Turbulence Heat and Mass Transfer: Begell House Inc; 2003. 
p. 1047-54. 

[924] Lattanzi AM, Tavanashad V, Subramaniam S, Capecelatro J. Stochastic models for 

capturing dispersion in particle-laden flows. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2020; 
903:1–29. 

[925] Gosman A, Loannides E. Aspects of computer simulation of liquid-fueled 

combustors. Journal of Energy 1983;7:482–90. 

[926] Daly BJ, Harlow FH. Transport equations in turbulence. The Physics of Fluids 

1970;13:2634–49. 

[927] Mofakham AA, Ahmadi G. On random walk models for simulation of particle- 

laden turbulent flows. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2020;122: 
103157. 

[928] Armenio V, Piomelli U, Fiorotto V. Effect of the subgrid scales on particle motion. 

Physics of Fluids 1999;11:3030–42. 

[958] Berger KJ, Hrenya CM. Challenges of DEM: II. Wide particle size distributions. 

Powder Technology 2014;264:627–33. 

[959] Brosh T, Kalman H, Levy A. Accelerating CFD–DEM simulation of processes with 

wide particle size distributions. Particuology 2014;12:113–21. 

[960] Yu J, Lu L, Gao X, Xu Y, Shahnam M, Rogers WA. Coupling reduced-order 

modeling and coarse-grained CFD-DEM to accelerate coal gasifier simulation and 
optimization. AIChE Journal 2021;67:e17030. 

[961] Zhang Y, Zhao Y, Gao Z, Duan C, Xu J, Lu L, et al. Experimental and Eulerian- 

Lagrangian-Lagrangian study of binary gas-solid flow containing particles of 
significantly different sizes. Renewable Energy 2019;136:193–201. 

[962] Qinghong Z, Shuyan W, Huilin L, Guodong L, Shuai W, Guangbo Z. A coupled 
Eulerian fluid phase-Eulerian solids phase-Lagrangian discrete particles hybrid 
model applied to gas-solids bubbling fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2017; 
315:385–97. 

[963] Hirche D, Birkholz F, Hinrichsen O. A hybrid Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian model 
for gas-solid simulations. Chemical Engineering Journal 2019;377:119743. 

[964] Ishii M. Thermo-fluid dynamic theory of two-phase flow. Paris: Eyrolles; 1975. 
[965] Lyczkowski RW. The History of Multiphase Science and Computational Fluid 

[929] Kuerten J, Vreman A. Can turbophoresis be predicted by large-eddy simulation? 

Dynamics: A Personal Memoir: Springer; 2017. 

Physics of Fluids 2005;17:011701–4. 

[966] Mesina G. A history of RELAP computer codes. Nuclear Science and Engineering 

[930] Pozorski J, Apte SV. Filtered particle tracking in isotropic turbulence and 

2016;182. v–ix. 

stochastic modeling of subgrid-scale dispersion. International Journal of 
Multiphase Flow 2009;35:118–28. 

[967] Moore K, Rettig W. RELAP2: A DIGITAL PROGRAM FOR REACTOR BLOWDOWN 
AND POWER EXCURSION ANALYSIS. Phillips Petroleum Co., Idaho Falls, Idaho. 
Atomic Energy Div.; 1968. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930205F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[968] Solbrig C, Hughes ED. Two phase flow equations which account for unequal phase 
velocities and unequal phase temperatures. Idaho National Lab.(INL), Idaho Falls, 
ID (United States) 1971. 

[969] Harlow FH, Amsden AA. Numerical calculation of multiphase fluid flow. Journal 

of Computational Physics 1975;17:19–52. 

[970] Amsden AA, Harlow FH. KACHINA: An eulerian computer program for multifield 

fluid flows. Los Alamos Scientific Lab., N. Mex.(USA) 1974. 

[971] Blake T. Computer modeling of coal gasification reactors: Department of Energy; 

1976. 

[972] Savage S, Jeffrey D. The stress tensor in a granular flow at high shear rates. 

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1981;110:255–72. 

[973] Jenkins J, Richman M. Grad’s 13-moment system for a dense gas of inelastic 

spheres. The breadth and depth of continuum mechanics: Springer; 1986. p. 647- 
69. 

[974] Johnson PC, Nott P, Jackson R. Frictional–collisional equations of motion for 

[1000] Thunman H, Lind F, Breitholtz C, Berguerand N, Seemann M. Using an oxygen- 

carrier as bed material for combustion of biomass in a 12-MWth circulating 
fluidized-bed boiler. Fuel 2013;113:300–9. 

[1001] Ranzi E, Cuoci A, Faravelli T, Frassoldati A, Migliavacca G, Pierucci S, et al. 
Chemical kinetics of biomass pyrolysis. Energy & Fuels 2008;22:4292–300. 

[1002] Blondeau J, Jeanmart H. Biomass pyrolysis at high temperatures: Prediction of 
gaseous species yields from an anisotropic particle. Biomass & Bioenergy 2012; 
41:107–21. 

[1003] Hejazi B, Grace JR, Bi X, As Mahecha-Botero. Kinetic model of steam gasification 
of biomass in a bubbling fluidized bed reactor. Energy & Fuels 2017;31: 
1702–11. 

[1004] Hejazi B, Grace JR, Bi X, As Mahecha-Botero. Kinetic model of steam gasification 
of biomass in a dual fluidized bed reactor: Comparison with pilot-plant 
experimental results. Energy & Fuels 2017;31:12141–55. 

[1005] Fernandez A, Ortiz LR, Asensio D, Rodriguez R, Mazza G. Kinetic analysis and 

participate flows and their application to chutes. Journal of fluid mechanics 1990; 
210:501–35. 

thermodynamics properties of air/steam gasification of agricultural waste. 
Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering 2020;8:103829. 

[975] Gidaspow D, Jung J, Singh RK. Hydrodynamics of fluidization using kinetic 

[1006] Zeng K, Gauthier D, Soria J, Mazza G, Flamant G. Solar pyrolysis of 

theory: an emerging paradigm: 2002 Flour-Daniel lecture. Powder Technology 
2004;148:123–41. 

[976] Spalding Runchal AKBrian. CFD & Reality: A Personal Recollection. Journal of the 

Franklin Institute 2014;351:65–87. 

[977] Greenshields CJ. OpenFOAM user guide. OpenFOAM Foundation Ltd, version 

2015;3:47. 

[978] Hong K, Wang W, Zhou Q, Wang J, Li J. An EMMS-based multi-fluid model (EFM) 
for heterogeneous gas–solid riser flows: Part I. Formulation of structure- 
dependent conservation equations. Chemical Engineering Science 2012;75: 
376–89. 

carbonaceous feedstocks: A review. Solar Energy 2017;156:73–92. 
[1007] Fernandez A, Palacios C, Echegaray M, Mazza G, Rodriguez R. Pyrolysis and 
combustion of regional agro-industrial wastes: Thermal behavior and kinetic 
parameters comparison. Combustion Science and Technology 2018;190:114–35. 
[1008] Blasi D. Kinetic and heat transfer control in the slow and flash pyrolysis of solids. 

Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 1996;35:37–46. 
[1009] Miller RS, Bellan J. A generalized biomass pyrolysis model based on 

superimposed cellulose, hemicelluloseand liqnin kinetics. Combustion Science 
and Technology 1997;126:97–137. 

[1010] Kalgo AS. The development and optimisation of a fast pyrolysis process for bio- 

[979] Ramkrishna D. Population balances: Theory and applications to particulate 

oil production: Aston University; 2011. 

systems in engineering: Elsevier; 2000. 

[1011] Di Blasi C, Branca C. Kinetics of primary product formation from wood pyrolysis. 

[980] Chen X, Wang J, Li J. Coarse grid simulation of heterogeneous gas–solid flow in a 

Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2001;40:5547–56. 

CFB riser with polydisperse particles. Chemical Engineering Journal 2013;234: 
173–83. 

[981] My¨oh¨anen K, Palonen J, Hypp¨anen T. Modelling of indirect steam gasification in 

circulating fluidized bed reactors. Fuel Processing Technology 2018;171:10–9. 

[982] Nasro-Allah Y, Montilla C, Ansart R, Fox RO. Simonin O. Numerical and 

experimental study of electrostatic charge in gas-solid fluidized beds. In: 10th 
International Conference on Multiphase Flow (ICMF 2019); 2020. 

[1012] Trendewicz A, Evans R, Dutta A, Sykes R, Carpenter D, Braun R. Evaluating the 
effect of potassium on cellulose pyrolysis reaction kinetics. Biomass & Bioenergy 
2015;74:15–25. 

[1013] Ranzi E, Corbetta M, Manenti F, Pierucci S. Kinetic modeling of the thermal 

degradation and combustion of biomass. Chemical Engineering Science 2014; 
110:2–12. 

[1014] Patel M. Pyrolysis and gasification of biomass and acid hydrolysis residues: 

[983] Montilla C, Youssef N-A, Ansart R, Fox RO, Simonin O. Eulerian modeling of 

Aston University; 2013. 

mono-disperse gas–particle flow with electrostatic forces. In: 10th International 
Conference on Multiphase Flow (ICMF 2019); 2020. 

[984] Dong X, Yu A, Burgess JM, Pinson D, Chew S, Zulli P. Modelling of multiphase 
flow in ironmaking blast furnace. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 
2009;48:214–26. 

[985] Jiao L, Kuang S, Yu A, Li Y, Mao X, Xu H. Three-dimensional modeling of an 

ironmaking blast furnace with a layered cohesive zone. Metallurgical and 
Materials Transactions B 2020;51:258–75. 

[986] Chen X, Song N, Jiang M, Zhou Q. Theoretical and numerical analysis of key sub- 
grid quantities’ effect on filtered Eulerian drag force. Powder Technology 2020; 
372:15–31. 

[987] Van Wachem B, Almstedt A-E. Methods for multiphase computational fluid 

dynamics. Chemical Engineering Journal 2003;96:81–98. 

[988] van der Hoef MA, van Sint Annaland M, Deen N, Kuipers J. Numerical simulation 
of dense gas-solid fluidized beds: a multiscale modeling strategy. Annu Rev Fluid 
Mech 2008;40:47–70. 

[989] Sharma A, Pareek V, Zhang D. Biomass pyrolysis—A review of modelling, process 

parameters and catalytic studies. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 
2015;50:1081–96. 

[990] Alobaid F, Busch J-P, Stroh A, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Experimental measurements for 
torrefied biomass Co-combustion in a 1 MWth  pulverized coal-fired furnace. 
Journal of the Energy Institute 2020;93:833–46. 

[1015] Xiong Q, Yang Y, Xu F, Pan Y, Zhang J, Hong K, et al. Overview of computational 

fluid dynamics simulation of reactor-scale biomass pyrolysis. ACS Sustainable 
Chemistry and Engineering 2017;5:2783–98. 

[1016] Papadikis K, Bridgwater A, Gu S. CFD modelling of the fast pyrolysis of biomass 
in fluidised bed reactors, Part A: Eulerian computation of momentum transport 
in bubbling fluidised beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2008;63:4218–27. 

[1017] Papadikis K, Gu S, Bridgwater A. CFD modelling of the fast pyrolysis of biomass 
in fluidised bed reactors. Part B: Heat, momentum and mass transport in 
bubbling fluidised beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2009;64:1036–45. 

[1018] Papadikis K, Gu S, Bridgwater AV. CFD modelling of the fast pyrolysis of biomass 
in fluidised bed reactors: modelling the impact of biomass shrinkage. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2009;149:417–27. 

[1019] Papadikis K, Gu S, Bridgwater AV. Computational modelling of the impact of 

particle size to the heat transfer coefficient between biomass particles and a 
fluidised bed. Fuel Processing Technology 2010;91:68–79. 

[1020] Makkawi Y, Yu X, Ocone R. Parametric analysis of biomass fast pyrolysis in a 
downer fluidized bed reactor. Renewable Energy 2019;143:1225–34. 
[1021] Bashir M, Yu X, Hassan M, Makkawi Y. Modeling and performance analysis of 

biomass fast pyrolysis in a solar-thermal reactor. ACS Sustainable Chemistry 
Engineering 2017;5:3795–807. 

[1022] Ashcraft RW, Heynderickx GJ, Marin GB. Modeling fast biomass pyrolysis in a 

gas–solid vortex reactor. Chemical Engineering Journal 2012;207:195–208. 

[991] Sansaniwal S, Pal K, Rosen M, Tyagi S. Recent advances in the development of 

[1023] Aramideh S, Xiong Q, Kong S-C, Brown RC. Numerical simulation of biomass fast 

biomass gasification technology: A comprehensive review. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews 2017;72:363–84. 

[992] Dieringer P, Marx F, Alobaid F, Str¨ohle J, Epple B. Process Control Strategies in 
Chemical Looping Gasification—A Novel Process for the Production of Biofuels 
Allowing for Net Negative CO2  Emissions. Applied Sciences 2020;10:4271. 

[993] Zeng J, Xiao R, Zhang H, Wang Y, Zeng D, Ma Z. Chemical looping pyrolysis- 

gasification of biomass for high H2/CO syngas production. Fuel Processing 
Technology 2017;168:116–22. 

[994] Chen S, Wang D, Xue Z, Sun X, Xiang W. Calcium looping gasification for high- 
concentration hydrogen production with CO2  capture in a novel compact 
fluidized bed: simulation and operation requirements. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:4887–99. 

[995] Beirow M, Parvez AM, Schmid M, Scheffknecht G. A Detailed One-Dimensional 
Hydrodynamic and Kinetic Model for Sorption Enhanced Gasification. Applied 
Sciences 2020;10:6136. 

[996] Karl J, Pr¨oll T. Steam gasification of biomass in dual fluidized bed gasifiers: A 

review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2018;98:64–78. 

[997] Su´arez-Almeida M, G´omez-Barea A, Ghoniem A, Pfeifer C. Solar gasification of 
biomass in a dual fluidized bed. Chemical Engineering Journal 2021;406:126665. 
[998] Li X, Shen Y, Wei L, He C, Lapkin AA, Lipi´nski W, et al. Hydrogen production of 
solar-driven steam gasification of sewage sludge in an indirectly irradiated 
fluidized-bed reactor. Applied Energy 2020;261:114229. 

[999] Lyngfelt A. Chemical-looping combustion of solid fuels–status of development. 

Applied Energy 2014;113:1869–73. 

pyrolysis in an auger reactor. Fuel 2015;156:234–42. 

[1024] Grønli MG, Melaaen MC. Mathematical model for wood pyrolysis comparison of 
experimental measurements with model predictions. Energy & Fuels 2000;14: 
791–800. 

[1025] Boroson ML, Howard JB, Longwell JP, Peters WA. Product yields and kinetics 
from the vapor phase cracking of wood pyrolysis tars. AIChE Journal 1989;35: 
120–8. 

[1026] Rath J, Staudinger G. Cracking reactions of tar from pyrolysis of spruce wood. 

Fuel 2001;80:1379–89. 

[1027] Neubauer Y, Behrendt F. Application of laser mass spectrometry for a fast and 
detailed online tar analysis in biomass gasification. In: Proceedings of the 15th 
European Biomass Conference & Exhibition, Berlin, May; 2007. p. 850–4. 
[1028] Shi Z, Wang W, Li J. A bubble-based EMMS model for gas–solid bubbling 

fluidization. Chemical Engineering Science 2011;66:5541–55. 

[1029] Tepper H. Zur vergasung von rest-und abfallholz in wirbelschichtreaktoren für 
dezentrale energieversorgungsanlagen. Germany: Otto-von-Guericke-Universitat 
Magdeburg; 2005. 

[1030] Wiest W. Zur Pyrolyse von Biomasse im Drehrohrreaktor: na; 1998. 
[1031] Garcıa-Ibanez P, Cabanillas A, S´anchez J. Gasification of leached orujillo (olive 
oil waste) in a pilot plant circulating fluidised bed reactor. Preliminary results. 
Biomass and Bioenergy 2004;27:183–94. 

[1032] Rapagn`a S, Jand N, Kiennemann A, Foscolo P. Steam-gasification of biomass in a 
fluidised-bed of olivine particles. Biomass & Bioenergy 2000;19:187–97. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930206F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1033] Badzioch S, Hawksley PG. Kinetics of thermal decomposition of pulverized coal 
particles. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Process Design and Development 
1970;9:521–30. 

[1064] Abad A, Mattisson T, Lyngfelt A, Ryd`en M. Chemical-looping combustion in a 
300 W continuously operating reactor system using a manganese-based oxygen 
carrier. Fuel 2006;85:1174–85. 

[1034] Field MA. Rate of combustion of size-graded fractions of char from a low-rank 

[1065] Abad A, Mattisson T, Lyngfelt A, Johansson M. The use of iron oxide as oxygen 

coal between 1 200 K and 2 000 K. Combustion and Flame 1969;13:237–52. 

carrier in a chemical-looping reactor. Fuel 2007;86:1021–35. 

[1035] Baum M, Street P. Predicting the combustion behaviour of coal particles. 

[1066] Charitos A. Experimental characterization of the calcium looping process for 

Combustion Science Technology 1971;3:231–43. 

CO2  capture. 2013. 

[1036] Onel O, Niziolek AM, Hasan MF, Floudas CA. Municipal solid waste to liquid 
transportation fuels–Part I: Mathematical modeling of a municipal solid waste 
gasifier. Computers & Chemical Engineering 2014;71:636–47. 

[1037] Wang J, Cheng G, You Y, Xiao B, Liu S, He P, et al. Hydrogen-rich gas production 
by steam gasification of municipal solid waste (MSW) using NiO supported on 
modified dolomite. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:6503–10. 
[1038] Ghassemi H, Shahsavan-Markadeh R. Effects of various operational parameters 
on biomass gasification process; a modified equilibrium model. Energy 
Conversion and Management 2014;79:18–24. 

[1039] Subramanian P, Sampathrajan A, Venkatachalam P. Fluidized bed gasification of 
select granular biomaterials. Bioresource Technology 2011;102:1914–20. 

[1040] Couto N, Silva V, Bispo C, Rouboa A. From laboratorial to pilot fluidized bed 
reactors: analysis of the scale-up phenomenon. Energy Conversion and 
Management 2016;119:177–86. 

[1067] Shadle L, Spenik J, Monazam RE, Panday R, Richardson G. Carbon dioxide 

capture in fully integrated fluidized process using polyethylenimine (PEI) 
sorbent. DOE Report 2013. 

[1068] Akbari V, Borhani TNG, Shamiri A, Aramesh R, Hussain MA, Hamid MKA. 2D 
CFD-PBM simulation of hydrodynamic and particle growth in an industrial gas 
phase fluidized bed polymerization reactor. Chemical Engineering Research and 
Design 2015;104:53–67. 

[1069] Aloisi I, Di Giuliano A, Di Carlo A, Foscolo P, Courson C, Gallucci K. Sorption 
enhanced catalytic Steam Methane Reforming: Experimental data and 
simulations describing the behaviour of bi-functional particles. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2017;314:570–82. 

[1070] Rem´on J, Jarauta-C´ordoba C, García L, Arauzo J. Analysis and optimisation of 
H2  production from crude glycerol by steam reforming using a novel two step 
process. Fuel Processing Technology 2016;145:130–47. 

[1041] Bi J, Kojima T. Prediction of temperature and composition in a jetting fluidized 

[1071] Darton R, RC D, RD L, JF D, D H. Bubble Growth Due To Coalescence in 

bed coal gasifier. Chemical Engineering Science 1996;51:2745–50. 

process. International Journal of Energy Research 1980;4: 

[1042] Patel J. The U-gas
149–65. 

® 

[1043] Chejne F, Hernandez J. Modelling and simulation of coal gasification process in 

fluidised bed. Fuel 2002;81:1687–702. 

[1044] de Souza-Santos M. Comprehensive modelling and simulation of fluidized bed 

boilers and gasifiers. Fuel 1989;68:1507–21. 

[1045] Ocampo A, Arenas E, Chejne F, Espinel J, Londono C, Aguirre J, et al. An 

experimental study on gasification of Colombian coal in fluidised bed. Fuel 
2003;82:161–4. 

[1046] Armstrong L, Gu S, Luo K. Parametric study of gasification processes in a BFB 

coal gasifier. Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research 2011;50:5959–74. 

[1047] Xiao R, Zhang M, Jin B, Huang Y, Zhou H. High-temperature air/steam-blown 
gasification of coal in a pressurized spout-fluid bed. Energy & Fuels 2006;20: 
715–20. 

[1048] Xiao R, Zhang M, Jin B, Xiaong Y, Zhou H, Duan Y, et al. Air blown partial 
gasification of coal in a pilot plant pressurized spout-fluid bed reactor. Fuel 
2007;86:1631–40. 

[1049] Xiao R, Shen L, Zhang M, Jin B, Xiong Y, Duan Y, et al. Partial gasification of coal 
in a fluidized bed reactor: Comparison of a laboratory and pilot scale reactors. 
Korean Journal of Chemical Engineering 2007;24:175–80. 

[1050] Johnson JL. Kinetics of coal gasification: a compilation of research. Kinetics of 

coal gasification: a compilation of research. United States 1979. 

[1051] My¨oh¨anen K, Hypp¨anen T, Pikkarainen T, Eriksson T, Hotta A. Near Zero CO2 
emissions in coal firing with oxy-fuel circulating fluidized bed boiler. Chemical 
Engineering & Technology: Industrial Chemistry-Plant Equipment-Process 
Engineering-Biotechnology 2009;32:355–63. 

[1052] Fryer C, Potter OE. Experimental investigation of models for fluidized bed 

catalytic reactors. AIChE Journal 1976;22:38–47. 

[1053] Ji J, Cheng L, Liu Y, Wei Y, Nie L. Investigation on sodium fate for high alkali 

coal during circulating fluidized bed combustion. Energy & Fuels 2019;33: 
916–26. 

[1054] Issangya A, Bai D, Bi H, Lim K, Zhu J, Grace J. Suspension densities in a high- 
density circulating fluidized bed riser. Chemical Engineering Science 1999;54: 
5451–60. 

[1055] Issangya AS, Grace JR, Bai D, Zhu J. Further measurements of flow dynamics in 

a high-density circulating fluidized bed riser. Powder Technology 2000;111: 
104–13. 

[1056] Forero C, Gay´an P, García-Labiano F, De Diego L, Abad A, Ad´anez J. High 

temperature behaviour of a CuO/γAl2O3  oxygen carrier for chemical-looping 
combustion. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 2011;5:659–67. 
[1057] Ad´anez J, Dueso C, de Diego LF, Garcia-Labiano F, Gay´an P, Abad A. Methane 
combustion in a 500 Wth chemical-looping combustion system using an 
impregnated Ni-based oxygen carrier. Energy & Fuels 2009;23:130–42. 
[1058] Kolbitsch P, Bolhar-Nordenkampf J, Pr¨oll T, Hofbauer H. Comparison of two Ni- 
based oxygen carriers for chemical looping combustion of natural gas in 140 kW 
continuous looping operation. Industrial & engineering chemistry research 
2009;48:5542–7. 

[1059] Mendiara T, Abad A, De Diego L, García-Labiano F, Gay´an P, Ad´anez J. Biomass 
combustion in a CLC system using an iron ore as an oxygen carrier. International 
Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 2013;19:322–30. 

[1060] Ad´anez J, García-Labiano F, de Diego LF, Gay´an P, Celaya J, Abad A. Nickel(cid:0)

copper oxygen carriers to reach zero CO and H2  emissions in chemical-looping 
combustion. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2006;45:2617–25. 
[1061] Mattisson T, Lyngfelt A, Cho P. The use of iron oxide as an oxygen carrier in 

chemical-looping combustion of methane with inherent separation of CO2. Fuel 
2001;80:1953–62. 

[1062] Son SR, Kim SD. Chemical-looping combustion with NiO and Fe2O3  in a 
thermobalance and circulating fluidized bed reactor with double loops. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2006;45:2689–96. 

Fluidized Beds. Transactions of the Institution of Chemical Engineers 1977;55: 
274–80. 

[1072] Vogt E, Weckhuysen B. Fluid catalytic cracking: recent developments on the 

grand old lady of zeolite catalysis. Chemical Society Reviews 2015;44:7342–70. 
[1073] Zheng Y, Wan X, Qian Z, Wei F, Jin Y. Numerical simulation of the gas–particle 
turbulent flow in riser reactor based on k–ε–kp–εp–Θ two-fluid model. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2001;56:6813–22. 

[1074] De Wilde J, de Broqueville A. Rotating fluidized beds in a static geometry: 
experimental proof of concept. AIChE Journal 2007;53:793–810. 

[1075] Li P, Lan X, Xu C, Wang G, Lu C, Gao J. Drag models for simulating gas–solid 
flow in the turbulent fluidization of FCC particles. Particuology 2009;7:269–77. 

[1076] Batakliev T, Georgiev V, Anachkov M, Rakovsky S. Ozone decomposition. 

Interdisciplinary toxicology 2014;7:47–59. 

[1077] Cao C, Weinstein H. Characterization of downflowing high velocity fluidized 

beds. AIChE Journal 2000;46:515–22. 

[1078] Kashyap M, Gidaspow D. Measurements and computation of low mass transfer 
coefficients for FCC particles with ozone decomposition reaction. AIChE journal 
2012;58:707–29. 

[1079] Lefevere J, Mullens S, Meynen V, Van Noyen J. Structured catalysts for 

methanol-to-olefins conversion: a review. Chemical Papers 2014;68:1143–53. 

[1080] Keil FJ. Methanol-to-hydrocarbons: process technology. Microporous and 

Mesoporous Materials 1999;29:49–66. 

[1081] da Silva CAM, Butzge JJ, Nitz M, Taranto OP. Monitoring and control of coating 
and granulation processes in fluidized beds–A review. Advanced Powder 
Technology 2014;25:195–210. 

[1082] Zhang J, Mao M, Ye J, Wang H, Yang W. Investigation of wetting and drying 
process in a gas-solid fluidized bed by electrical capacitance tomography and 
pressure measurement. Powder Technology 2016;301:1148–58. 

[1083] Sowinski A, Miller L, Mehrani P. Investigation of electrostatic charge 

distribution in gas–solid fluidized beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2010;65: 
2771–81. 

[1084] Ciborowski J, Wlodarski A. On electrostatic effects in fluidized beds. Chemical 

Engineering Science 1962;17:23–32. 

[1085] Cunha F, Sobral Y, Gontijo R. Stabilization of concentration waves in fluidized 

beds of magnetic particles. Powder Technology 2013;241:219–29. 
[1086] Lehmann S, Hartge E-U, Jongsma A, deLeeuw I-M, Innings F, Heinrich S. 

Fluidization characteristics of cohesive powders in vibrated fluidized bed drying 
at low vibration frequencies. Powder Technology 2019;357:54–63. 
[1087] Xu C, Zhu J. Parametric study of fine particle fluidization under mechanical 

vibration. Powder Technology 2006;161:135–44. 

[1088] Kaliyaperumal S, Barghi S, Briens L, Rohani S, Zhu J. Fluidization of nano and 
sub-micron powders using mechanical vibration. Particuology 2011;9:279–87. 
[1089] Kuipers J, Tammes H, Prins W, van Swaaij WPM. Experimental and theoretical 

porosity profiles in a two-dimensional gas-fluidized bed with a central jet. 
Powder Technology 1992;71:87–99. 

[1090] Hogness T, Wilson TL, Johnson WC. The thermal decomposition of silane. 

Journal of the American Chemical Society 1936;58:108–12. 

[1091] Furusawa T, Hiroha H, Kojima T. Chemical vapor deposition and homogeneous 

nucleation in monosilane pyrolysis within interparticle spaces-application of 
fines formation analysis to fluidized bed CVD. Tenth International Symposium 
on Chemical Reaction Engineering: Elsevier; 1988. p. 2037-42. 

[1092] Alder BJ, Wainwright TE. Phase transition for a hard sphere system. The Journal 

of Chemical Physics 1957;27:1208–9. 

[1093] Sommerfeld M. Validation of a stochastic Lagrangian modelling approach for 

inter-particle collisions in homogeneous isotropic turbulence. International 
Journal of Multiphase Flow 2001;27:1829–58. 

[1094] Chen M, Kontomaris K, McLaughlin J. Direct numerical simulation of droplet 

collisions in a turbulent channel flow. Part I: collision algorithm. International 
Journal of Multiphase Flow 1999;24:1079–103. 

[1095] Li J, Kuipers J. Effect of pressure on gas–solid flow behavior in dense gas- 

[1063] Leion H, Mattisson T, Lyngfelt A. Solid fuels in chemical-looping combustion. 

International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 2008;2:180–93. 

fluidized beds: a discrete particle simulation study. Powder Technology 2002; 
127:173–84. 

[1096] Li J, Kuipers J. Gas-particle interactions in dense gas-fluidized beds. Chemical 

Engineering Science 2003;58:711–8. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930207F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1097] Li J, Kuipers J. On the origin of heterogeneous structure in dense gas–solid 

[1129] Müller CR, Holland DJ, Sederman AJ, Mantle MD, Gladden LF, Davidson J. 

flows. Chemical Engineering Science 2005;60:1251–65. 

[1098] Chiesa M, Mathiesen V, Melheim JA, Halvorsen B. Numerical simulation of 

particulate flow by the Eulerian–Lagrangian and the Eulerian–Eulerian approach 
with application to a fluidized bed. Computers & Chemical Engineering 2005; 
29:291–304. 

[1099] Wang T, He Y, Tang T, Zhao Y. Numerical investigation on particle behavior in a 
bubbling fluidized bed with non-spherical particles using discrete hard sphere 
method. Powder Technology 2016;301:927–39. 

[1100] Balakin B, Hoffmann AC, Kosinski P. The collision efficiency in a shear flow. 

Chemical Engineering Science 2012;68:305–12. 

[1101] Liu H, Zhang L, Chen T, Wang S, Han Z, Wu S. Experimental study on the 

fluidization behaviors of the superfine particles. Chemical Engineering Journal 
2015;262:579–87. 

[1102] Chaouki J, Chavarie C, Klvana D, Pajonk G. Effect of interparticle forces on the 

hydrodynamic behaviour of fluidized aerogels. Powder Technology 1985;43: 
117–25. 

Magnetic resonance imaging of fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2008;183: 
53–62. 

[1130] Pietsch W. Agglomeration Processes. Phenomena, Tecnologies, Equipament.: 

Wilev-VCH Verlaq GmbH; 2002. 

[1131] Khadilkar A, Rozelle PL, Pisupati SV. Models of agglomerate growth in fluidized 
bed reactors: Critical review, status and applications. Powder Technology 2014; 
264:216–28. 

[1132] Zhou T, Li H. Estimation of agglomerate size for cohesive particles during 

fluidization. Powder Technology 1999;101:57–62. 

[1133] Brooks EF. Fluidization of novel tendrillar carbonaceous materials. 1986. 
[1134] Morooka S, Kusakabe K, Kobata A, Kato Y. Fluidization state of ultrafine 
powders. Journal of Chemical Engineering of Japan 1988;21:41–6. 
[1135] L¨offler F, Muhr W. Die Abscheidung von Feststoffteilchen und Tropfen an 

Kreiszylindern infolge von Tr¨agheitskr¨aften. Chemie Ingenieur Technik 1972;44: 
510–4. 

[1136] Hiller R. Der Einfluß von Partikelstoß und Partikelhaftung auf die Abscheidung 

[1103] Yao W, Guangsheng G, Fei W, Jun W. Fluidization and agglomerate structure of 

in Faserfiltern: Verein Deutscher Ingenieure; 1981. 

SiO2  nanoparticles. Powder Technology 2002;124:152–9. 

[1104] Obermair S, Gutschi C, Woisetschl¨ager J, Staudinger G. Flow pattern and 

agglomeration in the dust outlet of a gas cyclone investigated by Phase Doppler 
Anemometry. Powder Technology 2005;156:34–42. 

[1137] London F. The general theory of molecular forces. Transactions of the Faraday 

Society 1937;33:8–26. 

[1138] Hamaker HC. The London—van der Waals attraction between spherical 

particles. Physica 1937;4:1058–72. 

[1105] Tomas J. Adhesion of ultrafine particles—a micromechanical approach. 

[1139] Moseley J, O’brien T. A model for agglomeration in a fluidized bed. chemical 

Chemical Engineering Science 2007;62:1997–2010. 

Engineering Science 1993;48:3043–50. 

[1106] Kosinski P, Hoffmann AC. Extension of the hard-sphere particle-wall collision 
model to account for particle deposition. Physical review E 2009;79:061302. 

[1107] Kosinski P, Hoffmann AC. Extended hard-sphere model and collisions of 

[1140] Horio M. The prediction of sizes of agglomerates formed in fluidized beds. 

Proceedings of World Congress of Chemical Engineering, 2nd Int Particle 
Technology Forum V. San Diego, United States 1996. 

cohesive particles. Physical review E 2011;84:031303. 

[1108] Uijttewaal W, Oliemans R. Particle dispersion and deposition in direct numerical 

and large eddy simulations of vertical pipe flows. Physics of Fluids 1996;8: 
2590–604. 

[1109] Wang Q, Squires K. Large eddy simulation of particle deposition in a vertical 

turbulent channel flow. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1996;22: 
667–83. 

[1141] Iwadate Y. The Prediction of Sizes of Agglomerates Formed in Fluidized Beds, in 
The Case of Liquid Bridging, Force. Proc 62th Annual Meeting of Soc Chem Eng 
Japan 1997. p. 41. 

[1142] Van de Ven T, Mason S. The microrheology of colloidal dispersions VII. 

Orthokinetic doublet formation of spheres. Colloid and Polymer Science 1977; 
255:468–79. 

[1143] Iwadate Y, Horio M. Prediction of agglomerate sizes in bubbling fluidized beds 

[1110] Njobuenwu DO, Fairweather M. Simulation of deterministic energy-balance 

of group C powders. Powder Technology 1998;100:223–36. 

particle agglomeration in turbulent liquid-solid flows. Physics of Fluids 2017;29: 
083301. 

[1144] Zhou T, Li H. Force balance modelling for agglomerating fluidization of cohesive 

particles. Powder Technology 2000;111:60–5. 

[1111] Winkler C, Rani SL. Vanka S. A numerical study of particle wall-deposition in a 

[1145] Weber MW, Hoffman DK, Hrenya CM. Discrete-particle simulations of cohesive 

turbulent square duct flow. Powder Technology 2006;170:12–25. 
[1112] Blei S, Sommerfeld M. CFD in Drying Technology–Spray-Dryer Simulation. 

granular flow using a square-well potential. Granular Matter 2004;6:239–54. 

[1146] Weber MW, Hrenya CM. Square-well model for cohesion in fluidized beds. 

Modern Drying Technology: Computational Tools at Different Scales 2007;1: 
155–208. 

[1113] Roos YH. Importance of glass transition and water activity to spray drying and 

stability of dairy powders. Le Lait 2002;82:475–84. 

Chemical Engineering Science 2006;61:4511–27. 

[1147] Johnson K. Contact Mechanics. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 

Cambridge; 1985. 

[1148] Brilliantov NV, Albers N, Spahn F, P¨oschel T. Collision dynamics of granular 

[1114] Quintero B, Laín S, Sommerfeld M. Derivation and validation of a hard-body 

particles with adhesion. Physical Review E 2007;76:051302. 

particle-wall collision model for non-spherical particles of arbitrary shape. 
Powder Technology 2021;380:526–38. 

[1115] Wang T, Gao Q, Deng A, Tang T, He Y. Numerical and experimental 

investigations of instability in a spouted bed with non-spherical particles. 
Powder Technology 2021;379:231–40. 

[1116] Goldschmidt M, Weijers G, Boerefijn R, Kuipers J. Discrete element modelling of 
fluidised bed spray granulation. Powder Technology 2003;138:39–45. 

[1117] Huilin L, Shuyan W, Yunhua Z, Yang L, Gidaspow D, Ding J. Prediction of 

particle motion in a two-dimensional bubbling fluidized bed using discrete hard- 
sphere model. Chemical Engineering Science 2005;60:3217–31. 
[1118] Wu C-l, Zhan J-m. Numerical prediction of particle mixing behavior in a 

bubbling fluidized bed. Journal of Hydrodynamics, Ser B. 2007;19:335–41. 

[1149] Johnson KL, Kendall K. Roberts a. Surface energy and the contact of elastic 
solids. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A Mathematical Physical 
Sciences 1971;324:301–13. 

[1150] Weiler C. Generierung leicht dispergierbarer Inhalationspulver mittels 

Sprühtrocknung: Universit¨atsbibliothek Johannes Gutenberg-Universit¨at Mainz; 
2008. 

[1151] Ennis BJ, Tardos G, Pfeffer R. A microlevel-based characterization of granulation 

phenomena. Powder Technology 1991;65:257–72. 

[1152] Kang S-W, Sarofim AF, Be´er JM. Agglomerate formation during coal combustion: 

a mechanistic model. Combustion and Flame 1991;86:258–68. 

[1153] Cryer SA. Modeling agglomeration processes in fluid-bed granulation. AIChE 

Journal 1999;45:2069–78. 

[1119] Njobuenwu DO, Fairweather M. Large eddy simulation of particle agglomeration 

[1154] He Y. A criterion for particle agglomeration by collision. Powder Technology 

with shear breakup in turbulent channel flow. Physics of Fluids 2018;30: 
063303. 

[1120] Pawar S. Multiphase flow in a spray dryer: experimental and computational 
study. The Netherlands: Eindhoven University of Technology; 2014. 

[1121] Pawar S, Padding J, Deen N, Jongsma A, Innings F, Kuipers JH. Numerical and 
experimental investigation of induced flow and droplet–droplet interactions in a 
liquid spray. Chemical Engineering Science 2015;138:17–30. 

[1122] Kim S, Lee DJ, Lee CS. Modeling of binary droplet collisions for application to 
inter-impingement sprays. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2009;35: 
533–49. 

[1123] Nieuwland JJ. Hydrodynamic modelling of gassolid two-phase flows. 

Netherland: Twente University; 1994. 

1999;103:189–93. 

[1155] Liu L, Litster J, Iveson S, Ennis B. Coalescence of deformable granules in wet 

granulation processes. AIChE Journal 2000;46:529–39. 

[1156] Tan H, Goldschmidt M, Boerefijn R, Hounslow M, Salman A, Kuipers J. Building 

population balance model for fluidized bed melt granulation: lessons from 
kinetic theory of granular flow. Powder Technology 2004;142:103–9. 
[1157] Li S, Shang L, Teng H, Lu Q. A model for agglomeration in bio-fuel fired fluidized 

bed. Journal of Thermal Science 2010;19:451–8. 

[1158] Turchiuli C, Jimen`ez T, Dumoulin E. Identification of thermal zones and 
population balance modelling of fluidized bed spray granulation. Powder 
Technology 2011;208:542–52. 

[1159] Moseley JL. The discrete agglomeration model: equivalent problems. Applied 

[1124] Ergun S. Fluid flow through packed columns. Chemical Engineering Progress 

Mathematics 2012;3:1–17. 

1952;48:89–94. 

[1125] He Y, Deen N, MvS Annaland. Kuipers J. Gas(cid:0)

solid turbulent flow in a 

circulating fluidized bed riser: numerical study of binary particle systems. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry research 2009;48:8098–108. 
[1126] Wang T, He Y, Kim DR. Granular temperature and rotational characteristic 

analysis of a gas–solid bubbling fluidized bed under different gravities using 
discrete hard sphere model. Powder Technology 2015;271:35–48. 

[1127] Zhao X-L, Li S-Q, Liu G-Q, Yao Q, Marshall J-S. DEM simulation of the particle 

dynamics in two-dimensional spouted beds. Powder Technology 2008;184: 
205–13. 

[1160] Lipowsky J, Sommerfeld M. Influence of particle agglomeration and 

agglomerate porosity on the simulation of gas cyclones. In: 6th International 
Conference on CFD in Oil & Gas, Metallurgical and Process Industries; 2008. 0- 
16. 

[1161] Lipowsky J. Zur instation¨aren Euler-Lagrange-Simulation partikelbeladener 

Drallstr¨omungen. Germany: Martin-Luther-Universit¨at Halle-Wittenberg 
(Universit¨ats- und Landesbibliothek Sachsen-Anhalt); 2013. 

[1162] Stübing S. Lagrangesche Berechnung von Agglomeratstrukturen am Beispiel 
eines Sprühtrockners. Germany: Martin-Luther-Universit¨at Halle-Wittenberg 
(Universit¨ats- und Landesbibliothek Sachsen-Anhalt); 2014. 

[1128] Liu G-Q, Li S-Q, Zhao X-L, Yao Q. Experimental studies of particle flow dynamics 

[1163] Dietzel M, Sommerfeld M. Numerical calculation of flow resistance for 

in a two-dimensional spouted bed. Chemical Engineering Science 2008;63: 
1131–41. 

agglomerates with different morphology by the Lattice–Boltzmann Method. 
Powder Technology 2013;250:122–37. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930208F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1164] Ernst M, Dietzel M, Sommerfeld M. A lattice Boltzmann method for simulating 

[1199] Krishnan K, Loth E. Effects of gas and droplet characteristics on drop-drop 

transport and agglomeration of resolved particles. Acta Mechanica 2013;224: 
2425–49. 

[1165] Vanni M. Creeping flow over spherical permeable aggregates. Chemical 

Engineering Science 2000;55:685–98. 

[1166] Kusters KA. The influence of turbulence on aggregation of small particles in 

agitated vessels1991. 

[1167] B¨abler MU, Morbidelli M, BAŁDYGA J. Modelling the breakup of solid 

aggregates in turbulent flows. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2008;612:261–89. 

[1168] Ammar Y, Dehbi A, Reeks MW. Break-up of aerosol agglomerates in highly 
turbulent gas flow. Flow, Turbulence Combustion. 2012;89:465–89. 
[1169] Higashitani K, Iimura K, Sanda H. Simulation of deformation and breakup of 

large aggregates in flows of viscous fluids. Chemical Engineering Science 2001; 
56:2927–38. 

[1170] Eggersdorfer M, Kadau D, Herrmann HJ. Pratsinis SE. Fragmentation and 

restructuring of soft-agglomerates under shear. Journal of colloid and Interface 
Science 2010;342:261–8. 

[1171] Rumpf H. The strength of granules and agglomerates. In: Agglomeration- 

Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Agglomeration, 
Philadelphia, 1962; 1962. p. 379–418. 

[1172] Tomi D, Bagster D. The Behavior of Aggregates in Stirred Vessels, Part I. 
Transactions of the Institution of Chemical Engineers 1978;56. 
[1173] Sonntag RC, Russel WB. Structure and breakup of flocs subjected to fluid 

stresses: II. Theory. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 1987;115:378–89. 
[1174] Zaccone A, Soos M, Lattuada M, Wu H, B¨abler MU, Morbidelli M. Breakup of 

dense colloidal aggregates under hydrodynamic stresses. Journal Physical 
Review E 2009;79:061401. 

collision outcome regimes. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2015;77: 
171–86. 

[1200] Post SL, Abraham J. Modeling the outcome of drop–drop collisions in Diesel 
sprays. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2002;28:997–1019. 

[1201] Wozniak G. Zerst¨aubungstechnik: Prinzipien, Verfahren. Ger¨ate: Springer- 

Verlag; 2013. 

[1202] Kuschel M, Sommerfeld M. Investigation of droplet collisions for solutions with 

different solids content. Experiments in Fluids 2013;54:1440. 

[1203] Ashgriz N, Poo J. Coalescence and separation in binary collisions of liquid drops. 

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1990;221:183–204. 

[1204] Brazier-Smith P, Jennings S, Latham J. The interaction of falling water drops: 
coalescence. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences 1972;326:393–408. 

[1205] Gotaas C, Havelka P, Jakobsen HA, Svendsen HF, Hase M, Roth N, et al. Effect of 
viscosity on droplet-droplet collision outcome: Experimental study and 
numerical comparison. Physics of Fluids 2007;19:102106. 

[1206] Arkhipov V, Vasenin I, Trofimov V. Stability of colliding drops of ideal liquid. 
Journal of Applied Mechanics and Technical Physics 1983;24:371–3. 
[1207] Brenn G, Valkovska D, Danov K. The formation of satellite droplets by unstable 

binary drop collisions. Physics of Fluids 2001;13:2463–77. 

[1208] Ko GH, Ryou HS. Modeling of droplet collision-induced breakup process. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2005;31:723–38. 

[1209] Munnannur A, Reitz RD. A new predictive model for fragmenting and non- 

fragmenting binary droplet collisions. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 
2007;33:873–96. 

[1210] Chen R-H. Diesel–diesel and diesel–ethanol drop collisions. Applied Thermal 

[1175] Thomas DG. Turbulent disruption of flocs in small particle size suspensions. 

Engineering 2007;27:604–10. 

AIChE Journal 1964;10:517–23. 

[1211] Sommerfeld M, Kuschel M. Modelling droplet collision outcomes for different 

[1176] Mühle K. Floc stability in laminar and turbulent flow. Surfactant Science Series 

substances and viscosities. Experiments in Fluids 2016;57:187. 

1993:355. 

[1177] Yeung A, Gibbs A, Pelton R. Effect of shear on the strength of polymer-induced 

flocs. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 1997;196:113–5. 

[1178] Saha D, Babler MU, Holzner M, Soos M, Lüthi B, Liberzon A, et al. Breakup of 
finite-size colloidal aggregates in turbulent flow investigated by three- 
dimensional (3D) particle tracking velocimetry. Langmuir 2016;32:55–65. 

[1179] Weiler C, Wolkenhauer M, Trunk M, Langguth P. New model describing the total 
dispersion of dry powder agglomerates. Powder Technology 2010;203:248–53. 
[1180] Saha D. Experimental analysis of aggregate breakup in flows observed by three 

dimensional particle tracking velocimetry: ETH Zurich; 2013. 

[1181] Lu S, Ding Y, Guo J. Kinetics of fine particle aggregation in turbulence. Advances 

in Colloid and Interface Science 1998;78:197–235. 

[1182] Friedlander S, Johnstone H. Deposition of suspended particles from turbulent 
gas streams. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 1957;49:1151–6. 

[1183] Liu BY, Agarwal JK. Experimental observation of aerosol deposition in turbulent 

flow. Journal of Aerosol Science 1974;5:145–55. 

[1184] McCoy D, Hanratty T. Rate of deposition of droplets in annular two-phase flow. 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1977;3:319–31. 

[1185] Wood N. A simple method for the calculation of turbulent deposition to smooth 

and rough surfaces. Journal of Aerosol Science 1981;12:275–90. 

[1186] Kvasnak W, Ahmadi G, Bayer R, Gaynes M. Experimental investigation of dust 
particle deposition in a turbulent channel flow. Journal of Aerosol Science 1993; 
24:795–815. 

[1187] Papavergos P, Hedley A. Particle deposition behaviour from turbulent flows. 

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1984;62:275–95. 

[1188] McLaughlin JBJPoFAFD. Aerosol particle deposition in numerically simulated 

channel flow. Physics of Fluids 1989;1:1211–24. 

[1189] Pui DY, Romay-Novas F, Liu BY. Experimental study of particle deposition in 

bends of circular cross section. Aerosol Science and Technology 1987;7:301–15. 
[1190] Koullapis P, Kassinos SC, Bivolarova MP, Melikov AK. Particle deposition in a 

realistic geometry of the human conducting airways: Effects of inlet velocity 
profile, inhalation flowrate and electrostatic charge. Journal of Biomechanics 
2016;49:2201–12. 

[1191] Dahneke B. The capture of aerosol particles by surfaces. Journal of colloid and 

Interface Science 1971;37:342–53. 

[1192] Li A, Ahmadi G. Dispersion and deposition of spherical particles from point 

sources in a turbulent channel flow. Aerosol Science and Technology 1992;16: 
209–26. 

[1193] Fan F-G, Ahmadi G. A sublayer model for turbulent deposition of particles in 

vertical ducts with smooth and rough surfaces. Journal of Aerosol Science 1993; 
24:45–64. 

[1194] Li A, Ahmadi G. Deposition of aerosols on surfaces in a turbulent channel flow. 

International Journal of Engineering Science 1993;31:435–51. 
[1195] Marchioli C, Soldati A. Reynolds number scaling of particle preferential 

concentration in turbulent channel flow. Advances in Turbulence XI: Springer 
2007:298–300. 

[1196] Jiang Y, Umemura A, Law C. An experimental investigation on the collision 

behaviour of hydrocarbon droplets. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1992;234: 
171–90. 

[1197] Qian J, Law CK. Regimes of coalescence and separation in droplet collision. 

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 1997;331:59–80. 

[1212] Finotello G, Kooiman RF, Padding JT, Buist KA, Jongsma A, Innings F, et al. The 
dynamics of milk droplet–droplet collisions. Experiments in Fluids 2018;59:17. 

[1213] Howarth W. Coalescence of drops in a turbulent flow field. Chemical 

Engineering Science 1964;19:33–8. 

[1214] Amsden AA, O’Rourke PJ, Butler TD. KIVA-II: A computer program for 

chemically reactive flows with sprays. Los Alamos National Lab., NM (USA) 
1989. 

[1215] Guo B, Fletcher DF, Langrish TA. Simulation of the agglomeration in a spray 
using Lagrangian particle tracking. Applied Mathematical Modelling 2004;28: 
273–90. 

[1216] Koll´ar LE, Farzaneh M, Karev AR. Modeling droplet collision and coalescence in 
an icing wind tunnel and the influence of these processes on droplet size 
distribution. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2005;31:69–92. 

[1217] Brenn G. Droplet collision. Handbook of Atomization and Sprays. Springer; 

2011. p. 157–81. 

[1218] Podvysotsky A, Shraiber A. Coalescence and break-up of drops in two-phase 
flows. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1984;10:195–209. 
[1219] Chesters AK. Modelling of coalescence processes in fluid-liquid dispersions: a 
review of current understanding. Chemical Engineering Research and Design 
1991;69:259–70. 

[1220] Liao Y, Lucas D. A literature review on mechanisms and models for the 

coalescence process of fluid particles. Chemical Engineering Science 2010;65: 
2851–64. 

[1221] Lau Y, Bai W, Deen N, Kuipers J. Numerical study of bubble break-up in bubbly 
flows using a deterministic Euler–Lagrange framework. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2014;108:9–22. 

[1222] Mirza MR. Studies of diesel sprays interacting with cross-flows and solid 

boundaries: University of Manchester, Institute of Science and Technology; 
1991. 

[1223] Gao Y, Deng J, Li C, Dang F, Liao Z, Wu Z, et al. Experimental study of the spray 
characteristics of biodiesel based on inedible oil. Biotechnology Advances 2009; 
27:616–24. 

[1224] Sperling LH. Introduction to physical polymer science. John Wiley & Sons; 2005. 
[1225] Cundall PA. A computer model for simulating progressive, large-scale movement 
in blocky rock system. In: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Rock 
Mechanics; 1971. 1971. 

[1226] Kriebitzsch S, Van der Hoef M, Kuipers J. Fully resolved simulation of a gas- 

fluidized bed: a critical test of DEM models. Chemical Engineering Science 2013; 
91:1–4. 

[1227] Wang S, Luo K, Hu C, Lin J, Fan J. CFD-DEM simulation of heat transfer in 

fluidized beds: Model verification, validation, and application. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2019;197:280–95. 

[1228] Zhou Z, Pinson D, Zou R, Yu A. Discrete particle simulation of gas fluidization of 
ellipsoidal particles. Chemical Engineering Science 2011;66:6128–45. 
[1229] Xu L, Zhang Q, Zheng J, Zhao Y. Numerical prediction of erosion in elbow based 

on CFD-DEM simulation. Powder Technology 2016;302:236–46. 

[1230] Van Buijtenen MS, Van Dijk W-J, Deen NG, Kuipers J, Leadbeater T, Parker D. 
Numerical and experimental study on multiple-spout fluidized beds. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2011;66:2368–76. 

[1231] Mahmoodi B, Hosseini S, particles Ahmadi GCFD–DEM simulation of a pseudo- 
two-dimensional spouted bed comprising coarse. Particuology 2019;43:171–80. 

[1198] Estrade J-P, Carentz H, Lavergne G, Biscos Y. Experimental investigation of 

dynamic binary collision of ethanol droplets–a model for droplet coalescence 
and bouncing. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 1999;20:486–91. 

[1232] Wang S, Sun Z, Li X, Gao J, Lan X, Dong Q. Simulation of flow behavior of 
particles in liquid–solid fluidized bed with uniform magnetic field. Powder 
Technology 2013;237:314–25. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930209F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1233] Li X, Sun D, Chen J-h, Wang S, Bai Y-h, Lu H-l. Numerical simulation of magnetic 

particles flow behaviour in a gas-solid fluidized bed with gradient magnetic 
field. Journal of Chemical Engineering of Chinese Universities 2010;24:52–7. 
[1234] Agrawal V, Shinde Y, Shah MT, Utikar RP, Pareek VK, Joshi JB. Effect of drag 

[1262] Zhou L, Han C, Bai L, Shi W, Agarwal R. Numerical and Experimental Study of 
Multiphase Transient Core-Annular Flow Patterns in a Spouted Bed. Journal of 
Energy Resources Technology 2020;142:1–13. 

[1263] Xu Y, Musser J, Li T, Gopalan B, Panday R, Tucker J, et al. Numerical Simulation 

models on CFD–DEM predictions of bubbling fluidized beds with Geldart D 
particles. Advanced Powder Technology 2018;29:2658–69. 

[1235] Ma H, Xu L, Zhao Y. CFD-DEM simulation of fluidization of rod-like particles in a 

fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2017;314:355–66. 

[1236] Sommerfeld M. Kinetic simulations for analysing the wall collision process of 
non-spherical particles. In: ASME 2002 Joint US-European Fluids Engineering 
Division Conference: American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital 
Collection; 2002. p. 539–47. 

[1237] Fotovat F, Bi XT, Grace JR. Electrostatics in gas-solid fluidized beds: a review. 

Chemical Engineering Science 2017;173:303–34. 

[1238] Hassani MA, Zarghami R, Norouzi H, Mostoufi N. Numerical investigation of 

effect of electrostatic forces on the hydrodynamics of gas–solid fluidized beds. 
Powder Technology 2013;246:16–25. 

[1239] Yang Y, Zi C, Huang Z, Wang J, Lungu M, Liao Z, et al. CFD-DEM investigation of 
particle elutriation with electrostatic effects in gas-solid fluidized beds. powder 
Technology 2017;308:422–33. 

[1240] Okhovat-Alavian S, Shabanian J, Norouzi H, Zarghami R, Chaouki J, Mostoufi N. 

Effect of interparticle force on gas dynamics in a bubbling gas–solid fluidized 
bed: A CFD-DEM study. Chemical Engineering Research and Design 2019;152: 
348–62. 

[1241] Kuwagi K, Takano K, Horio M. The effect of tangential lubrication by bridge 
liquid on the behavior of agglomerating fluidized beds. Powder Technology 
2000;113:287–98. 

[1242] Tsuji Y. Activities in discrete particle simulation in Japan. Powder Technology 

2000;113:278–86. 

and Experimental Study of the Gas–Solid Flow Behavior Inside a Full-Loop 
Circulating Fluidized Bed: Evaluation of Different Drag Models. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry Research 2018;57:740–50. 

[1264] Wissing F, Wirtz S, Scherer V. Simulating municipal solid waste incineration 
with a DEM/CFD method–influences of waste properties, grate and furnace 
design. Fuel 2017;206:638–56. 

[1265] Song C, Liu D, Ma J, Chen X. CFD-DEM simulation of flow pattern and particle 

velocity in a fluidized bed with wet particles. Powder Technology 2017;314: 
346–54. 

[1266] Lim EWC. Mixing behaviors of granular materials in gas fluidized beds with 
electrostatic effects. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2013;52: 
15863–73. 

[1267] Fan H, Guo D, Dong J, Cui X, Zhang M, Zhang Z. Discrete element method 

simulation of the mixing process of particles with and without cohesive 
interparticle forces in a fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2018;327:223–31. 

[1268] Pei C, Wu C-Y, England D, Byard S, Berchtold H, Adams M. Numerical analysis of 

contact electrification using DEM–CFD. Powder Technology 2013;248:34–43. 

[1269] Hotta K, Takeda K, Iinoya K. The capillary binding force of a liquid bridge. 

Powder Technology 1974;10:231–42. 

[1270] Zhu R, Zhu W, Xing L, Sun Q. DEM simulation on particle mixing in dry and wet 

particles spouted bed. Powder Technology 2011;210:73–81. 

[1271] Darabi P, Pougatch K, Salcudean M, Grecov D. DEM investigations of fluidized 
beds in the presence of liquid coating. Powder Technology 2011;214:365–74. 
[1272] Fries L, Antonyuk S, Heinrich S, granulator Palzer SDEM–CFD modeling of a 
fluidized bed spray. Chemical Engineering Science 2011;66:2340–55. 

[1243] Shi D, McCarthy JJ. Numerical simulation of liquid transfer between particles. 

[1273] Fries L, Antonyuk S, Heinrich S, Dopfer D, Palzer S. Collision dynamics in 

Powder Technology 2008;184:64–75. 

[1244] Anand A, Curtis JS, Wassgren CR, Hancock BC, Ketterhagen WR. Predicting 

fluidised bed granulators: A DEM-CFD study. Chemical Engineering Science 
2013;86:108–23. 

discharge dynamics of wet cohesive particles from a rectangular hopper using 
the discrete element method (DEM). Chemical Engineering Science 2009;64: 
5268–75. 

[1274] Washino K, Tan H, Hounslow M, Salman A. A new capillary force model 

implemented in micro-scale CFD–DEM coupling for wet granulation. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2013;93:197–205. 

[1245] Sutkar VS, Deen NG, Patil AV, Peters EA, Kuipers J, Salikov V, et al. 

[1275] Chuan Lim EW, Hee Tan RB, Xiao Z. Mixing behaviors of wet granular materials 

Experimental study of hydrodynamics and thermal behavior of a pseudo-2D 
spout-fluidized bed with liquid injection. AIChE Journal 2015;61:1146–59. 

in gas fluidized bed systems. AIChE Journal 2013;59:4058–67. 

[1276] Seah SLL, Lim EWC. Density segregation of dry and wet granular mixtures in gas 

[1246] Knight P, Seville J, Kamiya H, Horio M. Modelling of sintering of iron particles in 

fluidized beds. AIChE Journal 2015;61:4069–86. 

high-temperature gas fluidisation. Chemical Engineering Science 2000;55: 
4783–7. 

[1277] Wang M, Zhu W, Sun Q, Zhang X. A DEM simulation of dry and wet particle flow 

behaviors in riser. Powder Technology 2014;267:221–33. 

[1247] Buist K, Van Erdewijk T, Deen N, Kuipers J. Determination and comparison of 

[1278] He Y, Peng W, Wang T, Yan S. DEM study of wet cohesive particles in the 

rotational velocity in a pseudo 2-D fluidized bed using magnetic particle 
tracking and discrete particle modeling. AIChE Journal 2015;61:3198–207. 

[1248] Yang S, Wang S, Luo K, Fan J, Chew JW. Numerical investigation of the back- 

mixing and non-uniform characteristics in the three-dimensional full-loop 
circulating fluidized bed combustor with six parallel cyclones. Applied Thermal 
Engineering 2019;153:524–35. 

[1249] Blasi CD. Physico-chemical processes occurring inside a degrading two- 

dimensional anisotropic porous medium. International Journal of Heat and Mass 
Transfer 1998;41:4139–50. 

[1250] Pozzobon V, Colin J, Perr´e P. Hydrodynamics of a packed bed of non-spherical 
polydisperse particles: A fully virtual approach validated by experiments. 
Chemical Engineering Journal 2018;354:126–36. 

[1251] Oschmann TS. Extension and improvement of the coupled CFD-DEM approach 
to describe multidimensional heat transfer and non-spherical particle shape for 
fluidized systems. Germany: Technische Universit¨at Berlin; 2019. 
[1252] Lu G, Third J, Müller C. Discrete element models for non-spherical particle 

systems: From theoretical developments to applications. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2015;127:425–65. 

presence of liquid bridges in a gas fluidized bed. Mathematical Problems in 
Engineering 2014;2014:1–15. 

[1279] Pandit JK, Wang XS, Rhodes MJ. Study of Geldart’s Group A behaviour using the 
discrete element method simulation. Powder Technology 2005;160:7–14. 
[1280] Sarangi S, Thalberg K, Frenning G. Numerical modeling of collision of adhesive 
units: Stability and mechanical properties during handling. Chemical 
Engineering Science: X 2020;6:100051. 

[1281] Ma H, Zhao Y. Investigating the fluidization of disk-like particles in a fluidized 
bed using CFD-DEM simulation. Advanced Powder Technology 2018;29: 
2380–93. 

[1282] Lu L, Morris A, Li T, Benyahia S. Extension of a coarse grained particle method to 
simulate heat transfer in fluidized beds. International journal of heat and Mass 
Transfer 2017;111:723–35. 

[1283] Hou Q, Zhou Z, Yu A. Computational study of heat transfer in a bubbling 

fluidized bed with a horizontal tube. AIChE Journal 2012;58:1422–34. 

[1284] Hou Q-F, Zhou Z-Y, Yu A-B. Computational study of the effects of material 

properties on heat transfer in gas fluidization. Industrial & Engineering 
Chemistry Research 2012;51:11572–86. 

[1253] Kruggel-Emden H, Vollmari K. Flow-regime transitions in fluidized beds of non- 

[1285] Tsory T, Ben-Jacob N, Brosh T, Levy A. Thermal DEM–CFD modeling and 

spherical particles. Particuology 2016;29:1–15. 

[1254] Oschmann T, Schiemann M, Kruggel-Emden H. Development and verification of 
a resolved 3D inner particle heat transfer model for the Discrete Element Method 
(DEM). Powder Technology 2016;291:392–407. 

[1255] Vollmari K, Jaseviˇcius R, Kruggel-Emden H. Experimental and numerical study 

simulation of heat transfer through packed bed. Powder Technology 2013;244: 
52–60. 

[1286] Yang W, Zhou Z, Yu A. Particle scale studies of heat transfer in a moving bed. 

Powder Technology 2015;281:99–111. 

[1287] Patil A, Peters E, Kuipers J. Computational study of particle temperature in a 

of fluidization and pressure drop of spherical and non-spherical particles in a 
model scale fluidized bed. Powder Technology 2016;291:506–21. 

bubbling spout fluidized bed with hot gas injection. Powder Technology 2015; 
284:475–85. 

[1256] Oschmann T, Kruggel-Emden H. A novel method for the calculation of particle 
heat conduction and resolved 3D wall heat transfer for the CFD/DEM approach. 
Powder Technology 2018;338:289–303. 

[1257] Guo Y, Curtis JS. Discrete element method simulations for complex granular 

flows. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 2015;47:21–46. 

[1258] Zhou H, Flamant G, Gauthier D. DEM-LES simulation of coal combustion in a 
bubbling fluidized bed Part II: coal combustion at the particle level. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2004;59:4205–15. 

[1259] Zhou H, Flamant G, Gauthier D, Flitris Y. Simulation of coal combustion in a 

bubbling fluidized bed by distinct element method. Chemical Engineering 
Research and Design 2003;81:1144–9. 

[1260] Zhou H, Flamant G, Gauthier D. DEM-LES of coal combustion in a bubbling 

fluidized bed. Part I: gas-particle turbulent flow structure. Chemical Engineering 
Science 2004;59:4193–203. 

[1261] Wang S, Luo K, Hu C, Fan J. CFD-DEM study of the effect of cyclone 

arrangements on the gas-solid flow dynamics in the full-loop circulating 
fluidized bed. Chemical Engineering Science 2017;172:199–215. 

[1288] Li B, Ma M, Yu Y, Chen C, Zhou Z. Particle scale study on heat transfer of 

gas–solid spout fluidized bed with hot gas injection. Particulate Science and 
Technology 2019;37:781–90. 

[1289] Wu H, Gui N, Yang X, Tu J, Jiang S. Numerical simulation of heat transfer in 
packed pebble beds: CFD-DEM coupled with particle thermal radiation. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2017;110:393–405. 
[1290] Hu C, Luo K, Wang S, Junjie L, Fan J. The effects of collisional parameters on the 

hydrodynamics and heat transfer in spouted bed: A CFD-DEM study. Powder 
Technology 2019;353:132–44. 

[1291] Wu H, Gui N, Yang X, Tu J, Jiang S. A smoothed void fraction method for CFD- 
DEM simulation of packed pebble beds with particle thermal radiation. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2018;118:275–88. 
[1292] Hou Q, Zhou Z, flow Yu AGas–solid, properties heat transfer in fluidized beds 
with tubes: Effects of material, settings tube array. Powder Technology 2016; 
296:59–71. 

[1293] Wang S, Luo K, Hu C, Fan J. CFD-DEM study of the effect of ring baffles on 
system performance of a full-loop circulating fluidized bed. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2019;196:130–44. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930210F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1294] Feng Y, Yu A. Effect of Model Formulation of Discrete Particle Simulation on the 

[1324] Ku X, Shen F, Jin H, Lin J, Li H. Simulation of Biomass Pyrolysis in a Fluidized 

Gas Fluidisation Behaviour. In: Third International Conference on CFD in the 
Mineral and Process Industries Melbourne: Australian Commonwealth Scientific 
and Research Organization (CSIRO); 2003. 

[1295] Gan J, Zhou Z, Yu A. CFD–DEM modeling of gas fluidization of fine ellipsoidal 

particles. AIChE Journal 2016;62:62–77. 

[1296] Shrestha S, Kuang S, Yu A, Zhou Z. Particle shape effect on bubble dynamics in 
central air jet pseudo-2D fluidized beds: A CFD-DEM study. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2019;201:448–66. 

[1297] Zhang Y, Jin B, Zhong W, Ren B, Xiao R. DEM simulation of particle mixing in 
flat-bottom spout-fluid bed. Chemical Engineering Research and Design 2010; 
88:757–71. 

[1298] Norouzi H, Mostoufi N, Mansourpour Z, Sotudeh-Gharebagh R, Chaouki J. 

Characterization of solids mixing patterns in bubbling fluidized beds. Chemical 
Engineering Research and Design 2011;89:817–26. 

[1299] Jovanovi´c A, Pezo M, Pezo L, Levi´c L. DEM/CFD analysis of granular flow in 

static mixers. Powder Technology 2014;266:240–8. 

[1300] Luo K, Wu F, Yang S, mixing Fan JCFD–DEM study of, bed dispersion behaviors 

of solid phase in a bubbling fluidized. Powder Technology 2015;274:482–93. 

[1301] Le Lee J, Lim EWC. Comparisons of Eulerian-Eulerian and CFD-DEM simulations 
of mixing behaviors in bubbling fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2017;318: 
193–205. 

[1302] Wang L-J, Wei G-C, Duan S-P, Hou Q-F. CFD-DEM study on the mixing 

characteristics of binary particle systems in a fluidized bed of refuse-derived 
fuel. Particulate Science and Technology 2019;37:51–9. 

[1303] Oschmann T, Vollmari K, Kruggel-Emden H, Wirtz S. Numerical investigation of 

the mixing of non-spherical particles in fluidized beds and during pneumatic 
conveying. Procedia Engineering 2015;102:976–85. 

[1304] Ren A-X, Wang T-Y, Tang T-Q, He Y-R. Non-spherical particle mixing behaviors 
by spherical inert particles assisted in a fluidized bed. Petroleum Science 2019: 
1–16. 

[1305] Lin J, Luo K, Wang S, Sun L, Fan J. Particle-Scale Simulation of Solid Mixing 

Characteristics of Binary Particles in a. Bubbling Fluidized Bed. Energies. 2020; 
13:1–18. 

[1306] Liu R, Zhou Z, Xiao R, Yu A. CFD-DEM modelling of mixing of granular materials 
in multiple jets fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2020;361:315–25. 
[1307] Mahmoudi AH, Hoffmann F, Peters B. Application of XDEM as a novel approach 

to predict drying of a packed bed. International Journal of Thermal Sciences 
2014;75:65–75. 

Bed Reactor Using Thermally Thick Treatment. Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry Research 2019;58:1720–31. 

[1325] Bellan S, Kodama T, Matsubara K, Gokon N, Cho HS, Inoue K. Thermal 

performance of a 30 kW fluidized bed reactor for solar gasification: A CFD-DEM 
study. Chemical Engineering Journal 2019;360:1287–300. 

[1326] Hu C, Luo K, Wang S, Sun L, Fan J. Influences of operating parameters on the 

fluidized bed coal gasification process: A coarse-grained CFD-DEM study. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2019;195:693–706. 

[1327] Hou Q, Dianyu E, Kuang S, Li Z, Yu A. DEM-based virtual experimental blast 

furnace: A quasi-steady state model. Powder Technology 2017;314:557–66. 

[1328] Zhao Y, Xu L, Zheng J. CFD–DEM simulation of tube erosion in a fluidized bed. 

AIChE Journal 2017;63:418–37. 

[1329] Chu K, Chen J, Yu A. Applicability of a coarse-grained CFD–DEM model on dense 

medium cyclone. Minerals Engineering 2016;90:43–54. 

[1330] Kinaci ME, Lichtenegger T, Schneiderbauer S. Direct Reduction of Iron-Ore in 
Fluidized Beds. Computer Aided Chemical Engineering: Elsevier; 2018. p. 217- 
22. 

[1331] Kinaci ME, Lichtenegger T, Schneiderbauer S. Modelling of Chemical Reactions 

in Metallurgical Processes: SINTEF Academic Press; 2017. 

[1332] De Jong J, Odu S, Van Buijtenen M, Deen N, van Sint Annaland M, Kuipers J. 

Development and validation of a novel digital image analysis method for 
fluidized bed particle image velocimetry. Powder technology 2012;230: 
193–202. 

[1333] Mahajan VV, Padding JT, Nijssen TM, Buist KA, Kuipers J. Nonspherical 

particles in a pseudo-2D fluidized bed: Experimental study. AIChE Journal 2018; 
64:1573–90. 

[1334] Varas AlE Carlos, Peters E, Kuipers J. Computational fluid dynamics–discrete 
element method (CFD-DEM) study of mass-transfer mechanisms in riser flow. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2017;56:5558–72. 

[1335] de Oliveira D, Wu C, Nandakumar K. Numerical investigation of pulsed fluidized 
bed using CFD-DEM: Insights on the dynamics. Powder Technology 2020;363: 
745–56. 

[1336] Li H-W, Wang L, Wang T. Du C-h. Experimental and CFD-DEM numerical 

evaluation of flow and heat transfer characteristics in mixed pulsed fluidized 
beds. Advanced Powder Technology 2020;31:3144–57. 

[1337] Zhang K, Wang S, Li B, He Y, Zhao Y. Heat transfer in a pulsed fluidized bed by 

using coupled CFD-DEM method. Powder Technology 2020;367:497–505. 

[1338] Hou Q, Li J, Yu A. CFD-DEM Study of Heat Transfer in the Reduction Shaft of 

[1308] Azmir J, Hou Q, Yu A. Discrete particle simulation of food grain drying in a 

Corex. Steel Research International 2015;86:626–35. 

fluidised bed. Powder Technology 2018;323:238–49. 

[1339] Nigmetova A, Masi E, Simonin O, Dufresne Y, Moureau V, Lartigue G. Statistical 

[1309] Azmir J, Hou Q, Yu A. CFD-DEM study of the effects of food grain properties on 
drying and shrinkage in a fluidised bed. Powder Technology 2020;360:33–42. 

analysis of lab-scale pressurized fluidized bed simulation using a LES-DEM 
approach. In: 10th International Conference on Multiphase Flow; 2019. p. 0. 

[1310] Mahmoudi AH, Hoffmann F, Peters B. Semi-resolved modeling of heat-up, 
drying and pyrolysis of biomass solid particles as a new feature in XDEM. 
Applied Thermal Engineering 2016;93:1091–104. 

[1340] Liu R, Zhou Z, Xiao R, Ye M, Yu A. Particle velocity distribution function around 
a single bubble in gas-solid fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2020;361:33–44. 
[1341] Wang X, Chen K, Kang T, Ouyang J. A Dynamic Coarse Grain Discrete Element 

[1311] Gan J, Zhou Z, Yu A. Effect of particle shape and size on effective thermal 
conductivity of packed beds. Powder Technology 2017;311:157–66. 

[1312] Girardi M, Radl S, Sundaresan S. Simulating wet gas–solid fluidized beds using 
coarse-grid CFD-DEM. Chemical Engineering Science 2016;144:224–38. 

[1313] Tamrakar A, Ramachandran R. CFD–DEM–PBM coupled model development 

and validation of a 3D top-spray fluidized bed wet granulation process. 
Computers & Chemical Engineering 2019;125:249–70. 

[1314] Hilton J, Ying D, Cleary P. Modelling spray coating using a combined CFD–DEM 

and spherical harmonic formulation. Chemical Engineering Science 2013;99: 
141–60. 

[1315] B¨ohling P, Khinast JG, Jajcevic D, Davies C, Carmody A, Doshi P, et al. 
Computational fluid dynamics-discrete element method modeling of an 
industrial-scale Wurster coater. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 2019;108: 
538–50. 

Method for Gas-Solid Fluidized Beds by Considering Particle-Group Crushing 
and Polymerization. Applied Sciences 2020;10:1943. 

[1342] Miao Z, Zhou Z, Yu A, Shen Y. CFD-DEM simulation of raceway formation in an 

ironmaking blast furnace. Powder Technology 2017;314:542–9. 

[1343] Cui J, Hou Q, Shen Y. CFD-DEM study of coke combustion in the raceway cavity 
of an ironmaking blast furnace. Powder Technology 2020;362:539–49. 
[1344] Lichtenegger T. Fast Eulerian-Lagrangian simulations of moving particle beds 
under pseudo-steady-state conditions. Powder Technology 2020;362:474–85. 

[1345] Bellan S, Matsubara K, Cheok CH, Gokon N, Kodama T. CFD-DEM investigation 

of particles circulation pattern of two-tower fluidized bed reactor for beam- 
down solar concentrating system. Powder Technology 2017;319:228–37. 

[1346] Walton O. Particle-dynamics calculations of shear flow. Studies in Applied 

Mechanics: Elsevier; 1983. p. 327-38. 

[1347] Hawkins G. Simulation of granular flow. Studies in Applied Mechanics: Elsevier; 

[1316] Rong D, Horio M. DEM simulation of char combustion in a fluidized bed. In: 

1983. p. 305-12. 

Second International Conference on CFD in the Minerals and Process Industries 
CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia; 1999. p. 65–70. 

[1317] Liu D, Chen X, Zhou W, Zhao C. Simulation of char and propane combustion in a 
fluidized bed by extending DEM–CFD approach. Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 2011;33:2701–8. 

[1318] Geng Y, Che D. An extended DEM–CFD model for char combustion in a bubbling 
fluidized bed combustor of inert sand. Chemical Engineering Science 2011;66: 
207–19. 

[1319] Dufresne Y, Moureau V, Masi E, Simonin O, Horwitz J. Simulation of a reactive 
fluidized bed reactor using CFD/DEM. Center for Turbulence Research Summer 
Program. Stanford, United States 2016:35–44. 

[1320] Zhuang Y, Chen X, Liu D, Bu C. CFD–DEM Modeling of O2/CO2 Char Combustion 

[1348] UEMURA D, HAKUNO M. Granular assembly simulation with Cundall’s model 
for the dynamic collapse of the structural foundation. Doboku Gakkai 
Ronbunshu 1987;1987:181–90. 

[1349] Iwashita K, Tarumi Y, Casaverde L, Uemura D, Meguro K, Hakuno M. Granular 
assembly simulation for ground collapse. Studies in Applied Mechanics: Elsevier; 
1988. p. 125-32. 

[1350] Tsuji Y, Morikawa Y, Tanaka T, Nakatsukasa N, Nakatani M. Numerical 

simulation of gas-solid two-phase flow in a two-dimensional horizontal channel. 
International Journal of Multiphase Flow 1987;13:671–84. 

[1351] Tsuji Y, Tanaka T, Ishida T. Lagrangian numerical simulation of plug flow of 

cohesionless particles in a horizontal pipe. Powder Technology 1992;71:239–50. 

[1352] Xu B, Yu A. Numerical simulation of the gas-solid flow in a fluidized bed by 

in a Fluidized Bed. International Symposium on Coal Combustion: Springer; 
2015. p. 287-93. 

combining discrete particle method with computational fluid dynamics. 
Chemical Engineering Science 1997;52:2785–809. 

[1321] Gerber S, Oevermann M. A two dimensional Euler–Lagrangian model of wood 

[1353] Rong D, Mikami T, Horio M. Particle and bubble movements around tubes 

gasification in a charcoal bed—Part II: Parameter influence and comparison. 
Particuology 2017;35:22–30. 

[1322] Ku X, Li T, Løvås T. Effects of particle shrinkage and devolatilization models on 
high-temperature biomass pyrolysis and gasification. Energy & Fuels 2015;29: 
5127–35. 

immersed in fluidized beds–a numerical study. Chemical Engineering Science 
1999;54:5737–54. 

[1354] Wu K, de Martín L, Coppens M-O. Pattern formation in pulsed gas-solid fluidized 
beds–The role of granular solid mechanics. Chemical Engineering Journal 2017; 
329:4–14. 

[1323] Bruchmüller J, van Wachem B, Gu S, Luo K, Brown R. Modeling the 

[1355] Namdarkedenji R, Hashemnia K, Emdad H. Effect of flow pulsation on 

thermochemical degradation of biomass inside a fast pyrolysis fluidized bed 
reactor. AIChE Journal 2012;58:3030–42. 

fluidization degree of gas-solid fluidized beds by using coupled CFD-DEM. 
Advanced Powder Technology 2018;29:3527–41. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930211F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1356] Wang T, Wang S, Shen Y. Particle-scale study of gas-solid flows in a bubbling 

[1385] Yang W, Zhou Z, Yu A. Discrete particle simulation of solid flow in a three- 

fluidised bed: Effect of drag force and collision models. Powder Technology 
2021;384:353–67. 

[1357] Busciglio A, Vella G, Micale G, Rizzuti L. Analysis of the bubbling behaviour of 
2D gas solid fluidized beds: Part I. Digital image analysis technique. Chemical 
Engineering Journal 2008;140:398–413. 

[1358] Buist KA, van der Gaag AC, Deen NG, Kuipers JA. Improved magnetic particle 
tracking technique in dense gas fluidized beds. AIChE Journal 2014;60:3133–42. 
[1359] van Buijtenen MS, B¨orner M, Deen NG, Heinrich S, Antonyuk S, Kuipers J. An 
experimental study of the effect of collision properties on spout fluidized bed 
dynamics. Powder technology 2011;206:139–48. 

[1360] Kawaguchi T, Tanaka T, Tsuji Y. Numerical simulation of two-dimensional 

fluidized beds using the discrete element method (comparison between the two- 
and three-dimensional models). Powder Technology 1998;96:129–38. 
[1361] Saidi M, Tabrizi HB, Grace JR, Lim CJ. Hydrodynamic investigation of gas-solid 
flow in rectangular spout-fluid bed using CFD-DEM modeling. Powder 
Technology 2015;284:355–64. 

[1362] Wang J, van der Hoef MA, Kuipers J. Comparison of Two-Fluid and Discrete 
Particle Modeling of Dense Gas-Particle Flows in Gas-Fluidized Beds. Chemie 
Ingenieur Technik 2013;85:290–8. 

dimensional blast furnace sector model. Chemical Engineering Journal 2015; 
278:339–52. 

[1386] Wright B, Zulli P, Zhou Z, Yu A. Gas–solid flow in an ironmaking blast 

furnace—I: Physical modelling. Powder Technology 2011;208:86–97. 
[1387] Harlow FH. The particle-in-cell method for numerical solution of problems in 

fluid dynamics. Los Alamos Scientific Lab., N. Mex. 1962. 

[1388] Snider D, O’rourke P, Andrews M. Sediment flow in inclined vessels calculated 
using a multiphase particle-in-cell model for dense particle flows. International 
Journal of Multiphase Flow 1998;24:1359–82. 

[1389] Hendrarsakti J. Application of the Multiphase Particle-In-Cell (MP-PIC) method 

to sedimentation of a polydisperse suspension: Texas A&M University; 1999. 

[1390] Snider D, ORourke P, Andrews M. An incompressible two-dimensional 

multiphase particle-in-cell model for dense particle flows. Los Alamos National 
Lab., NM (United States) 1997. 

[1391] Snider DM. Three fundamental granular flow experiments and CPFD predictions. 

Powder Technology 2007;176:36–46. 

[1392] Banerjee S, Chen A, Patel R, Snider D, Williams K, O’Hern T, et al. Enhanced 

Productivity of Chemical Processes Using Dense Fluidized Beds. Millennium 
Inorganic Chemicals; 2008. 

[1363] Mu L, Buist K, Kuipers J, Deen N. Scaling method of CFD-DEM simulations for 

[1393] Patankar N, Joseph D. Lagrangian numerical simulation of particulate flows. 

gas-solid flows in risers. Chemical Engineering Science: X 2020;6:100054. 

[1364] Traor´e P, Laurentie J-C, Dascalescu L. An efficient 4 way coupling CFD–DEM 
model for dense gas–solid particulate flows simulations. Computers and Fluids 
2015;113:65–76. 

[1365] Luo K, Wu F, Yang S, Fang M, Fan J. High-fidelity simulation of the 3-D full-loop 
gas–solid flow characteristics in the circulating fluidized bed. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2015;123:22–38. 

[1366] Wang S, Luo K, Yang S, Hu C, Fan J. Parallel LES-DEM simulation of dense flows 

in fluidized beds. Applied Thermal Engineering 2017;111:1523–35. 

[1367] Tukovi´c ˇZ, Jasak H. Immersed boundary method in OpenFOAM

®

. 7th 

OpenFOAM

Workshop2012. p. 25-8. 

® 

International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2001;27:1685–706. 

[1394] Patankar N, Joseph D. Modeling and numerical simulation of particulate flows 
by the Eulerian–Lagrangian approach. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 
2001;27:1659–84. 

[1395] Apte S, Mahesh K, Lundgren T. An Eulerian-Lagrangian Model to Simulate Two- 
Phase/Particulate Flows in Complex Geometries. APS 2003;56. AG. 001. 
[1396] Cocco R, Arrington Y, Hays R, Findlay J, Karri S, Knowlton T. Jet cup attrition 

testing. Powder Technology. 2010;200:224–33. 

[1397] Benyahia S, Galvin JE. Estimation of numerical errors related to some basic 
assumptions in discrete particle methods. Industrial Engineering Chemistry 
Research 2010;49:10588–605. 

[1368] Dufresne Y, Moureau V, Lartigue G. Simonin O. A massively parallel CFD/DEM 
approach for reactive gas-solid flows in complex geometries using unstructured 
meshes. Computers & Fluids 2020;198:104402. 

[1398] Pirker S, Kahrimanovic D, Kloss C, Popoff B, Braun M. Simulating coarse particle 
conveying by a set of Eulerian, Lagrangian and hybrid particle models. Powder 
Technology 2010;204:203–13. 

[1369] Beinert S, Kwade A, Schilde C. Strategies for multi-scale simulation of fine 
grinding and dispersing processes: Drag coefficient and fracture of fractal 
aggregates. Advanced Powder Technology 2018;29:707–18. 

[1370] Patil A, Peters E, Lau Y, Kuipers J. Modeling 3D bubble heat transfer in gas–solid 
fluidized beds using the CFD-DEM. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 
Research 2015;54:11466–74. 

[1371] Baltussen MW, Buist KA, Peters EA, Kuipers JA. Multiscale modelling of dense 
gas–particle flows. Advances in Chemical Engineering: Elsevier; 2018. p. 1-52. 
[1372] Gan J, Zhou Z, Yu A. Particle scale study of heat transfer in packed and fluidized 

beds of ellipsoidal particles. Chemical engineering science 2016;144:201–15. 

[1399] Krishnamoorthy G, Klosterman R, Shallbetter D. A Radiative Transfer Modeling 

Methodology in Gas-Liquid Multiphase Flow Simulations. Journal of 
Engineering 2014;2014:1–14. 

[1400] Hwang IS, Jeong HJ, Hwang J. Numerical simulation of a dense flow cyclone 

using the kinetic theory of granular flow in a dense discrete phase model. 
Powder Technology 2019;356:129–38. 

[1401] Schneiderbauer S, Pirker S, Puttinger S, Aguayo P, Touloupidis V, Joaristi AM. 
A Lagrangian-Eulerian hybrid model for the simulation of poly-disperse fluidized 
beds: Application to industrial-scale olefin polymerization. Powder Technology 
2017;316:697–710. 

[1373] Shao Y, Gu J, Zhong W, Yu A. Determination of minimum fluidization velocity in 

[1402] Leboreiro J, Joseph GG, Hrenya CM. Revisiting the standard drag law for 

fluidized bed at elevated pressures and temperatures using CFD simulations. 
Powder Technology 2019;350:81–90. 

bubbling, gas-fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2008;183:385–400. 
[1403] Leboreiro J, Joseph GG, Hrenya CM, Snider DM, Banerjee SS, Galvin JE. The 

[1374] Cheng G, Gan J, Xu D, Yu A. Evaluation of effective thermal conductivity in 
random packed bed: heat transfer through fluid voids and effect of packing 
structure. Powder Technology 2020;361:326–36. 

[1375] Liu X, Deen NG, Tang Y. On the treatment of bed-to-wall heat transfer in CFD- 
DEM simulations of gas-fluidized beds. Chemical Engineering Science 2021;236: 
116492. 

[1376] Uglietti R, Bracconi M, Maestri M. Development and assessment of speed-up 

algorithms for the reactive CFD–DEM simulation of fluidized bed reactors. 
Reaction Chemistry and Engineering 2020;5:278–88. 

[1377] Tabib MV, Johansen ST, Amini S. A 3D CFD-DEM methodology for simulating 

industrial scale packed bed chemical looping combustion reactors. Industrial 
and Engineering Chemistry Research 2013;52:12041–58. 

[1378] Peng Z, Doroodchi E, Alghamdi Y, Moghtaderi B. Mixing and segregation of solid 

mixtures in bubbling fluidized beds under conditions pertinent to the fuel 
reactor of a chemical looping system. Powder Technology 2013;235:823–37. 

[1379] Banerjee S, Agarwal RK. Computational fluid dynamics simulations of a binary 
particle bed in a riser-based carbon stripper for chemical looping combustion. 
Powder Technology 2018;325:361–7. 

[1380] Sornumpol R, Uraisakul W, Kuchonthara P, Chalermsinsuwan B. Piumsomboon 

P. CFD simulation of fuel reactor in chemical looping combustion. Energy 
Procedia 2017;138:979–84. 

[1381] Fulchini F, Ghadiri M, Borissova A, Amblard B, Bertholin S, Cloupet A, et al. 

Development of a methodology for predicting particle attrition in a cyclone by 
CFD-DEM. Powder Technology 2019;357:21–32. 

influence of binary drag laws on simulations of species segregation in gas- 
fluidized beds. Powder Technology 2008;184:275–90. 

[1404] Zhang W, You C. Numerical approach to predict particle breakage in dense flows 

by coupling multiphase particle-in-cell and Monte Carlo methods. Powder 
Technology 2015;283:128–36. 

[1405] Xie J, Zhong W, Yu A. MP-PIC modeling of CFB risers with homogeneous and 
heterogeneous drag models. Advanced Powder Technology 2018;29:2859–71. 

[1406] Gu J, Shao Y, Liu X, Zhong W, Yu A. Modelling of particle flow in a dual 

circulation fluidized bed by a Eulerian-Lagrangian approach. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2018;192:619–33. 

[1407] Xie J, Zhong W, Jin B, Shao Y, Liu H. Simulation on gasification of forestry 

residues in fluidized beds by Eulerian–Lagrangian approach. Bioresource 
Technology 2012;121:36–46. 

[1408] Upadhyay M, Park HC, Choi HS. Multiphase fluid dynamics coupled fast 

pyrolysis of biomass in a rectangular bubbling fluidized bed reactor: Process 
intensification. Chemical Engineering and Processing-Process Intensification 
2018;128:180–7. 

[1409] Zhou G, Zhong W, Yu A, Xie J. Simulation of coal pressurized pyrolysis process 

in an industrial-scale spout-fluid bed reactor. Advanced Powder Technology 
2019;30:3135–45. 

[1410] Yang S, Wang S. Eulerian-Lagrangian simulation of the full-loop gas-solid 

hydrodynamics in a pilot-scale circulating fluidized bed. Powder Technology 
2020;369:223–37. 

[1411] Kadyrov T, Li F, Wang W. Bubble-based EMMS/DP drag model for MP-PIC 

[1382] Hou Q, Dianyu E, Kuang S, Yu A. A process scaling approach for CFD-DEM 

simulation. Powder Technology 2020;372:611–24. 

modelling of thermochemical behaviours in moving bed reactors. Fuel 
Processing Technology 2020;202:106369. 

[1383] Zhou Z, Zhu H, Yu A, Zulli P. Numerical investigation of the transient multiphase 
flow in an ironmaking blast furnace. ISIJ international 2010;50:515–23. 

[1384] Komossa H, Wirtz S, Scherer V, Herz F, Specht E. Transversal bed motion in 

rotating drums using spherical particles: Comparison of experiments with DEM 
simulations. Powder Technology 2014;264:96–104. 

[1412] Xie J, Zhong W, Jin B, Shao Y, Huang Y. Eulerian–Lagrangian method for three- 

dimensional simulation of fluidized bed coal gasification. Advanced Powder 
Technology 2013;24:382–92. 

[1413] Parker JM. CFD model for the simulation of chemical looping combustion. 

Powder Technology 2014;265:47–53. 

[1414] Loha C, Chattopadhyay H, Chatterjee PK. Three dimensional kinetic modeling of 

fluidized bed biomass gasification. Chemical Engineering Science 2014;109: 
53–64. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930212F. Alobaid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[1415] Weng M, Omer A. CFBC fuel flexibility: Added value of advanced process 

optimization. South African Journal of Chemical Engineering 2014;19:48–61. 
[1416] Breault RW, Shadle LJ, Spenik JL, Huckaby ED. CO2  adsorption: experimental 

investigation and CFD reactor model validation. Journal of Computational 
Environmental Sciences 2014;2014:1–14. 

[1417] Zhong W, Xie J, Shao Y, Liu X, Jin B. Three-dimensional modeling of olive cake 

combustion in CFB. Applied Thermal Engineering 2015;88:322–33. 

[1418] Liu H, Cattolica RJ, Seiser R, C-h Liao. Three-dimensional full-loop simulation of 

a dual fluidized-bed biomass gasifier. Applied Energy 2015;160:489–501. 

[1419] Liu H, Cattolica RJ, Seiser R. CFD studies on biomass gasification in a pilot-scale 
dual fluidized-bed system. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 2016;41: 
11974–89. 

[1420] Motlagh AA, Grace JR, Salcudean M, Hrenya C. New structure-based model for 

Eulerian simulation of hydrodynamics in gas–solid fluidized beds of Geldart 
group “A” particles. Chemical Engineering Science 2014;120:22–36. 
[1421] Haider A, Levenspiel O. Drag coefficient and terminal velocity of spherical and 

[1422]

nonspherical particles. Powder Technology 1989;58:63–70. 
´
Scią˙zko M. Modele klasyfikacji węgla w ujęciu termodynamicznym i 
kinetycznym: Wydawnictwa AGH; 2010. 

[1423] Cuq B, Mandato S, Jeantet R, Saleh K, Ruiz T. Agglomeration/granulation in 

food powder production. Handbook of food powders: Elsevier; 2013. p. 150-77.  

Falah  Alobaid  received  his  Ph.D.  degree  with  the  highest 
distinction  from  the  Technical  University  of  Darmstadt,  Ger-
many in 2013 for his work on the CFD-DEM model. His disser-
tation was awarded the energy special prize of the Technical 
University of Darmstadt in 2014. Since he is the research group 
leader at the Institute of Energy Systems and Technology at the 
Technical  University  of  Darmstadt.  In  2018,  he  received  his 
habilitation degree in energy systems (habilitation lecture: En-
ergy Storage Technologies) and then followed by the academic 
title “Privatdozent” in 2019. He has vast experience and track 
record in the field of numerical simulation of energy systems and 
the  associated  engineering  processes  using  one-dimensional 
dynamic  process  simulation  and  three-dimensional  computa-
tional fluid dynamics. He published more than 80 papers as first author and second author in 
renowned peer-reviewed journals as well as numerous conference contributions and many 
patents. He is the co-author of the textbook “Simulation of Power Plants and Firings” and in 
2018 he published his book “Numerical Simulation for Next Generation Thermal Power 
Plants” in Springer (ca. 500 pages). He is also a reviewer for several journals in the field of 
energy and process engineering and has subjected more than 1000 manuscripts to a critical 
assessment so that he has been honoured with several awards from many publishers and 
peer-reviewed journals.  

Naser Almohammed received his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engi-
neering with the highest distinction from the Helmut-Schmidt- 
University Hamburg, Germany in 2018 for his work on CFD of 
Multiphase Flows. His research interests focused on dispersed 
flows, fluidized beds, spray systems, collision, agglomeration, 
deposition,  and  droplet  coalescence.  He  also  lectured  at  un-
dergraduate and graduate levels such as CFD, Fluid Mechanics, 
Applied  Fluid  Dynamics,  Turbulence  Modelling  and  Simula-
tion.  In  2017,  he  joined  the  R&D  -  Product  Development  E- 
Mobility  at  Continental  AG,  Germany,  as  a  CAE  Simulation 
Expert.  His  activities  focused  on  Electronics  Cooling  and 
Thermal  Management  in  E-Axle  Systems  based  on  CAE  
simulations (CFD and FEA/FEM) as well as developing innovative concepts for the thermal 
management along the entire development process of drive systems of hybrid/ electric 
vehicle (xEV) up to the introduction into series production. In 2019, he was promoted to 
Technical Lead of a global team for the standardization of thermal management simula-
tions in E-Mobility. In 2020, he started working in the department of Cost Value Engi-
neering  E-Mobility  at  Schaeffler  Technologies  AG,  Germany.  His  activities  covered 
developing  holistic,  systematic  strategies  to  reduce  costs  in  Power  Electronics  and 
Mechatronic Systems and conducting Should Costing, Design-to-Cost, Product Teardown 
and Benchmarking.  

Massoud  Massoudi  Farid  received  his  Ph.D.  degree  in  Me-
chanical  Engineering  with  a  focus  on  modelling  and  experi-
mental investigations on combustion and gasification reactors, 
from Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea in 2016 under the 
guidance of Prof. Jungho Hwang. His research interests focus 
on numerical simulation of dense multiphase systems such as 
industrial  scale  fixed  and  fluidized  bed  reactors,  pyrolysis, 
combustion, and gasification of solid fuels, and experimental 
evaluation  of reaction kinetics. In 2017, he  joined the trans-
disciplinary Centre for Innovation Competence for Virtual High 
Temperature  Conversion  (CIC  Virtuhcon)  at  the  Institute  of 
Energy Process Engineering and Chemical Engineering (IEC), 
TU Bergakademie Freiberg, as a CFD expert in fixed and flu-
idized bed modelling. In 2019, he was promoted to group leader of Virtuhcon multiphase 
models group focusing on the detailed modelling of complex thermo-chemical multiphase 
flows for metallurgical and chemical processes to develop new correlations and advanced 
models in the fields of phase change and conversion processes.  

Jan May  is a Ph.D. candidate at the Technical  University of 
Darmstadt. Since 2016 he has been a member of the Institute 
for  Energy  Systems  and  Technology  headed  by  Prof.  Bernd 
Epple.  His  research  focusses  on  numerical  and  experimental 
investigations of fluidized bed carbon capture processes as well 
as fluidized bed gasification of solid fuels. Jan May received his 
M.Sc. in Mechanical Engineering in 2016 from the Technical 
University of Darmstadt.  

Philip  R¨oßger  is  a  Ph.D.  candidate  at  Technical  University 
Bergakademie  Freiberg  under  the  guidance  of  Prof.  Bernd 
Meyer since 2015. He is currently working as a research asso-
ciate in the group “CFD-Modelling of High-Temperature Pro-
cesses”  of  Priv.-Doz.  Dr.-Ing.  habil.  Andreas  Richter.  His 
activities cover multi-objective optimisation of chemical pro-
cesses using CFD, flowsheet, and reduced-order modelling as 
well  as  CFD  model  development  for  fluidized  bed  gasifiers. 
Before this, he received his M.Sc. in Environmental Engineer-
ing in 2015 from Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg, 
Germany.  

Andreas Richter received his Ph.D. degree in 2009 in Dresden 
in the field of aero-acoustic simulations and habilitated in 2018 
on  heat  and  mass  transfer  in  reactive  high-temperature  pro-
cesses. He was head of the research group “CFD modeling of 
high  temperature  processes”.  Since  2021  he  is  professor  for 
“Modeling  of  Thermochemical  Conversion  Processes”  at  the 
Institute  of  Energy  Process  Engineering  and  Chemical  Engi-
neering  at  TU  Bergakademie  Freiberg.  His  expertise  is  the 
modeling  of  high-temperature  conversion  processes  on  all 
length scales, from chemically reacting particles to complete 
reactors.  The  development  of  models  and  strategies  for  the 
simulation  of  high-temperature  reactors  includes  fixed-bed, 
fluidized-bed  and  entrained-flow  systems  in  metallurgy  and 
chemical engineering. The focus lies on the development and mathematical optimization 
of new technologies for the use of alternative feedstocks as a basis for sustainable pro-
duction in various industries.  

Bernd Epple took his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering 
in 1993 from the University of Stuttgart, Germany. Then, he 
was head of the departments “research and development” and 
“power plant design”  at ALSTOM Power Boiler GmbH. Since 
2004,  he  is  the  head  of  the  Institute  of  Energy  Systems  and 
Technology at the Technical University of Darmstadt. He has 
large  experience  in  the  field  of  power  plant  technology, 
particularly in solid fuel combustion processes and related CO2 
capture  technologies,  with  key  expertise  in  modelling  and 
simulation of multiphase flows and power plant processes, as 
well as experimental investigations in pilot-scale test facilities. 
He led various large EU and national research projects (e.g. FP7 
project  SCARLET,  COORETEC-FABIENE)  in  the  field  of  CO2 
capture, combustion, and gasification technologies, including the erection and operation 
of a 1 MWth pilot plant consisting of two fluidized bed reactors and a combustion chamber. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100930213