Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Carbons as low-platinum catalyst supports and non-noble catalysts for
polymer electrolyte fuel cells

Yizhe Chen, Shiming Zhang *, Joey Chung-Yen Jung, Jiujun Zhang **

Institute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Proton and anion exchange membrane fuel
cells
Oxygen reduction reaction
Templates-induced carbons
Low-platinum catalyst supports
Non-noble catalysts

Polymer  electrolyte  fuel  cells,  including  acidic  proton  exchange  membrane  fuel  cells  (PEMFCs)  and  alkaline
anion exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs), are the types of the most promising high-efficiency techniques
for conversion hydrogen energy to electricity energy. However, the catalysts’ insufficient activity and stability
toward oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathodes of these devices are still the important constraints to
their performance. So far, carbon black supported platinum (Pt/C) and its alloys are still the most practical and
best-performing type of catalysts. However, the scarcity of Pt is highly challenging and the high price of com-
mercial catalyst will continue to drive up the cost of both PEMFCs and AEMFCs. Moreover, the traditional carbon
black support is susceptible to corrosion especially under electrochemical operation, itself inactive for ORR and
weakly binding with Pt-based nanoparticles. In this review, the advanced carbons synthesized by various tem-
plate methods, including hard-template, soft-template, self-template and combined-template, are systematically
evaluated as low-Pt catalyst supports and non-noble catalysts. For the templates-induced carbon-based catalysts,
this  review  presents  a  comprehensive  overview  on  the  carbon  supported  low-Pt  catalysts  from  aspect  of
composition, size and shape control as well as the non-noble carbon catalysts such as transition metal-nitrogen-
carbons, metal-free carbons and defective carbons. Furthermore, this review also summarizes the applications of
low/non-Pt carbon-based catalysts base on the template-induce advanced carbons at the cathodes of PEMFCs and
AEMFCs.  Overall,  the  templates-induced  carbons  can  show  some  perfect  attributes  including  ordered
morphology, reasonable pore structure, high conductivity and surface area, good corrosion resistance and me-
chanical property, as well as strong metal–support interaction. All of these features are of particular importance
for the construction of high-performance carbon-based ORR catalysts. However, some drawbacks mainly involve
the removal of templates, maintenance of morphological structure, and demetalation. To address these issues,
this review also summarizes some effective strategies, such as employing the easily removed hard/soft-templates,
developing the advantageous self-templates, enhancing the metal–support interaction by formation of chemical
binds,  etc.  In  conclusion,  this  review  provides  an  effective  guide  for  the  construction  of  template-induced
advanced carbons and carbon-based low/non-Pt catalysts with analysis of technical challenges in the develop-
ment of ORR electrocatalysts for both PEMFCs and AEMFCs, and also proposes several future research directions
for overcoming the challenges towards practical applications.

1. Introduction

Energy is always needed for the survival and civilization of human
beings,  and  at  the  same  time,  is  also  the  driving  force  of  sustainable
development of society [1]. As is well-known, the traditional fossil fuel
energy sources (such as coal, oil and natural gas, etc.) are non-renewable
and their usage can cause environmentally polluting [2,3]. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to develop clean, efficient and safe renewable

energy  sources  as  the  alternatives,  commonly  including  wind,  solar,
water fall, geothermal, etc. However, the electricity energy converted
from these energy sources are closely related to the weather and then
intermittent. Therefore, some storing, converting and smoothing tech-
nologies are necessary for such a kind of intermittent electricity energy.
With respect to this, the electrochemical energy technologies including
fuel  cells,  batteries,  supercapacitors,  water-electrolysis  for  hydrogen
generation  have  been  recognized  as  reliable,  efficient  and  practical

* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: smzhang@shu.edu.cn (S. Zhang), jiujun.zhang@i.shu.edu.cn (J. Zhang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101101
Received 8 September 2022; Received in revised form 17 May 2023; Accepted 18 May 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)101101Availableonline8June20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

Y. Chen et al.

options [4]. Among these electrochemical energy systems, hydrogen-fed
polymer electrolyte fuel cells popularly by the electrochemical reactions
of hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) are considered to be one of the most
promising devices especially for electric vehicle applications [5]. For the
polymer  electrolyte  fuel  cells,  there  can  be  the  protonic  (acidic)  and
anionic  (alkaline)  ones  according  to  differential  polymer  electrolyte
membranes used. Among them, the typical H2-Air (O2) proton exchange
membrane fuel cells (abbreviated as PEMFCs) have been standing out
with  the  advantages  of  high  energy  density,  low/zero  emission  and
sustainability [6,7]. In comparison with PEMFCs, the greatest merit of
alkaline polymer electrolyte fuel cells (also called the anion exchange
membrane fuel cells, abbreviated as AEMFCs) is the opportunity to use
non-noble catalysts [8,9]. Despite the tremendous advantages and wide
application  of  polymer  electrolyte  fuel  cells,  the  performance  is  still
needed to improve for their commercial application [10]. Regarding the
performance, the cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is one of the
most  important determining factors for both PEMFCs and  AEMFCs in
terms of the catalysts’ activity and stability.

At  present,  platinum  (Pt)-based  catalysts  remain  the  most  reliable
and  practical  cathodic  ORR  catalysts,  such  as  the  well-known  carbon
black  supported  Pt  (Pt/C)  [11]  and  Pt-based  alloys  (PtM/C)  [12].
However, the high price and limited availability of Pt in the Earth’s crust
are seen to be the severe limitation to their large-scale commercial ap-
plications. Moreover, there are some major shortcomings for the com-
mercial carbon black supports. On the one hand, the traditional carbon
black  is  susceptible  to  corrosion  especially  under  high  cathode  ORR
potential. Carbon corrosion will destabilize the anchor sites, resulting in
the  activity  loss  and  stability  decline.  Noncarbon  materials  have
remarkable advantages in high corrosion resistance, however in com-
parison with carbon materials, significant challenges remain in terms of
low  electronic  conductivity,  low  surface  area  and  weak  interactions
between metal and noncarbon support [13]. On the other hand, carbon
black is almost inactive for catalytic ORR. That is to say, it has insig-
nificant contribution to the electrocatalytic ORR. In addition, the weak
binding  of  carbon  black  with  Pt-based  nanoparticles  can  cause  the
agglomeration  and  detachment  of  Pt  in  the  practical  application.
Therefore, it seems to be a promising solution to develop the advanced
carbons  as  low-Pt  catalyst  supports  and  non-noble  catalysts  for  the
construction  of  high-performance  carbon-based  ORR  catalysts.  The
advanced  carbons  as  supports  of  low-Pt  catalysts  can  have  strong
modification  effects  on  the  properties  of  electrocatalysts,  such  as  the
composition/size/morphology controls, the degree of Pt dispersion and
alloying as well as the metal-support interaction. Also, some advanced
carbons directly as non-noble carbon catalysts including the transition
metal-nitrogen-carbon
catalysts,  non-metallic  hetero-
atom-doped  carbon  catalysts  and  defective  carbon  catalysts  can  be
potentially used as the substitutes for Pt-based catalysts [14], however,
most of which will still suffer from low activity/stability and suscepti-
bility to corrosion [15]. So, it is highly expected for the effective stra-
tegies  to  design  advanced  carbons  with  the  advantages  of  ordered
morphology, reasonable pore structure and surface area, good corrosion
resistance and mechanical property, high electrical conductivity, as well
as the ability to provide ORR active-sites and more anchor sites for the
dispersion of Pt-based nanoparticles [16].

(M-N-C)

For innovative design and synthesis of ORR catalysts, the template
methods have been effectively used for achieving advanced carbons and
carbon-based ORR catalysts of low-Pt and non-noble [17,18], commonly
being  divided  into  hard-template  method,  soft-template  method,
self-template  method  and  combined-template  method  [19].  To  sum-
marize  these  research  works,  this  paper  will  specifically  sum  up  the
template-induced  methods  for  various  advanced  carbons  such  as
zero-dimensional  (nanospheres,  onions,  nanodots),  one-dimensional
(nanowires, nanofibers, nanotubes, nanorods, semi-tubes), two-dimen-
sional  (nanosheets,  nanobelts),  three-dimensional  (nanocages,  nano-
cubes, frameworks), and their hybrids (binary, ternary). Overall, these
advanced carbons have been expected for the carbon-based catalysts to

act not only as novel carbon supports of low-Pt catalysts with sufficient
dispersion  and  anchor  of  Pt-based  nanoparticles  but  also  as  direct
non-noble  catalysts.  On  these  basis,  such  carbon  materials  and
carbon-based  catalysts  have  been  gathered  over  the  past  decades
meanwhile with the corresponding synthesis methodologies and func-
tional properties, the growth and electrocatalytic mechanisms as well as
the effects of templates on the advanced carbons and catalysts perfor-
mance. Furthermore, the recent research progress in templates-induced
carbon-based  ORR  catalysts  in  applications  of  the  both  PEMFCs  and
AEMFCs  are  summarized  in  category.  In  conclusion,  this  review  will
provide guidance for the construction of templates-induced carbons and
carbon-based catalysts, research  of ORR  electrocatalysis, and applica-
tion in both PEMFCs and AEMFCs.

2. Oxygen reduction reaction

2.1. ORR process

The ORR process has been widely studied as the core reaction of both
PEMFCs and AEMFCs. In 1976, Wroblowa et al. [20] first developed a
model that reflected the ORR process. The model demonstrates that the
ORR  exhibits  different  reaction  pathways  in  acidic  and  basic  electro-
lytes.  In  addition,  in  the  same  electrolyte,  the  ORR  electron  transfer
pathway can be divided into two main types: two-step 2-electron process
and one-step 4-electron process [21]. In acidic media, the main differ-
ence between the two-step 2-electron process and the one-step 4-elec-
tron process is whether or not the intermediate of hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) is produced  [Eqs. (1)–(3)]. While in  alkaline media,  the main
-  is produced [Eqs. (4)–(6)].
difference between the two is whether HO2
The specific reaction processes in acidic and basic electrolytes are shown
below [Eqs. (1)–(6)].

In acidic electrolytes:

(1)  Two-step 2-electron process:

O2  + 2H+ + 2e(cid:0) → H2O2

H2O2  + 2H+ + 2e(cid:0) → 2H2O

(2)  One-step 4-electron process:

O2  + 4H+ + 4e(cid:0) → 2H2O

In alkaline electrolytes:

(1)  Two-step 2-electron process:

O2  +H2O + 2e(cid:0) → OH(cid:0) + HO2-

HO2-+ H2O + 2e(cid:0) → 3OH(cid:0)

(2)  One-step 4-electron process:

O2  +2H2O + 4e(cid:0) → 4OH(cid:0)

2.2. ORR mechanisms

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

In fact, ORR mechanisms are more complicated than the described
by Eqs. (1)–(6) due to the possibility of simultaneous existence of the
above reaction processes. Typically, a one-step 4-electron process has
greater advantages compared to a stepwise 2-electron process. The main
reason for this is that the one-step 4-electron process has more efficient
reaction kinetics because no intermediates are produced during the re-
action [22,23]. In acidic electrolytes, the H2O2 intermediate produced in
the stepwise 2-electron process can cause severe corrosion of polymer
electrolyte membrane, thus greatly reducing the energy conversion ef-
ficiency of PEMFCs [24]. Therefore, the one-step 4-electron process is

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011012

Y. Chen et al.

undoubtedly the best reaction pathway in ORR process.

Although the one-step 4-electron process has higher efficiency, the
stepwise  2-electron  process  will  still  naturally  exist,  only  the  matter
what its portion in the whole ORR process. Among them, the dissocia-
tion potential of O-O bonds on catalyst surface and the adsorption model
of O2 have important effects on the choice of the two reaction pathways
[25]. Zhang et al. [26] in summarizing the possible ORR mechanisms,
have  found  that  there  are  three  possible  reaction  pathways  of  ORR,
namely  peroxo  mechanism,  dissociation  mechanism  and  association
mechanism  [13].  In  the  peroxo  mechanism,  the  binding  of  the  metal
center to the O2 does not lead to a break in the O-O bond, and ultimately,
the  H2O2  is  produced  via  the  2-electron  pathway  [Eq.  (7)].  For  the
dissociation mechanism, it allows the O2 to undergo direct dissociation
due to its strong bonding. Eventually, the final product of H2O is pro-
duced  through  the  4-electron  pathway  [Eq.  (8)].  In  the  association
mechanism, the individual metal center binds to the O2, making it more

difficult to detach H2O2 from the catalyst surface, and finally producing
the  product  of  H2O  [Eq.  (9)].  Among  them,  these  oxygen-containing
functional groups (*O2, *O, *OOH and *OH) represent the intermedi-
ate  products  of  the  reactions  in  each  step.  At  the  same  time,  the
adsorption energy of these functional groups on catalyst also has a large
influence on the reactivity of each step [27–29]. Specifically, if these
oxygen-containing  functional  groups  possess  weak  adsorption,  the
adsorption and dissociation of oxygen will be greatly limited. If these
oxygen-containing functional groups possess strong adsorption, it will
be  detrimental  to  the  desorption  of  *O  and  *OH.  Therefore,  a  good
catalyst should have a moderate binding energy for the intermediates.
Typically, density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been used
to  provide  insight  into  the  interpretation  and  evaluation  of  the  free
energy  of  intermediates  on  the  catalyst  surface  [30,31].  Based  on  a
database  of  the  calculated  adsorption  energies  of  oxygen-containing
intermediates,  Nørskov  et  al.  [32]  presented  a  well-known  volcano

Fig. 1. (a) Possible ORR mechanism on the surface of Pt(111). Reprinted from Ref. [33] with permission from the Wiley Online Library. (b) ORR mechanism of the
Fe-N4  active  site  in  alkaline  media.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [34]  with  permission  from  the  American  Chemical  Society.  (c)  ORR  mechanism  of  N-doped  graphene
materials. Reprinted from Ref. [35] with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of a graphene material with pentagonal defects and
its corresponding free energy diagram for the four-electron transfer ORR process. (e) Schematic diagram of GLD558-01 material and its corresponding four-electron
transfer ORR free energy diagram. Reprinted from Ref. [36] with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011013

Y. Chen et al.

curve  diagram,  which  would  provide  valuable  guidance  to  rationally
design the efficient ORR catalysts

+∗
O2→

+H++e(cid:0)
∗O2 ̅̅̅→

+H++e(cid:0)
∗OOH ̅̅̅→

H2O2 + ∗

+2∗
O2 ̅̅→

+2H++2e(cid:0)
2∗O ̅̅̅→

+2H++2e(cid:0)
2∗OH ̅̅̅→

2H2O + 2∗

+∗
O2→

+H++e(cid:0)
∗O2 ̅̅̅→

+H++e(cid:0)
∗OOH ̅̅̅→

+2H++2e(cid:0)
H2O + ∗O ̅̅̅→

H2O+∗

(7)

(8)

(9)

in Eqs. (7)–(9), * represents the catalytically active sites.

directly chemisorbed to the Fe2+

Classically, carbon-based ORR electrocatalysts  can be divided into
precious metal catalysts and non-noble catalysts. Pt-based catalysts are
the  most  typical  precious  metal  catalysts.  Since  the  1960s,  various
models for the ORR mechanisms of Pt-based catalysts have been grad-
ually proposed. Among them, the mechanism model proposed by Wro-
blowa  et  al.  [20]  has  been  widely  accepted.  The  adsorbed  O2  can
undergo a four-electron reduction to produce H2O. It can also undergo a
two-electron reduction to produce the adsorbed H2O2. Later, Keith et al.
[33] elaborated the ORR mechanism on the Pt(111) surface using DFT
calculations, and the possible reaction paths have been shown in Fig. 1a.
For the non-noble catalysts, M-N-C catalysts have shown the potential to
be able to replace Pt-based catalysts, and the researchers have found that
the M-Nx  species formed in such catalysts can serve as effective active
sites for ORR. Among them, Fe-N-C catalyst is the typical representative
in  non-noble  M-N-C  catalysts.  Mukerjee  et  al.  [34]  proposed  a  hypo-
thetical ORR mechanism on Fe-N-C under alkaline conditions (Fig. 1b).
(cid:0)
First, O2 replaces OH
-N4 active site,
followed  by  the  generation  of  divalent  iron  superoxide  complex  via
trivalent iron superoxide complex. Then, it can be regenerated repeat-
edly  by  the  formation  of  trivalent  iron  hydroxyl  compound  after  the
completion  of  the  four-electron  reaction.  Moreover,  non-metallic  het-
eroatom-doped  carbon  catalysts  have  been  the  focus  of  attention.  In
particular,  nitrogen  (N)-doped  catalysts  have  shown  excellent  ORR
performance.  Li  et  al.  [35]  investigated  the  electrocatalytic  ORR
mechanism  of  a  N-doped  graphitic  carbon  using  DFT  calculations
(Fig. 1c). They found that phenazine derivatives could undergo a con-
version process of one proton and two electrons to generate derivatives
of negative ions, which then formed the final product through proton-
ation reactions. This study successfully explained the oxygen activation
mechanism  of  carbon  negative  ion  intermediates  in  the  N-doped
graphitic carbon materials. In addition,  defective carbons can also be
investigated as the ORR catalysts. Zhang et al. [36] studied in detail the
ORR  mechanisms  of  graphene  materials  with  pentagonal  ring  defects
and  pentagon-pentagon-octagonal  defects  (GLD558-01)  by  means  of
DFT  simulations  (Fig.  1d).  The  results  indicated  that  certain  defects
could  contribute  to  the  emergence  of  ORR  active  sites,  ultimately
leading  to  the  defective  carbon  catalyst  possessing  a  reaction  energy
barrier comparable to that of Pt(111).

2.3. Fundamentals of carbon-based ORR catalysts

2.3.1. Pt-based catalysts

Currently,  Pt-based  carbon  catalysts  are  the  most  commonly  used
cathodic  catalysts  in  both  PEMFCs  and  AEMFCs  [37].  However,  the
scarcity and high price of Pt have largely limited its large-scale appli-
cation  [38].  Therefore,  reducing the  usage of  Pt  while  improving  the
activity  and  stability  of  cathode  ORR  electrocatalyst  is  the  key  but
difficult point for commercialization of fuel cells. Based on this, some
more  abundant  and  cheaper  metals  are  also  the  noteworthy  research
objects in recent years, such as Pd [39], Ru [40], Ir [41], etc. Although
the  ORR  mechanisms  on  various  metal  surfaces  are  different,  the
adsorption and desorption of reaction intermediate species are involved
regardless of the metal surfaces. And, these adsorption and desorption
processes in turn can control the ORR kinetics [42–44].

Earliest,  Nørskov  et  al.  [32]  reported  a  volcano-type  trend  graph,

illustrating that Pt was the best electrocatalyst among the pure metals.
However, it has been observed that pure Pt is not at the top of the vol-
cano (Fig. 2a). Subsequently, Stamenkovic et al. [45] focused their study
on Pt-M catalysts (M = Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) and made another volcano graph
based  on  the  results  of  DFT  simulation  results.  As  can  be  seen  from
Fig. 2b that Pt-M catalysts possess better ORR electrocatalytic activity
than pure Pt catalyst. The main reason is that the transition-metal atoms
with smaller atomic radii are embedded in the crystal structure of Pt,
leading to the stress effect [46]. Due to the different electronegativity,
electron transfers from transition-metal into Pt to lower its d-band center
position. And, both d-band center and stress effect can affect the binding
energy of ORR intermediate species on the catalyst surface. Paulus et al.
[47]  calculated  the  activation  energy  of  Pt-M  catalysts  to  be  almost
unchanged compared to pure Pt based on the conventional transition
state  theory.  The  only  change  is  that  the  hydroxyl  group  forms  a
somewhat more positive potential interval on the Pt-M surface than pure
Pt. This means that Pt-M can obtain a higher surface free energy in the
high potential interval, allowing it to easily react with oxygen species
and thus increasing its ORR electrocatalytic activity. By further study,
Paulus  et  al.  [47]  concluded  that  the  chemisorption  energy  of  the
catalyst is closely related to its d-band center, and a high d-band center
implies a strong chemisorption energy. Stamenkovic et al. [48] further
validated the relationship between the d-band center and ORR activity
using experimental and DFT calculations. The results indicated that the
adsorption energy of the appropriate oxygen species was a prerequisite
for the high ORR activity of catalyst. The high d-band center indicated
that catalyst had a strong interaction with oxygen-containing species,
meaning that the surface of this catalyst was covered with a high density
of reaction intermediates during the ORR process. However, this led to a
reduction of catalytic active sites, which ultimately prevented ORR from
occurring. In the Pt-M catalysts, the d-band center of Pt was lower than
the  over-adsorption  of
that
oxygen-containing  species  on  Pt  was  alleviated.  This  was  the  main
reason for the improved ORR electrocatalytic activity of Pt-M catalysts
compared to pure Pt catalyst.

the  pure  Pt,

implying

that

in

In order to improve the Pt utilization, Pt single-atom catalysts (Pt-
SACs) have been developed, which are also highly active in ORR elec-
trocatalysis [49,50]. In contrast to Pt nanoparticle catalysts, Pt-SACs can
reduce the metal size to a minimum and greatly increase the Pt utili-
zation  [11].  Li  et  al.  [51]  reported  a  strategy  for  the  synthesis  of  a
N-doped  carbon  black  loaded  Pt  monatomic  catalyst.  Under  acidic
condition, this catalyst exhibited ORR activity comparable to the com-
mercial  Pt/C  catalyst.  Meanwhile,  the  Pt  loading  in  this  catalyst  was
only 0.4 wt%.

Also, researchers have found that the strong interaction between Pt
atoms and supports can enhance activity and stability. Carbon blacks are
often used as the supports of Pt-based catalysts due to their high elec-
trical conductivity and high specific surface area [52]. Currently, Cab-
ot’s Vulcan XC-72R carbon black with an average particle size of about
30  nm  is  the  most  widely  used  supports  for  Pt/C  catalysts. However,
carbon black has a lot of defects and oxygen doping sites on its surface.
The  further  oxidation  can produce  carbon  monoxide, carbon  dioxide,
formic  acid  and  other  substances  during  actual  fuel  cell  operation,
resulting in catalyst shedding and serious collapse of the electrode [53].
Therefore,  modified  carbon  supports  are  usually  used  to  enhance  the
synergistic catalysis with Pt. The more common method is to change the
physicochemical  properties  of  the  carbon  surface  by  pretreatment.  It
would be a possibility that the electrons on the Pt can interact with the
oxygen atoms on the carbon surface, resulting in the stable deposition of
Pt into the carbon support [54]. Jung et al. [55] used a pyrolysis of Fe-Co
chelates to synthesize a composite carbon subsequently as a support of
(cid:0) 2, showing a
Pt. The final catalyst has a low Pt loading of 0.04 mgPt cm
4-fold higher ORR activity than the commercial Pt/C catalyst. This is
mainly attributed to the strong interaction between carbon support and
Pt.  Similarly,  Kwon  et  al.  [56]  investigated  a  doped  porous  carbon
supported Pt (Pt/DPC) catalyst using polyaniline as carbon source and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011014

Y. Chen et al.

Fig. 2. (a) Oxygen reduction trends for each element are plotted as a function of oxygen binding energy. Reprinted from Ref. [32] with permission from the American
Chemical Society. (b) Prediction of Pt3M (M = Ni, Co, Fe, Ti) alloy model by DFT simulation. Reprinted from Ref. [45] with permission from the Wiley Online Library.

dicyandiamide  as  heteroatom  dopant.  This  catalyst  showed  the
enhanced  ORR  performance  which  is  mainly  ascribed  to  the  specific
interaction between DPC support and Pt nanoparticles.

catalysts, various transition metals, nitrogen and carbon sources were
widely used as the precursors [58–60]. For M-N-C catalysts, mainly, the
ORR mechanism revolves around several different active sites.

2.3.2. Non-noble catalysts

As a typical class of non-noble catalysts, M-N-C catalysts have the
potential  to replace  Pt-based catalysts. Jasinski  et  al.  [57] first  found
that carbon materials with Co-N4  as the active site possessed superior
oxygen  reduction  performance.  Later,  in  the  synthesis  of  M-N-C

(1)  Atomic  M-Nx

sites

[61,62].

Typically,  multiple
ex-situ/in-situ/operando  physical  characterizations  such  as
M ̈ossbauer  spectroscopy,  X-ray  absorption  spectroscopy  and
atomic resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy are
used  to  identify  the  active  sites  of  M-N-C  catalysts  [63,64].

Fig. 3. (a–d) Molecular structures of several potential active sites of M-N-C catalysts. Reprinted from Ref. [67] with permission from the Elsevier. (e) Schematic
diagram of the ORR process occurring on the surface of Fe4@SWNT catalyst. (f) Projected DOS of the p orbital of the C atom bonded to Fe4 in the three materials. The
vacuum level is aligned to 0 eV. (g) ORR free energy level diagram on Fe4@SWNT catalyst. Reprinted from Ref. [79] with permission from the Wiley Online Library.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011015

Y. Chen et al.

Mostly, the metal-containing sites can exhibit superior catalytic
ORR capacity than those of the metal-free sites. Atomic M-Nx sites
have the highest metal utilization, mainly including Fe-Nx, Co-Nx,
Ni-Nx, Mn-Nx, etc. [65,66]. Among them, Fe-Nx site has the best
ORR performance with more mechanism studies. Yang et al. [67]
reviewed the structures of different M-Nx-Cy active sites of M-N-C
catalysts, as shown in Fig. 3a-d. Among them, M-N4-C10 (Fig. 3a)
and  M-N2+2-C4+4  (Fig.  3b)  moieties  are  mostly  found  on  con-
ventional  graphene  materials  [63].  M-N4-C12  (Fig.  3c)  and
M-N2+2-C12 (Fig. 3d) moieties are more often derived from some
metal–organic framework (MOF) or its derivative materials [64].
Li et al. [68] investigated in details the effect of Fe-Nx (x = 1–5)
coordination number x on ORR activity. The results showed that
the type of active sites could be controlled by regulating the py-
rolysis  temperature.  The  ORR  performance  order  was  Fe-N  <
Fe-N3  < Fe-N4. Miao et al. [69] found that the Fe-N2  and Fe-N3
sites  were  less  active  and  stable  in  ORR  than  the  Fe-N4  site.
Overall,  plenty  of  results  indicate  that  Fe-N4  can  be  the  most
effective active site for ORR. In 2017, Chung et al. [70] clearly
observed the Fe-N4 structure using aberration-corrected scanning
transmission electron microscopy (AC-STEM) to directly identify
the ORR active site for Fe-N-C catalysts. Furthermore, some re-
searchers  have  suggested  that  the  Fe-N4  active  sites  are
commonly located at the edge defect of graphene [71] or at the
substitution defect on the plane [72] which can affect the cata-
lytic activity to different degrees. Workman et al. [73] found that
if the graphene plane hosted most of the Fe-N4  active sites, the
thinner the graphene sheet, the more defective active sites could
be exposed. Conversely, if there were more defective sites at the
edges of graphene, the lateral size of graphene sheet needed to be
reduced to improve the catalytic activity.

In addition to the structure and location of active sites, the exposed
site density can also greatly influence the catalytic performance of M-N-
C catalysts [74] with the expectation of fabricating high-density Fe-N4
sites. Mainly, the exposed M-Nx  sites attached to the surface can pref-
erentially  react  with  oxygen  during  the  ORR  process,  while  they  are
difficult when located below the carbon layer. Therefore, the binding of
M-Nx sites to oxygen will be significantly facilitated by expanding pore
size of carbon surface or introducing more carbon defect sites. Qu et al.
[75] successfully constructed a large pore size of Fe-N-C catalyst with
high concentration of Fe-Nx active sites, providing a half-wave potential
of 0.835 V. This catalyst showed a kinetic current density of 31.02 mA
(cid:0) 2  in  an  acidic  electrolyte  at  0.8  V  (vs.  RHE).  The  success  of  this
cm
design  idea  provides  more  possibilities  for  developing  highly  active
Fe-N-C  catalysts.  Except  for  expanding  pore  size  of  carbon  surface  or
introducing defect sites, pushing the confinement or pore-forming can
be  also  the  effective  strategy  to  increase  the  Fe-Nx  site  density.  Chen
et al. [76] proposed a synergy of spatial confinement and microporous
fixation to successfully accomplish the high-density Fe-N4 site in Fe-N-C
catalyst. It is noteworthy that all Fe-containing species in the catalyst
product are Fe-N4  active sites. Also, the selection of carbon templates
with large surface area and abundant pore structure can also induce the
growth of high-density Fe-Nx active sites. Zhang et al. [77] reported the
Fe-catalyzed in-situ growth of carbon nanotubes and the formation of
high-density Fe-N4  active sites can be found in the presence of various
carbon templates. Besides, introducing a second metal element to pre-
vent the aggregation of Fe can also induce a high density of Fe-Nx active
sites. For example, by using poly(p-phenylenediamine, PPDA) polymer
and ZnCl2 as the templates, Fu et al. [78] successfully prepared a mes-
oporous carbon sphere catalyst with a high density of Fe-Nx sites. In the
formed  Zn-Fe-PPDA  complex,  the  addition  of  Zn  could  reduce  the
nucleation between Fe cations and promote their distribution, achieving
a high density of Fe-Nx active sites.

(2)  Transition-metal  nanoparticles  (M-NPs)  sites.  During  high-
temperature  pyrolysis  for  the  preparation  of  M-N-C  catalysts,
transition-metal atoms can undergo agglomeration into bulky M-
NPs. After cooling, the carbon atoms precipitate due to carbon
saturation form a N-doped carbon (NC) layer around the M-NPs
and encase them in it [80]. Such NC coated M-NPs (M-NPs@NC)
structures  are  common  in  M-N-C  materials  and  can  be  used  to
prepare  special  structures  such  as  carbon  nanotubes  [70,81].
Unlike the uncoated M-NPs, the M-NPs@NC as a new composite
site can continue catalyze the ORR without being destroyed in
acidic  environments,  even  under  the  fuel  cell  operating  condi-
tions  [82].  Therefore,  some  researchers  have  suggested  that
M-NPs@NC  are  even  more  efficient  in  catalyzing  the  ORR
compared to monodisperse M-Nx site. Deng et al. [79] reported a
N-doped  carbon  nanotube  catalyst  encapsulated  with  Fe  nano-
particles (Fig. 3e) and the improved catalytic activity is mainly
attributed  to  the  structure  of  N-doped  carbon  coated  Fe  nano-
particles (Fe-NPs@NC) active-sties. This view is also supported
and  proved  by  DFT  calculations  (Fig.  3f  and  g).  The  electrons
transfer from the inner Fe-NPs to the outer carbon surface can
decrease the surface carbon atomic work function, which reduces
the oxygen adsorption energy and makes the surface more reac-
tive, thus facilitating the ORR. Strickland et al. [83] also reported
an Fe-based catalyst obtained from a MOF based on Zn (ZIF-8) in
which the presence of large amounts of N-doped carbon coated
iron/iron carbide nanoparticles (Fe/FexC-NPs@NC) is the main
component of the catalytic ORR.

Furthermore, in addition to the M-NPs@NC, a number of transition
metal compounds such as iron-based oxides [84], nitrides [85], carbides
[86], and sulfide [87] have also received a lot of attention due to their
low cost. Wang et al. [88] successfully prepared an efficient ORR cata-
lyst by loading Fe3O4/Fe2O3/Fe nanoparticles onto a  N-doped porous
carbon nanosphere, which also showed an excellent peak power density
(cid:0) 2)  of  zinc-air  cell.  Liu  et  al.  [89]  also  found  that  the
(106.8  mW  cm
catalyst  of  Fe2N  nanoparticles  loaded  on  N-doped  porous  carbon
possessed  better  ORR  activity  with  an  onset  potential  and  half-wave
potential of 0.945 V and 0.803 V (vs. RHE), respectively. DFT calcula-
tions showed that loading Fe2N nanoparticles on N-doped carbon could
reduce the adsorption energy of oxygen-containing intermediates during
the ORR process, resulting in good ORR performance.

(3)  Multiple-sites synergy. In the actual M-N-C catalysts, there will be
a coexistence of multiple-sites such as M-Nx, M-NPs, heteroatoms-
doping,  defects,  etc.  [90–92].  More  importantly,  these  various
sites can act in catalyzing ORR synergistically.

Normally, M-NPs are inactive for ORR, but they can promote ORR
activity  by  affecting  adjacent  atomic  M-Nx  sites.  Several  studies  have
shown that Fe nanoparticles can significantly increase the catalytic ORR
activity  of  adjacent  Fe-Nx  sites  [93,94].  For  example,  Yin  et  al.  [95]
found  that  the  coexistence  of  Fe-N4  sites  and  Fe/Fe3C  nanoparticles
could enhance the binding energy of O2  compared to catalysts with a
single Fe-N4  site, which greatly enhanced the adsorption of O2  by the
Fe-N4  site.  Jiang  et  al.  [96]  concluded  that  in  alkaline  electrolytes,
Fe-NPs@NC  could  enhance  the  catalytic  performance  of  neighboring
M-Nx sites. After removing the Fe-NPs by acid etching, ORR performance
of the resulted catalyst was found to be significantly reduced. Also, the
results  of  theoretical  calculations  indicated  that  the  presence  of  the
double sites could facilitate the oxygen adsorption process in an alkaline
environment. Tylus et al. [97] also reported a two-sites synergistic cat-
alytic mechanism. First, oxygen was catalyzed by the M(cid:0) N4 site to form
a  hydrogen  peroxide  intermediate.  And  then,  the  intermediate  was
further  reduced  by  the  Fe-NPs@NC  site  to  form  water.  Finally,  the
overall ORR process  was  completed by  a  stepwise 2-electron process.
The  above  findings  suggested  that  the  existence  of  Fe-based

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011016

Y. Chen et al.

nanoparticles could helpfully enhance the catalytic capacity of atomic
M-Nx sites.

It is also known that heteroatoms-doping like N can form various N-C
active  sites  which  can synergistically  act with  M-Nx  sites.  Yabu  et  al.
[90] successfully designed an iron-azaphthalocyanine (FeAzPc) catalyst,
in  which  Fe-N4  active  site  was  surrounded  by  a  large  number  of  N-C
active sites. In alkaline electrolyte, this catalyst possessed a half-wave
potential  of  0.922  V  and  onset  potential  of  1.00  V.  DFT  calculations
demonstrated  that  FeAzPc  possessed  a  higher  occupied  molecular
orbital  energy  level  compared  to  conventional  iron  phthalocyanine
(FePc), which implied a faster ORR kinetic. Similarly, Abe et al. [98]
adsorbed FeAzPc on oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes. The pre-
pared catalysts also exhibited both good ORR activity and durability in
alkaline electrolytes.

In  addition,  defects  are  also  capable  of  promoting  ORR  [91,92].
Intrinsic defects are generally originated from the locations of vacancy,

pore,  edge,  step,  dislocation,  etc.,  which  can  not  only  anchor
M-Nx/heteroatoms-doping sites but also act as active sites for ORR. For
example,  the  synergy  roles  of  nitrogen/oxygen  dopants  and  vacancy
defects have been studied in catalyzing ORR [99]. Furthermore, Jiang
et al. [100] reported the synergy effect between chemical components of
Fe-Nx/N/S-dopants and defect structures relative to surface roughness.
Also, Chen et al. [101] successfully prepared an Fe-N-C catalyst enriched
with different active sites, including Fe-N4, N-C and pore defects. DFT
calculations  demonstrated  that  these  three  types  of  active  sites  could
synergistically modulate the ORR electrocatalysis.

2.3.3. Metal-free carbon catalysts

For metal-free carbon catalysts, the low cost will be one of the biggest
advantages due to the absence of metal elements. Since these catalysts
do not contain metal sites, there will be the low reactivity during ORR
process.  Therefore,  the  metal-free  carbons  can  be  usually  used  as

Fig. 4. (a) RRDE voltammograms of the three catalysts in 0.1 M KOH. (b) The calculated surface charge distribution of the NCNTs catalysts and the schematic
diagrams of the possible structures at the top and bottom. Reprinted from Ref. [104] with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(c–f) Pentagon, hole, serrated edge and armchair edge defect models constructed by DFT calculations, respectively. (g) Oxygen adsorption energy of different defect
models. (h) The onset potentials of different defect models. Reprinted from Ref. [107] with permission from the American Chemical Society.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011017

Y. Chen et al.

supports for Pt-based catalysts or directly as non-noble metal catalysts.
Presently, the catalytic activity of such catalysts can be mainly improved
by  modulating  their  metal-free  heteroatoms-doping  and  defect
engineering.

(1) Effect  of  heteroatoms-doping  on  ORR  performance.  Some  het-
eroatoms (N, B, P, S, and so on.) have different electronegativity
from carbon atoms, showing the enhanced catalytic activity for
ORR  [102,103].  Heteroatoms-doping  will  change  the  charge
distribution  and  destroy  the  electroneutrality  of  the  original
carbon  atoms,  weaken  the  π-bonds,  induce  charge  rearrange-
ment, and activate the inert carbon materials. Gong et al. [104]
investigated the prepared vertically aligned N-containing carbon
nanotubes (VA-NCNTs) by chemical vapor deposition, compared
with the conventional carbon nanotubes, the ORR performance of
VA-NCNTs was significantly improved (Fig. 4a). Also, a model for
the  adsorption  of  atomic  structures  was  further  developed
(Fig.  4b).  The results  show that after N-doping,  the adsorption
energy of O2 on the neighboring positively charged carbon atoms
is  reduced,  which  facilitates  the  breakage  of  O-O  bonds  and
promotes the ORR. In addition, researchers have also considered
the introduction of other elements such as P, S and B into carbon
materials. Liu et al. [105] synthesized the final carbon catalyst by
direct  pyrolysis  and  reported  that  P-doping  could  improve  its
ORR  activity.  Subsequently,
the  S-doped
graphene-based catalysts, Yang et al. [106] found that the overall
ORR  activity  of  the  catalysts  was  significantly  improved  after
S-doping.

studying

in

In recent years, the co-doping of different hetero-elements has also
attracted the interest of researchers. Wei et al. [108] successfully syn-
thesized a N/B co-doped carbon catalyst with porous one-dimensional
hollow structure using sodium tetraphenylborate and ammonium per-
sulfate as the B and N source. This catalyst showed the superior ORR
activity to those of the single N or B doped samples, indicating that the
synergistic  effect  between  N  and  B  is  beneficial  to  enhance  the  ORR
performance. Wang et al. [109] prepared N, S co-doped carbon-based
catalysts and also found that the binary doped catalysts performed better
ORR activity than the single element doped catalysts. Zan et al. [110]
successfully synthesized a three-dimensional mesoporous carbon cata-
lyst doped with multiple heteroatoms (S, N and P), which possessed high
porosity and abundant surface active sites. In alkaline electrolyte, this
catalyst possesses a 40 mV higher half-wave potential than commercial
Pt/C catalyst, excellent electrochemical durability, and good resistance
to poisoning. The above results suggested that the synergistic effect of
multiple heteroatoms can be ascribed to excellent ORR performance.

(2)  In addition to heteroatoms-doping in the carbon-based catalysts,
defects can also induce catalytic activity [91]. According to their
origin, defects can be classified into intrinsic defects and doping
defects [111]. In different materials, the intrinsic defects exhibit
different forms. For example, in carbon-based materials, inherent
defects  can  manifest  themselves  in  a  variety  of  forms  such  as
armchair edges, serrated edges, holes, and a range of topological
defects such as pentagonal and heptagonal [112].

In order to study the inherent defects of carbon materials, some re-
searchers  prepared  undoped  carbon  catalysts  with  different  types  of
defect  sites  and  investigated  the  oxygen  adsorption  energy  on  the
various defect sites by theoretical calculations [113,114]. For example,
Zhao et al. [114] proposed a new 585 defect on graphene (G585), which
is more effective in catalyzing the ORR than N-doping by the results of
theoretical  calculations.  Meanwhile,  the  experimental  results  also
confirmed a strong support to the theoretical predictions. In addition,
inherent  defects  can  disrupt  the  electrical  neutrality  of  the  original
carbon atoms and change the charge density distribution, which in turn

affects the physicochemical properties of the carbon material and pro-
vides abundant active sites for catalytic reactions [115]. By DFT calcu-
lations, Lim et al. [116] showed that defective graphene facilitates the
reduction  of  activation  energy  required  for  O2  desorption  and  can
accelerate  the  catalytic  reaction  by  reducing  the  stability  of  HO*  in-
termediates and lowering the energy barrier of the rate limiting step.
Jiang et al. [107] synthesized carbon nanotubes with different defects
located  in  corners,  holes,  and  edges,  respectively  and  created  defect
models of pentagonal, hole, serrated edge, and  armchair edge (Fig. 4
c-f). The DFT calculations results show that there are large differences in
the  oxygen  adsorption  energy  and  electronic  structures  for  different
defect types, among which pentagonal and serrated are the main con-
formations  with  high  ORR  activity  (Fig.  4  g-h).  Meanwhile,  Raman
spectroscopy  and  electrochemistry  results  showed  that  carbon  nano-
tubes with a high defect degree have better ORR catalytic activity. This
also indicates that the abundance of defective sites is beneficial for the
highly  active  ORR.  Jiang  et  al.  [117]  introduced  a  set  of  topological
defects  such  as  pentagonal,  heptagonal,  and  octagonal.  Through  the
experimental and theoretical studies, researchers found that topological
defects can be able to break the delocalization of their orbitals and form
localized  orbitals,  which  are  favorable  for  oxygen  adsorption  and
desorption. Recently, Zhu et al. [118] etched C60 and obtained carbon
materials with abundant pentagonal defects, demonstrating the role of
pentagonal  defects  in  enhancing  ORR  activity.  Due  to  the  charge  po-
larization of the edge carbon atoms, the edge defect sites also exhibit
unusual electronic properties [119].

Equally, heteroatoms-doping can create defects, thus using the defect
structure  to  modulate  the  p-electrons  local  density  and  thus  increase
ORR activity [120]. Therefore, the combination of defect engineering
with  non-metallic  heteroatoms-doping  is  often  studied as  an  effective
method  to  improve  the  ORR  activity  of  carbon  catalysts  [121].  Ding
et al. [122] synthesized a N-doped carbon catalyst with abundant pores
by  a  unique  salt-template approach. During  the high-temperature  py-
rolysis,  the  salt-template  as  a  sealed  nano-reactor  can  effectively  in-
crease  the  N-incorporation.  Meanwhile,  the  gasification  can  generate
large amounts of internal pores. The results show that this method can
significantly increase the number of edge defect sites and thus signifi-
cantly  improve  the  ORR  activity.  This  view  has  been  supported  by  a
number  of  subsequent  researchers  [123,124].  Matter  et  al.  [125]
correlated  oxygen  reduction  catalytic  activity  with  the  number  of
exposed pyridinic-N doped  carbon edge structures. Recently, Yi et  al.
[126]  successfully  prepared  the  pyridinic-N-rich  doped  carbon  nano-
tubes (N-CNT) and also changed the N-configuration and the number of
defects by a simple KMnO4  etching method. The results show that the
content of pyridinic-N in the prepared catalyst can be well controlled
with the etching time. The synthesized N-CNT catalyst exhibits superior
ORR activity in alkaline solutions than commercial Pt/C catalyst. Ac-
cording to DFT calculations, the superior catalytic activity arises from
the change in the number of defects on the edges and the different N
configurations.

3. Templates-induced growth of carbon materials

The  controllable  preparation  is  challenging  for  growth  of  carbon
materials  with  the  intrinsic  linkages  between  composition,  size,  fine
structure  and  function  [127].  At  the  same  time,  the  further  precise
design will have important research significance and practical value for
the  efficient  storage  and  conversion  of  next-generation  green  energy
[128]. Templates-method is widely used as a means of synthesizing the
carbon  materials.  It  can  effectively  regulate  the  size  and  shape,  and
ensure a uniform pore size distribution in the synthesized porous car-
bons
the
[129].  The  preparation  of  carbon  materials  by
templates-method  usually  consists  of  the  following  steps:  First,  the
templates-containing  precursors  are  formed.  Then,  the  precursors  are
transformed  into  the  target  carbon  materials  for  example  by  heat
treatment. Sometimes, the final removal of templates is required [130].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011018

Y. Chen et al.

to

the

According
formation  mechanism  of  carbon  materials,
templates-method  can  be  divided  into  four  types  of  hard-template
and
method,
combined-template method [131,132].

soft-template  method,

self-template  method

(CMK-1)  using  a  hard-template  method.  The  choice  of  different  tem-
plating  agents  can  help  to  adjust  the  pore  size  and  pore  channel  of
carbon materials appropriately. The common templating agents used in
the hard-template method include oxides, polymers, carbonates, and so
on [129,132,134,135].

3.1. Hard-template method

3.1.1. Oxides

The hard-template method has been very useful for the synthesis of
carbon materials since the 1990s. Previously, Joo et al. [133] success-
fully  synthesized  an  ordered  mesoporous  carbon  molecular  sieve

The usually used oxide templates include silicon dioxide (SiO2), zinc
oxide (ZnO), magnesium oxide (MgO) and so on. Among them, SiO2 is
the  most  common  hard  template,  which  has  already  achieved  batch

Fig. 5. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Fe-Co-N-OMCs. Reprinted from Ref. [141] with permission from the Wiley Online Library. (b) TEM image of
Pt-30/NCM. Reprinted from Ref. [155] with permission from the Elsevier. (c) MgCO3, CaCO3, and BaCO3 were used as templates to discover the effect of templates on
the morphology of the derived nanocarbon and oxygen species. Reprinted from Ref. [156] with permission from the Elsevier. (d) Material preparation flow chart of
NDCF. Reprinted from Ref. [157] with permission from the Wiley Online Library.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)1011019

Y. Chen et al.

production  [136].  By  oxidative  polymerization  of  templated  SiO2
nanospheres  with  polyaniline  (PANI),  Melke  et  al.  [137]  successfully
prepared  PANI/SiO2  composites,  followed  by  carbonization  and  tem-
plate  removal  to  produce  a  mesoporous  N-doped  carbon  support
(MPNC). The material possesses rich mesopores with 200 nm diameter
and  relatively  uniform  distribution.  The  pore  size,  shape  and  wall
thickness of MPNC can be controlled by the SiO2  template, which can
have  important  effect  on  the  activity  and  stability  of  the  supported
Pt-based  catalyst.  Compared  with  the  Vulcan  XC-72R  support,  the
Pt-loaded  MPNC  catalyst  with  optimized  conditions  possessed  better
electrochemical stability and ORR activity. Similarly, Qian et al. [138]
adjusted the size and structure of the pores of the prepared nanowire
material by changing the proportion of SiO2 in the template. Finally, the
(cid:0) 2.
maximum power density of this catalyst can reach 1407.42 mW m
This excellent performance is highly ascribed to the rational mesopore
structure,  well  matching  with  the  size  of  electron  mediators  for  a
highly-dense catalytic centers. In addition, the SiO2  template can also
act as a spatially confined domain [139]. For example, via the spatial
confinement  of  the  monolithic  meso-macroporous  SiO2  template,  Li
et  al.  [140]  finally  produced  a  hollow  NiSx@Co  by  coating  the  NiS2
surface with SiO2  and organic layers, respectively, and regulating the
loss of sulfur components from NiS2. Moreover, by one-step controllable
method of using the ordered silica nanosphere arrays as a hard-template,
Ran et al. [141] synthesized a Fe, Co, N-tri-doped ordered mesoporous
carbon materials (Fe-Co-N-OMCs). The synthetic process can be clearly
understood according to Fig. 5a. The as-prepared Fe-Co-N-OMCs have a
well-ordered mesoporous structure and the average mesoporous size is
about  20  nm.  Moreover,  compared  to  the  commercial  20  wt%  Pt/C
catalyst,  the  optimal  Fe-Co-N-OMC  (1:1)  catalyst  exhibits  excellent
stability and comparable ORR activity under alkaline condition.

◦

The advantage of ZnO as a template is its ability to react with carbon
precursors  to  produce  gas  during  high-temperature  pyrolysis,  thus
contributing  to  the  formation  of  porous  structures.  In  addition,  the
removal of templates is eliminated because Zn itself can evaporate at the
high temperature (boiling point: 907
C), thus reducing the impact on
the final material structure [142]. Wang et al. [143] successfully pre-
pared a porous carbon material using ZnO as a template and sucrose as a
raw  material.  The  resulted  porous  carbon  has  a  localized  graphite
(cid:0) 1,
structure  and  can  easily  withstand  a  current  density  of  1000  A  g
making  it  an  excellent  electrode  material.  The  multiporous  carbons
(MPCs) have been prepared by Hsu et al. [144] using ZnO and pyrolysis
oil as template and carbon source, respectively. A major advantage of
the  MPCs  is  that  the  specific  surface  area  and  pore  size  can  be  well
controlled  by  adjusting  the  mass  ratio  of  ZnO  to  pyrolysis  oil.  The
resulting  porous  structure  can  provide  a  large  number  of  electron
transport channels and sulfur storage space. Yu et al. [145] proposed a
method for preparing carbon materials using the disodium zinc salt of
ethylenediaminetetraacetic  acid  (EDTA)  as  a  carbon  source,  nitrogen
source and template simultaneously. In this method, the disodium zinc
EDTA  salt  can  be  thermally  decomposed  to  Na2CO3  and  ZnO.  More
importantly,  ZnO  can  produce  the  microporous  structures  under
high-temperature conditions by the reaction formula of ZnO + C = Zn +
CO. The needless intermediate product of Na2CO3 needs to be removed
by the subsequent dilute hydrochloric acid. Finally, the resulting carbon
material has a high capacitance and good electrochemical stability.

MgO is commonly used as a template material for three-dimensional
porous carbon due to its special crystal structure [146]. Yan et al. [147]
synthesized a N, S co-doped flower-like porous carbon using MgO as the
template and melamine as N-source. This product has a large specific
(cid:0) 1) and more active sites that can bind to
surface area (1752.54 m2  g
metal ions. In terms of electrocatalytic performance, the final catalyst
possesses a more positive initial potential (0.97 V) and higher ultimate
(cid:0) 2) compared to commercial Pt/C catalyst.
current density (5.35 mA cm
In  addition,  some  Mg-based  compounds  (Mg(OH)2  [148,149],  MgCl2
[150], Mg(NO3)2 [151,152]) are often able to regain the MgO template
by  high-temperature  pyrolysis.  Indirect  formation  of  MgO  templates

through high-temperature pyrolysis enables porous carbon to produce
more tunable pore structures than direct use of MgO templates.

In addition, some researchers tend to use a combination of two or
more  hard  templates  to  construct  carbon  materials  by  their  relative
advantages  [153].  For  example,  Li  et  al.  [154]  constructed  a
three-dimensional hierarchical carbon nanocage (hCNC) material using
MgO@ZnO as a template. Respectively, the MgO can provide support for
the carbon nanocages, while the ZnO removed at the high temperature
can provide more micropores and improve the electrical conductivity of
the carbon nanocages. Compared to carbon materials prepared using a
single  template,  hCNC  has  a  larger  specific  surface  area  and  electron
transfer  rate.  Also,  this  carbon  material  exhibits  high  specific  capaci-
(cid:0) 1)
tance (348 F g
under alkaline condition.

(cid:0) 1) and ultra-high power density (10.0–250.4 kW kg

3.1.2. Polymers

Commonly used polymer-based templates include polystyrene (PS)
microspheres, polymer cubes (PC) and mixtures of different polymers
built together [158,159]. Among them, PS is widely used in the prepa-
ration of porous carbon because of the advantages of easy morpholo-
gy/size  adjustment  and  template  removal  [160].  Li  et  al.  [155]
successfully  developed  a  low  Pt-loaded  N-doped  carbon  materials
(Pt-30/NCM) using PS  as the template. The PS-template were able to
create  an  ordered  macroporous  carbon  structure  (Fig.  5b),  which
enhanced  the  internal  mass  transport  and  metal-support  interaction.
After  electrochemical  durability  testing,  the  catalyst  was  still  able  to
outperform the mass activity of commercial Pt/C catalyst by more than
10 times. Meanwhile, some researchers have combined PS with another
polymer for porous carbon materials. Pagaduan et al. [161] successfully
synthesized  several  different  carbon-based  materials  using  a  poly-
styrene/poly(vinyl  methyl  ether)  blend  by  a  freeze-combustion  tech-
nique.  Using  this  hybrid  polymer  as  a  template,  the  researchers
successfully  verified  the  effect  of  polymer  mobility  on  the  template
morphology.

In addition, PC template have attracted the great interest of many
researchers due to their ordered porous structure and inherently large
specific surface area [162]. Song et al. [163] successfully synthesized a
cubic-ordered  mesoporous  carbon  (cOMC)  using  PC  template.  After
optimizing  the  conditions,  the  cOMC  calcined  at  750
C  possessed  a
(cid:0) 1)  and  the  smallest  pore  size
higher  specific  surface  area  (455  m2  g
(18.3  nm).  After  1000  charge/discharge  tests,  the  material  maintains
90% of its initial capacitance.

◦

3.1.3. Carbonates

Generally,  carbonate  templates  are  involved  in  the  preparation  of
porous  carbon  in  the  form  of  double  templates  [164],  and  some
commonly used carbonates include calcium carbonate (CaCO3) [165],
magnesium carbonate (MgCO3) [166], manganese carbonate (MnCO3)
[167], and so on. CaCO3  can be easily decomposed by heating to pro-
duce carbon dioxide (CO2) and calcium oxide (CaO). The produced CO2
contributes to the formation of porous carbon. In addition, CaO removal
can  also  produce  many mesopores  or  macropores,  which  will  help to
increase the specific surface area of porous carbon materials. Chen et al.
[168]  synthesized  a  mesoporous  graphitic  carbon  nitride  (mpg-C3N4)
using CaCO3 as a hard template and dicyandiamide as a N source. As a
result, the mpg-C3N4  sample shows a large specific surface area (59.7
(cid:0) 1).  Yang  et  al.  [169]  successfully  prepared  a  highly  capacitive
m2  g
porous carbon material with a large specific surface area of 1173.2 m2
(cid:0) 1 by using CaCO3 as a hard template and potassium oxalate (K2C2O4)
g
as  an  active  agent.  CaCO3  is  able  to  synergistically  interact  with
(K2C2O4), resulting in a layered porous carbon structure. Yu et al. [156]
compared the morphological structure and supercapacitor performance
of carbon materials prepared from three different carbonate templates of
CaCO3,  MgCO3  and  barium  carbonate  (BaCO3),  respectively.  Among
them,  MgCO3  template  with  poor  thermal  stability  can  produce  the
(cid:0) 1, the
carbon material with the largest specific surface area of 952 m2 g

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110110

Y. Chen et al.

cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and
sucrose in an aqueous solution and then carbonizing the hydrothermal
produced carbon precursor. The addition of PVA can adjust the nucle-
ation, growth and aggregation of carbon materials, which can success-
fully control the size of carbon spheres to about 70 nm. Similarly, Zhang
et al. [189] successfully prepared a catalyst with a semi-tubular struc-
ture  (Fig.  6a)  by  using  CTAB  as  a  template.  This  metal-free  N-doped
catalyst possessed a high specific surface area and pore volume. Under
alkaline  condition,  it  exhibited  excellent  ORR  performance.  Jia  et  al.
[190]  successfully  synthesized  a  N-doped  porous  carbon  spheres
(NPCSs) using a cationic surfactant of 1-dodecyl-3-methylimidazolium
bromide  as  a  soft  template.  The  NPCS  with  a  high  N  content  of
5.86–6.94  wt%,  a  pore  size  of  3.73–6.32  nm  and  a  pore  volume  of
(cid:0) 1, exhibited a high specific capacitance value and good
0.82–1.30 cm3 g
electrochemical stability under alkaline condition.

3.2.2. Block copolymers

A block copolymer is the macromolecular material that links two or
more polymer chain segments and is capable of offering the advantage of
multiple polymers at the same time [191]. By the formed micelles of
block  copolymer  of  polyethylene  oxide–polypropylene  oxide–poly-
ethylene  oxide  (P123)  as  templates,  Katchala  et  al.  [192]  obtained
(cid:0) 1
porous carbon spheres with a specific surface area of up to 396 m2 g
(cid:0) 1.  Choma  et  al.  [193]  suc-
and  a  reversible  capacity  of  422  mA  h  g
cessfully synthesized a micro-mesoporous carbons using a poly(ethylene
oxide)-poly(propylene  oxide)-poly(ethylene  oxide) triblock  copolymer

thinnest size of 20 nm and the largest specific capacitance (Fig. 5c).

3.1.4. Emerging templates

In  recent  years,  many  researchers  have  started  to  work  on  the
development of some emerging hard templates, such as sodium chloride
(NaCl)  [170],  ice  [171],  and  two-dimensional  transition  metal  carbi-
des/carbonitride/nitrides (MXene) [172,173].

NaCl has significant advantages as an easily removable and low-cost
template material. When NaCl template and carbon precursor are dis-
solved in water together, the carbon precursor molecules will wrap on
the surface of NaCl nanoparticles. Subsequently, the carbon source will
be  transformed  into  carbon  nanostructure  by  the  sequential  high-
temperature treatment and template removal of water washing [170].
Luo et al. [157] successfully prepared porous N-doped carbon skeletons
using zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) as a precursor and NaCl crystals as a
template (Fig. 5d). The as-prepared catalyst possesses three-dimensional
porous  framework  structure  and  rich  pyridinic-N  groups.  As  a  result,
more active sites and larger specific surface area can be exposed. Under
alkaline  condition,  the  N-doped  carbon  catalyst  exhibits  a  positive
half-wave potential of 0.88 V. Also, using NaCl as the template, Pan et al.
[174]  prepared  two  two-dimensional  layered  monometallic  carbon
nanocomposites of Co/C and Fe/C, respectively. The results show that
the two lamellar nanocomposites possess higher graphitization degree,
dielectric loss and excellent microwave absorption performance than the
three-dimensional bulk composites without NaCl addition.

Ice template  technology can  also  provide an  effective  way to  syn-
thesize porous carbon materials, but there are still some problems such
as  difficulty  in  tuning  the  size  of  the  material  and  poor  homogeneity
during  the synthesis process [175]. Patrike et  al. [176] synthesized a
three-dimensional  porous  N-doped  carbon  (3D  PNC)  network  with
mesoporous (20 nm) and microporous (1.5 μm) porosity by using the ice
template technique. Moreover, MXene materials are also widely used as
the novel templates in the synthesis of porous carbons [177–179]. Guo
et al. [180] successfully synthesized a MXene@rGO nanosphere material
by using MXene template. After 5000 cycles, the catalyst was able to
(cid:0) 1. Hu et al. [181] reported a
maintain a capacitance of 241.5 mAh g
two-dimensional MXene/carbon nanotube (MNT) material with the help
of MXene template by electrostatic spinning technique. The synthesized
MNT catalyst with dense active sites and a large specific surface area of
(cid:0) 1  exhibited  a  low  overpotential  (1.38  V)  and  excellent
234.9  m2  g
electrochemical durability.

3.2. Soft-template method

The soft-template method uses a structure-directing agent to produce
porous carbon materials by sequential self-assembly with organic car-
bon source precursors, followed by high-temperature carbonization or
solvent washing to remove the template [182]. The distinctive feature of
the  soft-template  method  is  its  "self-assembly",  which  is  the  essential
difference with the hard-template method. The following key elements
need to be considered for the construction of porous carbon materials
using  the  soft-template  method  [183]:  (1)  There  must  be  a  strong
interaction between the structure guide and the carbon source precur-
sor,  and  also  a  driving  force  to  form  the  self-assembly;  (2)  In  the
carbonization  process,  the  carbon  source  precursors  should  be  highly
cross-linked for a stable carbon skeleton structure and the cross-linked
product  should  be  thermostable  in  order  to  remove  the  template  by
carbonization  without  destroying  the  pore  structure;  (3)  The  suitable
solvent  should  be  adopted  for  the  wash  postprocessing.  The  common
soft-templates include surfactants [184], ionic liquids [185], and block
copolymers [186].

3.2.1. Surfactants

Surfactants  are  widely  used  as  one  of  the  most  common  soft-
templates  in  the  preparation  of  porous  carbons  [187].  Wang  et  al.
the  nano-sized  carbon  spheres,  by  dissolving
[188]  obtained

Fig. 6. (a) The possible growth process of semi-tubular material with CTAB as a
soft-template. Reprinted from Ref. [189] with permission from the MDPI. (b)
Schematic  diagram  of  soft-template  synthesized  micro-mesoporous  carbon
under  acidic  condition.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [193]  with  permission  from
the Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110111

Y. Chen et al.

(Pluronic F127) (Fig. 6b). The F127 soft-template afforded nanoporous
carbons  with  ordered  cylindrical  mesopores.  And  the  further  KOH
activation effectively enlarged their microporosity.

3.2.3.

Ionic liquids

Typically,  ionic  liquids  are  generally  used  as  soft-templates  for
heteroatom-doped carbons which can be mainly attributed to the better
thermal stability and the larger variety of heteroatoms [194]. Chen et al.
[195]  used  ionic  liquids  as  soft-template  and  formaldehyde  resin/-
resorcinol as carbon precursors to synthesize a N-doped hollow meso-
porous carbon spheres (N-HMCSs). The constructed N-HMCSs possessed
(cid:0) 1  and a specific surface area of 1158 m2
a pore volume of 1.70 cm3  g
(cid:0) 1.  Wu  et  al.  [196]  successfully  prepared  a  tubular  carbon  with
g
long-range  ordered  mesopores  by  using  F127  template  as  well  as  a
layered carbon with short- and long-range ordered micro-/mesopores by
an  ionic  liquid  template  of  1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium  chloride,
respectively.  However,  spherical  carbon  was  obtained  without  tem-
plates. Finally, the layered carbon exhibited excellent electrochemical
properties due to the higher degree of graphitization and more micro-
and mesoporous structures.

In recent years, as a new class of ionic liquids, deep eutectic solvents
(DESs) have been developed, typically by the complexation of quater-
nary  ammonium  or  phosphonium  salts  with  metal  salts  or  hydrogen-
bond  donors.  Compared  with  traditional  ionic  liquids,  DESs  has  the
advantages  of  high stability,  biodegradability  and  high ionic strength
[197,198].  Chen  et  al.  [199]  synthesized  a  DES  soft-template  by  a
complexation  of  zinc  chloride  and  choline  chloride.  Then,  by  this
DES-templated system, an overall broccoli-like carbon morphology with
rich micro-mesoporous structures was formed meanwhile using urea as
a  porogenic  agent.  L ́opez-Salas  et  al.  [200]  also  synthesized  a  DES
templating agent composed of choline chloride, urea and resorcinol for
the preparation of hierarchical porous carbons. After the optimization of
experimental  conditions,  the  results  showed  that  carbons  with  larger
mesopores could possess better electrochemical capacitance.

3.3. Self-template method

Although  the  hard  and  soft  template  methods  have  many  obvious
advantages, the removal of the used template often causes damage to the
structure  of  the  porous  carbon  [201,202].  At  the  same  time,
soft-template is more expensive and factors such as temperature, pH and
additives can have a significant impact on the formed material [203].
The  self-template  method  mainly  involves  direct  conversion  of  the
template material into a body part of the final porous carbon. Therefore,
compared  with  the  conventional  hard/soft-template  methods,  the
self-template  method  features  fewer  reaction  steps,  no  need  for  addi-
tional templates and convenient experimental process [204]. Typically,
self-templates mainly include traditional carbons [205,206], molecular
compounds  [207],  organic  frameworks  [208],  and  biomass  materials
[209,210].

3.3.1. Traditional carbons

Traditional  carbons  as  the  self-templates  have  the  advantages  of
wide source, low cost, and environmental friendliness, such as carbon
black  [211,212],  graphene  [213],  carbon  nanotubes  [214]  and  their
composites [215]. By introducing carbon black template into a mixture
of melamine and iron salts, Zhang et al. [212] successfully prepared an
Fe-N-C  catalyst.  The  results  showed  that  the  introduction  of  carbon
black induced conversion of the inactive Fe and Fe-carbides to the active
Fe-N4, which greatly improved the ORR activity of such Fe-N-C catalyst.
Graphene  is  a  more  commonly  used  carbon-based  support,  which  is
widely  used  in  electrocatalysis  because  of  its  excellent  electrical  con-
ductivity [216,217]. Li et al. [206] successfully prepared a free-standing
carbon  (FSC)  films  by  using  polyacrylonitrile  (PAN)/GO  as  a
self-template after high temperature carbonization. The incorporation of
GO  not only  improved the overall flexibility of the material, but also

provided more defect sites for the FSC film. Zhang et al. [77] reported an
Fe-N-doped graphene-based carbon catalyst, consisted of carbon nano-
tubes  in-situ  grown on  or  between graphene  sheets (CNT/GS).  It  was
found that the joint action of graphene and carbon nanotubes not only
improved the dispersion of the catalyst but also produced a large num-
ber  of  Fe-N  coordination  structures.  The  binary  FeN-CNT/GS  catalyst
exhibited excellent ORR performance comparable in acidic electrolyte
and  superior  in  alkaline  electrolyte  to  commercial  Pt/C.  Later,  by
introducing the carbon spheres (CS) into the above binary composite,
Zhang et al. [215] successfully synthesized the ternary FeN-CS/CNT/GS
composite.  The  results  showed  that  the  spacer  effect  of  nanospheres
allowed more nanotubes to grow on graphene, increasing the number of
Fe-N4  active  sites  and  the  specific  surface  area  of  the  final  catalyst.
Furthermore,  this  ternary  catalyst  exhibited  higher  ORR  performance
compared to the binary catalyst.

3.3.2. Organic frameworks

In  recent  years,  organic  frameworks  such  as  MOF  and  covalent
organic framework (COF) materials as the self-templates have attracted
a lot of attention from researchers. Take MOF templates as examples, the
formed carbon materials will have the following advantages [218]. (1)
The large specific surface area. For instance, Wang et al. [219] reported
a hierarchically porous N-doped carbon (HPNC) synthesized using ZIF-8
as a template, which possesses a large specific surface area (1131 m2
(cid:0) 1)  and  a  small  pore  size
g
(3.6  nm).  (2)  The  abundant
heteroatoms-doping. Nath et al. [220] reported a cobalt nanoparticles
embedded  in  N-doped  porous  carbon  (Co@NPC)  by  a  facile  Co-MOF
annealing  treatment,  showing  good  catalytic  activity  on  both
hydrogen  evolution  reaction  (HER)  and  oxygen  evolution  reaction
(OER). (3) The metal ions of the unsaturated state in MOF materials easy
to  create  new  sites.  Using  Fe-MOF  as  a  template,  Zhang  et  al.  [221]
successfully  synthesized  a  three-dimensional  porous  carbon  with  the
dispersion  of  FeF3-0.33H2O  nanoparticles  (<10  nm),  which  provides
more electron transport channels and accelerates the electron transfer
rate.

COF  materials  as  a  class  of  crystalline  polymers  characterized  by
precise  heteroatomic  sites,  high  specific  surface  area,  uniform  pore
distribution, good chemical and thermal stability [222]. Based on this,
researchers  have  used  COF  materials  as  the  self-templates  for  the
high-temperature pyrolytic carbons to perform electrocatalytic studies
[223].  Jiang  et  al.  [224]  successfully  synthesized  a  COF-derived  Fe
nanoparticles-decorated carbon nanospheres (Fe-N-CNS) (Fig. 7a). The
abundant nitrogen source and backbone structure in COF nanospheres
help to increase the active sites and improve the specific surface area and
electrical conductivity of the catalyst. This Fe-N-CNS catalyst shows the
ORR activity under alkaline condition approached to that of commercial
Pt/C catalyst as well as good methanol tolerance and electrochemical
stability. Zhang et al. [225] reported a strategy to synthesize catalysts
using  the  MOF-derived  COF  core-shell  structure  as  a  self-sacrificial
template.  First,  the  researchers  constructed  a  COF  nanofiber  material
using  MOF  templates,  and  subsequently,  a  graphitic  nitrogen-doped
porous  carbon  electrocatalyst  with  coexistence  of  mesopores  and  mi-
cropores  was  successfully  synthesized  by  high-temperature  pyrolysis
(Fig.  7b).  The  catalyst  possesses  a  high  degree  of  graphitization  and
N-doping.  Under  alkaline  condition,  it  exhibits  excellent  electro-
chemical performance.

3.3.3. Biomass materials

Also,  more  and  more  researchers  are  focusing  their  attentions  on
biomass-derived  carbon.  Xue  et  al.  [227]  successfully  synthesized  a
porous carbon material by burning rice husk as a self-template. After
optimizing the experimental conditions, it can be found that the product
(cid:0) 1, a pore volume of
has a maximum specific surface area of 797 m2  g
(cid:0) 1, and a maximum N content of 6.42%. Importantly, some
0.55 cm3 g
biomass  themselves  have  abundant  pore  structures,  which  can  help
speed up electron transport and improve the electrical conductivity of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110112

Y. Chen et al.

Fig.  7. (a)  Schematic  diagram  of  the  synthesis  of  Fe-N-CNS  and  N-CNS  catalysts.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [224]  with  permission  from  the  Elsevier.  (b)  Schematic
illustration of preparation procedure for GC@COF-NC catalyst. Reprinted from Ref. [225] with permission from the Elsevier. (c) Structural diagram of the porous
carbon material synthesized using sugarcane bagasse as a template. Reprinted from Ref. [226] with permission from the Elsevier. (d) Synthesis process of Fe-Nx-C
catalyst by the high-temperature pyrolysis of phthalocyanine-based molecular compounds. Reprinted from Ref. [76] with permission from the Elsevier.

the resulted catalyst materials. Using the tubular structure of sugarcane
bagasse, Xu et al. [226] successfully synthesized a porous carbon ma-
terial (Fig. 7c) possessed abundant oxygen-containing functional groups
(cid:0) 1.  As  an
(17.33%)  and  a  large  specific  surface  area  of  1351.7  m2  g
electrode material, this catalyst was able to maintain 98.9% of initial
activity  after  10000  cycles.  Also,  researchers  have  found  that  most
biomass materials contain a large number of heteroatoms. Using such
biomass as a self-template can help increase the number of active sites

and improve the performance of the formed products. Zhao et al. [228]
successfully  synthesized  a  carbon  nanosheet  structure  using  kelp
self-template  by  taking  advantage  of  its  high  N  and  S  contents.  The
conditions-optimized  catalyst  shows  the  N  content  of  4.52%  and  S
(cid:0) 1
content of 9.12%, as well as a large specific surface area of 1900 m2 g
(cid:0) 1, exhibiting a good initial coulombic
and pore volume of 1.04 cm3  g
efficiency (51.5%).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110113

Y. Chen et al.

3.3.4. Molecular compounds

Additionally, choosing molecular compounds as self-templates, the
prepared carbon materials have features such as adjustable pore size,
coexistence  of  multiple  heteroatoms,  and  abundant  active  sites  [212,
229]. By high-temperature pyrolysis of FePc, phthalocyanine (Pc) and
Zn-salts, Chen et al. [76] successfully synthesized a good ORR perfor-
mance Fe-Nx-C catalyst (Fig. 7d). The staggered π-π  stacking between
FePc and Pc can effectively confine the atomic Fe. The Zn-evaporation
can produce rich microporous defects to fix Fe-N4  active-sites. Finally,
the  synergistic  modulation  of  staggered  stacking  confinement  and
microporous defect fixation can realize the high-density growth of the
atomic FeII-N4  active-sites. Yan et al. [230] reported a facile one-step
self-template  method  for the  synthesis of  highly N-doped nanoporous
carbon wire (HNPCW) by the carbonization of a potassium citrate and
melamine mixture. The HNPCW material possesses a high N-content of
(cid:0) 1,  showing
16.8%  and  a  large  specific  surface  area  of  2149  m2  g
excellent cycle stability able to be maintained at 97.79% after 10 000
cycles.  Lin  et  al.  [231]  proposed  a  novel  self-template  approach  to
synthesize N-doped hollow carbon spheres (NHCSs) by pyrolysis of zinc
carbodiimide (Zn(NCN)) as both the carbon and nitrogen sources and
the self-templates. Further for catalyzing the ORR, the abundant defects
and  heavily  N-doped  catalyst  exhibited  excellent  stability.  Some  re-
searchers  generally  believe  that  polyatomic  doping  is  more  effective
than  single  atomic  doping  for  material  modification.  Using  the  small
molecule dithiooxamide acts as both the N and S dopants and the pre-
cursor self-templates, Li et al. [204] reported a facile method capable of
synthesizing a N, S co-doped carbon (NSC). The diatomically doped NSC
material possesses a larger layer spacing and better electrical conduc-
tivity. Due to the relatively high price of some molecular compounds,
researchers  have  started  to  make  use  of  some  components  in  waste
cinder. Wang et al. [232] successfully synthesized hierarchical porous
carbons (HPCs) via a unique self-template method by the co-activation
of heavy component (HC) and dense medium component (DMC) sepa-
rated from bituminous coal. Through an activation process of kaolinite
in HC and KOH, the formed Natrolite (K) (K2Al2Si3O10•2H2O) can act as
the  self-template.  And,  the  further  addition  of  asphalt-like  DMC  will
make a better use of the self-templates. The optimal HPCs material has
(cid:0) 1) and excellent electrical con-
large specific surface area (3851 m2  g
ductivity.  This  study  provides  a  new  idea  for  the  synthesis  of  porous
carbon materials constructed from low-cost coal minerals.

3.4. Combined-template method

The  combined-template  method  offers  a  possibility  of  pooling  the
various  benefits  of  single  template  methods.  The  outstanding  advan-
tages  should  be  capable  of  rationally  regulating  the  morphological/
structural diversities and well controlling the physical/chemical prop-
erties,  such  as  producing  the  multidimensional  morphologies,  hierar-
chical pores, high surface area, abundant compositions, etc. Commonly,
the combined-template methods are evolved from the single-template
methods, including dual-templates [233] and multi-templates [234].

et  al.  [237]  successfully  synthesized  a  N-doped  ordered  mesoporous
carbon  (NHMC),  with  hierarchically  porous  structure  composed  of
micropore, small ordered mesopore and large three-dimensional inter-
connected mesopore. Among them, the larger interconnect mesopores
are  caused  by  the  SiO2  hard-template,  while  the  F127  soft-template
plays a role in facilitating the self-assembly process and is able to pro-
mote  the  uniform  distribution  of  SiO2.  The  synthesized  NHMC  as  an
excellent  performance  ORR  electrocatalyst  exhibits  a  high  half-wave
potential of 0.76 V. Through a new dual-template route from carbon-
ization of a mixture containing zinc gluconate and urea, Zhu et al. [238]
synthesized N-functionalized porous carbons as adsorbent materials for
sulfur dioxide. In this case, the decomposition of urea can produce gas
templates and N-dopants. While, the heat treatment of zinc gluconate
can create rich microporosity by the Zn-evaporation, reducing the step
of  removing  templates.  The  final  synthesized  porous  carbon  material
with a tunable microporous structure possesses a large specific surface
(cid:0) 1 and a high N-content of 6.5 at%.
area of 1192 m2 g

3.4.2. Multi-templates

The multi-template method, in which three and more substances are
used together as hybrid template for the synthesis of carbon materials.
Compared  with  the  dual-template  method,  the  interactions  between
different templates are more complex and not easy to control. Wu et al.
[239] successfully synthesized HPC material by first combining a poly-
mer template with a zinc chloride (ZnCl2) template, followed by mixing
with  a  sodium  chloride  (NaCl)  template.  At  the  same  time,  such  a
stepwise processing avoids the influence of template interactions. The
as-prepared HPCs product has an abundance of active sites, a large layer
(cid:0) 1.
spacing of 0.395 nm and a large specific surface area of 604.4 m2 g
Such  a  stepwise  template idea  was  likewise  continued  by  Zhou  et  al.
[240]  towards  the  HPCs  materials.  First,  the  researchers  synthesized
hierarchical  silica  capsules  (HSCs)  by  emulsion  soft-template.  Then,
combing the HSCs hard-template with the Pluronic P123 and phenolic
resin  soft-templates
such  HPCs.  The  HSCs
hard-template  makes  meso–macro  pores  (5–100  nm),  while  P123
soft-template  provides  ordered  mesopores  (~3  nm).  This  study  also
provides a new idea for the graded regulation of the pore structure.

jointly  construct

4. Templates-induced low/non-Pt carbon-based catalysts

The commercial Pt/C catalyst has severe challenges in terms of the
scarce Pt resource, the unstable and inactive carbon black support, and
the  weak  metal-support  interaction.  To  solve  these  issues,  templates-
induced  advanced  carbons  have  been  used  as  Pt-based  catalyst  sup-
ports and non-noble catalysts for the construction of high-performance
low/non-Pt carbon-based ORR catalysts. The low-Pt carbon-based cat-
alysts  need  steadily  reduce  the  noble-metal  Pt  loading,  while  further
improving the ORR performance usually by the composition, size and
shape control. For the non-noble carbon-based catalysts, it is the M-N-C,
metal-free  heteroatoms-doped  carbons  and  defective  carbons  that  are
alternatives with high hopes.

3.4.1. Dual-templates

4.1. Carbon supported low-Pt catalysts

The dual-template method is to have two kinds of templates working
together  to  synthesize  the  carbon  materials.  The  synthesized  porous
carbons often have two or more pores with different sizes [235]. Luo
et al. [236] successfully synthesized a multi-phase interface structure of
embedded  cobalt  phosphide  nanoparticles on  hollow  N-doped  carbon
substance (CoxP/NC) using ZIF-67 and ZIF-8 dual-templates. Compared
(cid:0) 1 and pore volume of 0.667
to the specific surface area of 1265.9 m2 g
(cid:0) 1  of the material synthesized using a single ZIF-8 template, the
cm3  g
CoxP/NC  synthesized  using  a  composite  ZIF-67@ZIF-8  template
(cid:0) 1) and pore volume
exhibited a larger specific surface area (1317.3 m2 g
(cid:0) 1). Some researchers have used a combination of soft and
(0.694 cm3 g
hard  templates  to  synthesize  carbon  materials.  By  using  a  hybrid
dual-template of soft-template (F127) and hard-template (SiO2), Deng

Currently,  the  most  efficient  ORR  catalyst  known  is  the  carbon
supported Pt-based catalyst, such as Pt/C. To reduce the usage of Pt and
meanwhile improve the ORR performance of Pt-based catalysts, it will
be  the  effective  solution  to  control  composition,  size  and  shape.  The
templates-induced  carbons  as  supports  of  low-Pt  catalysts  can  better
fulfill these three requirements and improve the catalytic performance
of  Pt-based  catalysts. Carbon  supports  and  carbon-based  catalysts  are
often  characterized  by  the  controlled  physical/chemical  properties
relative to pore structure, surface area, conductivity, morphology, size,
composition, metal-support interaction, etc.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110114

Y. Chen et al.

4.1.1. Modulation of Pt-based nanostructures

(1)  Composition. Composition control for Pt-based catalysts can be
habitually  to  form  alloys  or  intermetallic  compounds,  and
meanwhile with the lattice shrinkage effect, electronic structure
effect  and  synergistic  effect  to  improve  their  catalytic  perfor-
mance [245]. Various PtM alloy catalysts including PtPd [246],
PtNi [247], PtAu [248], PtCo [249], PtAg [250], PtCu [251], PtFe
[252],  and  PtW  [253]  have  been  systematically  studied  in  the
past few years. These studies suggest that the electronic state of
the  outermost  Pt  layer  can  be  modulated  by  ligand  and  strain
effects and the addition of transition metals, thus to enhance ORR
activity [254]. Biz et al. [255] performed detailed studies by DFT
calculations on the Pt-based alloys. It was determined that what is
stable in theory is the formation of bimetallic distributed species,
in which Pt3M (M = Fe, Co and Ni) is the most stable structure in
multilayer  structures.  Pt-Ni  catalysts  have  become  one  of  the

◦

most  active  electrocatalysts  for  ORR  [256,257].  Nadeem  et  al.
[241] used a layered MOF as a sacrificed template by pyrolysis at
C to synthesize a porous carbon sheet with a large specific
900
(cid:0) 1, which was utilized as a support for the
surface area of 877 m2 g
Pt-Ni@PC900  catalyst  (Fig.  8a).  Compared  to  the  commercial
Pt/C catalyst, this catalyst has a low Pt loading of only 7 wt%,
showing a higher  half-wave potential of 0.909 V and  excellent
stability. By an in-situ self-templating solution reduction strategy
of  constructing  Pt  nanoparticles  onto  well-devised  Fe  and  N
co-doped carbons (Fe/NC), Liao et al. [258] successfully prepared
a  Pt-Fe/NC  catalyst.  The  template  strategy  resulted  Pt-Fe/NC
catalyst  showed  the  half-wave  potential  nearly  40  mV  positive
(cid:0) 1) about 1.2 times
to and the mass activity at 0.9 V (0.420 A mgPt
(cid:0) 1) of the commercial Pt/C catalyst.
higher than that (0.191 A mgPt
(2)  Size. As catalytic reactions take place on the catalyst surface, it is
possible  to  increase  the  percentage  of  surface  Pt  atoms  by
reducing the size of Pt particles, thus increasing the efficiency of

Fig. 8. (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Pt-Ni@PC900 and comparison of the electrochemical performance with commercial Pt/C catalyst. Reprinted from
Ref. [241] with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Relationship between oxygen reduction mass activity and particle size, and (c) electron transfer
pathways on catalyst surfaces. Reprinted from Ref. [242] with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) Gibbs free energy and (e) dissolution rate versus
particle size. Reprinted from Ref. [243] with permission from the IOPscience (f, i) Model schematics and (h, j) TEM images of the Pt-Co (f, h) rhombic dodecahedra
and (i, j) nanoframes catalysts. Reprinted from Ref. [244] with permission from the American Chemical Society.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110115

Y. Chen et al.

Pt utilization. In theory, the smaller of particle size the higher of
Pt utilization. In fact, studies have shown that the particle size has
a significant effect on the ORR performance of Pt-based catalysts.
For example, Shao et al. [242] investigated the effect of Pt par-
ticle size (1–5 nm) on the ORR activity. The results suggest that
the catalytic activity firstly increase and then decrease with the
increasing  particle  size,  where  the  catalysts  with  particle  size
around 3 nm showed the best performance (Fig. 8b and c). Ma
et al. [259] similarly demonstrated the high ORR performance of
Pt catalysts of 3 nm size. In terms of stability, the results show a
monotonic  increase  with  increasing  particle  size  [260].  Espe-
cially, the size below 2 nm is prone to dissolution loss due to the
high  surface  Gibbs  free  energy,  resulting  in  the  poor  stability.
When the particle is above 3 nm, the catalyst stability is signifi-
cantly  enhanced  with  increasing  particle  size  (Fig.  8d  and  e)
[243].

In addition, template method has particular advantages over other
synthetic methods in terms of regulating the Pt nanoparticles size [261,
262].  By  using  a  spherical  macromolecule  template  for  stepwise
complexation,  Yamamoto  et  al.  [263]  prepared  three  small  size  Pt
nanoclusters of Pt12@3, Pt28@3 and Pt60@3 which are 0.9, 1 and 1.2
nm, respectively. Each nanocluster has a good dispersion on the tem-
plate without agglomeration and fusion, which makes the particle size
better  controllable.  The  change  in  particle  size  leads  to  a  change  in
structure of the Pt nanoparticles, which undoubtedly also changes the
composition and occupancy ratio of the crystalline surfaces. In addition,
the variation of catalyst pore size also affects Pt nanoparticle size [264].
Through a soft-template method, Zhao et al. [265] synthesized a series
of ordered mesoporous carbons (OMCs) with the adjustable pore sizes
ranging from 4.0 to 8.1 nm. When OMCs as the supports of Pt catalysts, it
has been found that the increase of pore size can obviously enlarge the
specific  surface  area  and  pore  volume  of  the  OMCs  support,  but  de-
creases the Pt nanoparticles size. This conclusion was likewise supported
by  Cao et al. [266] when  investigating a catalyst support of N-doped
carbon  quantum  dot/graphene  (N-CQD/G)  using  dicyandiamide  as  a
sacrificial template precursor/N-source. Based on the XRD results, the
average Pt size was calculated to be 2.1 nm, which was much smaller
than that of commercial Pt/C catalyst (2.8 nm). Meanwhile, the smaller
Pt particle size conferred a larger electrochemical surface area (ECSA)
(cid:0) 1 and a higher Pt utilization of 92.4%. Under acidic
value of 123.4 m2 g
condition, the catalyst exhibited a superior ORR activity and durability
compared to Pt/C catalyst.

(3)  Shape. To investigate the effect of Pt-based catalysts morphology
on ORR activity, researchers have designed various shapes such
as nanocube [267], nanotube [268], nanowire [269], nanosheet
[270],  and  nanocage  [271],  along  with  the  optimal  nano-
structures of alloying [249], core-shell [272], and hollow/porous
[273]. These special shapes can somewhat increase the specific
surface  area  thus  increasing  the  number  of  exposed  active  Pt
atoms,  and  also  improve  the  stability.  Zhang  et  al.  [274]  suc-
cessfully  synthesized  an  ultrathin  PtNi  alloy  nanowires  (PtNi
NWs) loaded on carbon using CTAB as a soft-template. The ul-
trathin diameter of PtNi NWs ensures sufficient surface area and
higher  Pt  utilization,  while  nanowires  or  nanowire  networks
enable  PtNi  NWs  to  exhibit  better  stability.  Chen  et  al.  [244]
successfully  synthesized  the  hollow  Pt-Co  nanoframe  (NF)  via
chemical etching of Co from the solid rhombic dodecahedra (RD)
(Fig. 8f-j). Owing to the high specific surface area by the hollow
shape, the obtained Pt-Co NF catalyst showed high ORR catalytic
(cid:0) 1  in  acidic  elec-
performance  with  mass  activity  of  0.40  A  mgPt
trolyte. Also, this catalyst exhibited excellent long-term stability,
which  could  be  ascribed  to  the  negligible  electrochemical  Co
dissolution.  The  above  phenomenon  indicated  that  the  same
catalyst  with  different  morphological  structures  possessed

different ORR catalytic activities. Further by etching away the Pd
cores of cubes  and octahedra templates, Zhang et al.  [275] re-
ported  two  corresponding  Pt  cubic  and  octahedral  nanocages
respectively  enclosed  by  {100}  and  {111}  facets,  showing
distinctive ORR activities. In combination with DFT calculations,
the increased ORR activity was attributed to an overall structural
change. In a follow-up work, the fabricated Pt-based icosahedral
nanocages by the same method, surrounded by both {111} facets
and twin boundaries, exhibited extremely high activity towards
oxygen reduction  [276]. Ercolano  et  al.  [277]  summarized the
catalytic  performance  of  Pt-based  catalysts  with  different  mor-
phologies  and  surface  structures (Fig.  9).  Compared  with  com-
the  octahedral,  nano-framework,
mercial  Pt/C  catalyst,
nanowire,  and  core-shell  structure  catalysts  all  have  superior
catalytic activity. However, the  fuel cell performances of these
shaped catalysts can not yet reach the results of the rotating disk
electrode  (RDE)  experimental  tests,  and  the  precise  design  of
membrane  electrode  assembly  (MEA)  need  further  to  be
improved.

4.1.2. Control of carbon supports

(1)  Pore structure and surface area. In general, template methods can
offer unique advantages for precisely controlling the pore struc-
ture  and  surface  area  of  carbon  supports  for  forming  high-
performance  carbon-based  catalysts  [279–281].  Han  et  al.
[282] successfully synthesized a low-Pt loaded three-dimensional
porous carbon catalyst (Pt3Co/C) using NaCl as a template. By
regulating the NaCl content, it was possible to control the average
pore  size  of  the  porous  carbon  to  around  1  μm.  This  catalyst
possessed  a  honeycomb  porous  structure  and  therefore  had  a
(cid:0) 1). Amongst other things,
large BET surface area (471.73 m2  g
the optimum catalyst could be able to achieve a mass activity of
(cid:0) 1  in  acidic  electrolyte,  which  was  6.4  times  higher
0.70  A  mgPt
than that of commercial Pt/C. At the same time, Pt3Co/C showed
a good electrochemical stability with almost negligible decay of
half-wave potential after 5000 potential cycles. The honeycomb
porous structure could avoid agglomeration of metal ions due to
high temperature  sintering  and  also exposed more  active  sites,
which facilitated the ORR. Liu et al. [283] precisely regulated the
pore  structure  of  carbon  support  by  using  the  hard/soft
dual-templates. SiO2 was used as a hard-template for the forma-
tion  of  three-dimensional  macropores  and  meanwhile  the
styrene-acrylonitrile  polymer  as  soft-template  could  create  the
abundant micro/meso-pores. The three-dimensional porous car-
(cid:0) 1),
bons (3DC) possessed a large specific surface area (550.5 m2 g
which was benefited from the high dispersion of Pt nanoparticles.
(cid:0) 1 and good
Pt/3DC exhibited a high mass activity of 0.99 A mgPt
electrochemical durability.

(2)  Morphology  and  composition.  Template  methods  allow  for
modulation  of  morphology  and  composition  of  carbon  support
[284,285]. Wang et al. [286] designed a N-doped hollow carbon
sphere supported 2.8 wt% Pt catalyst (Pt@NHCS) using SiO2 as a
hard-template. Such a catalyst was precisely tuned to possess an
about 12 nm of N-doped carbon shell. Due to its unique structure
and  the  synergistic  effect  of  Pt  with  N-containing  species,
(cid:0) 1  and
Pt@NHCS exhibited a higher mass activity of 3.8 mA μgPt
also a superior electrochemical stability. Also, Cheng et al. [287]
used  PS  microspheres  as  the  template  to  successfully  design  a
Pt-decorated  three-dimensional  N-doped  carbon  porous  micro-
sphere cavity (Pt N/C PMC) catalyst with a surface area of 116.32
(cid:0) 1. After 3000 electrochemical cycles, this typical catalyst
m2  g
could be able to maintain 85.8% mass activity. Zhang et al. [189]
successfully designed the characteristic carbon semi-tube (CST)
by polymerization of aniline (AN) using the surfactant-assembled
micelles as the soft-templates. Recently, Chen et al. [285] further

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110116

Y. Chen et al.

Fig.  9. Performance  comparison  of  Pt-based  catalysts  with  different  morphologies  and  surface  structures.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [277]  with  permission  from  the
Elsevier. Schematic diagram of N-doped carbon semi-tube supported Pt (Pt/N-CST) catalyst and its ORR electrocatalysis. Reprinted from Ref. [278] with permission
from the Elsevier.

evolved  the  quality  of  CST  by  replacing  AN  with  m-phenyl-
enediamine (mPDA) through the same soft-template method. The
pyrolytic  product  of  N-doped  carbon  semi-tube  (N-CST)  had
increased  micropores  and  N-content  and  improved  electrical
conductivity, showing both enhanced ORR activity and electro-
chemical stability. DFT calculations suggested the curvature ef-
fect on ORR electrocatalysis. In the meantime, Cai et al. [278]
chosen the N-CST as a functional support for the successful con-
struction  of  N-CST  supported  microwave-produced  2.8  nm  Pt
nanoparticles  (Pt/N-CST)  catalyst.  The  schematic  diagram  of
Pt/N-CST morphology and its ORR electrocatalysis is shown in
Fig.  9b.  For  the  semi-tubular  Pt/N-CST  catalyst,  the  interfacial
Pt-N  bond  could  be  ascribed  for  the  enhanced  electrocatalytic
ORR  capacity  good  stability.  The  semi-tubular  carbon
morphology  should  be  expectant  for  the  innovative  design  of
high-performance low/non-Pt catalysts.

(3)  Metal-support  interaction.  Enhancing  the  interaction  of  carbon
supports with metal is also an effective strategy to improve the
ORR activity of Pt-based catalysts. Cao et al. [266] successfully
synthesized  a  N-doped  carbon  quantum  dot/graphene
(N-CQD/G) material to support Pt. This hybrid support combined
the  advantages  of  both  CQD  and  G,  such  as  better  electrical
conductivity, larger surface area and richer porous structure. The
obtained  Pt/N-CQD/G  catalyst  exhibited  a  good  catalytic  ORR
durability, which was mainly attributed to the strongly anchoring
of Pt by N-doping. Similarly, Wang et al. [288] used the X-ray
photoemission  electron  microscopy  (X-PEEM)  technique  to
illustrate  more  visually  the  strong  interactions  between  Cu-Pt
alloy and support in a N-doped porous carbon catalyst by using
ZIF-8 as a template. This catalyst showed a mass activity of 4.4
times higher and better electrochemical durability than those of
commercial Pt/C catalyst. The X-ray photoemission electron mi-
croscopy  data  indicated  a  strong  orbital  interaction  between
carbon support and Cu-Pt nanoparticles.

4.2. Non-noble carbon catalysts

4.2.1. Transition metal-nitrogen-carbon catalysts

In recent years, M-N-C catalysts with abundant resources as well as
high  ORR  activity  and  stability  under either  acidic  or  alkaline condi-
tions, are potential alternatives to noble-metal catalysts and have been
widely studied in the field of ORR electrocatalysis. Jasinski [289] first
reported  in  1964  that  cobalt  phthalocyanine  as  a  non-precious  metal

◦

catalyst exhibited excellent ORR activity under alkaline condition. Since
then, a large number of M(cid:0) N4 macrocyclic compounds (e.g. metal-based
phthalocyanines  and  porphyrins)  have  been  extensively  investigated
because the electronic configuration of the metal center can facilitate
the  breakage  of  the  O––O  bond  and  the  subsequent  reduction  of  O2
[290]. However, macrocyclic compounds also suffer from poor thermal
stability and electrical conductivity, and low ORR activity in practical
applications.  Therefore,  researchers  have  commonly  used
the
template-methods  to  prepare  ORR  catalysts  by  high-temperature  py-
rolysis. First, some macrocyclic precursor templates were treated at high
temperatures (500–1000
C) to improve the conductivity, activity and
stability of the M-Nx  structure [291,292]. Mukherjee et al. [293] suc-
cessfully synthesized a graphene-based ORR catalyst by a self-template
method  of  using  the  higher  conjugated  ZnPc.  The  catalyst  exhibited
good ORR catalytic activity and 4-electron transfer pathway in neutral
solution. Also using ZnPc precursor and NaCl crystallites template, Luo
et  al.  [157]  successfully synthesized  a porous  N-doped carbon  frame-
work with a protected pyridinic-N. Typically, NaCl crystallites can act as
the  hard-templates  to  create  porous  framework  and  increase  specific
surface area. This catalyst showed excellent ORR performance with a
higher half-wave potential (0.88 V) compared to the Pt/C catalyst (0.85
V)  under  alkaline  condition.  After  8000  electrochemical  cycles,  the
half-wave potential value of this typical catalyst decreased by only 18
mV, but 60 mV for Pt/C catalyst. Later, due to the relatively high cost of
macrocyclic  compounds,  a  variety  of  inorganic  transition-metal  salts
and N-containing carbon precursors (e.g. melamine) have been identi-
fied as effective templates for the preparation of M-N-C catalysts [294].
Wang  et  al.  [295]  successfully  synthesized  a  porous  Co-N-C  catalyst
using  ZIF-67  as  the  carbon  template  and  melamine  as  the  nitrogen
source and template. The physical characterization revealed that mel-
amine contributed to the thermal decomposition of ZIF-67. Compared
with the sample synthesized using pure ZIF-67, the addition of melamine
helped the catalyst to produce more carbon defects and thus more active
sites. The resulted catalyst possessed a larger specific surface area of 640
m2 g

(cid:0) 1 and higher pyridinic-N content of 13.95 wt%.
Generally,  M-N-C  catalysts  are  prepared  through  the  high-
temperature pyrolysis as shown in Fig. 10 [296]. The carbon precursor
is cracked at high temperature in an inert or ammonia atmosphere. The
three key elements of C, N and M required for the preparation of M-N-C
catalysts  are  derived  from  different  templates.  The  carbon  template
materials  will  provide  an  excess  of  carbon  atoms  and  serve  as  a
conductive support. To be effective as a support, the high specific sur-
face area is necessary for the carbon-based materials to ensure a high

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110117

Y. Chen et al.

Fig. 10. Schematic illustration of the preparation of M-N-C catalysts. Reprinted from Ref. [296] with permission from the MDPI.

active-site  density  and  good  electrical  conductivity,  such  as  different
types of carbon black [297], carbon nanotube [298,299], reduced gra-
phene oxide [300,301] and ordered mesoporous carbon [302]. Several
studies have demonstrated the importance of carbon supports to provide
good  ORR  activity  of  catalysts.  Noh  et  al.  [303]  compared  the  ORR
performance  of  the  different  catalysts  obtained  using  three  carbon
template materials of graphene (GR), carbon nanotube (CNT) and car-
bon  nanotube-graphene  (CNT-GR),  respectively.  The  results  showed
that the catalyst using CNT-GR as the carbon template possessed higher
ORR performance with a half-wave potential of 0.89 V compared to the
catalyst using a single carbon template (GR or CNT). In addition, the
surface  area  and  porosity  of  the  carbon  support  also  play  a  very
important role in providing higher active-site density and better mass
transfer  performance  for  the  formed  catalysts.  Xiao  et  al.  [304]  suc-
cessfully  synthesized  an  ordered  mesoporous  Fe-N-C  catalyst  using  a
soft-template method. This catalyst possesses a good ORR catalytic ac-
tivity  and  electrochemical  durability  and  exhibits  a  4-electron  ORR
process, which is mainly due to its large specific surface area of 1910 m2

(cid:0) 1 and abundant micropores of <2 nm.

g

◦

For the template-methods, pyrolysis is a key process, therefore, some
studies have focused on the effect of pyrolysis parameters on ORR per-
formance [305,306]. In general, temperatures above 700
C enable the
catalysts to exert relatively high catalytic activity and form a sufficient
number of ORR active sites. Typically, the maximum pyrolysis temper-
ature  used  in  catalyst  synthesis  is  between  1000–1100
C.  However,
there is no clear optimum pyrolysis temperature by literature analysis,
usually for the annealing range between 800–1000
C [307]. Li et al.
[308]  compared  the  ORR  activity  of  pyrolyzed  Fe-N-C  synthesized
composites between 800–1000
C. The results showed that the synthe-
◦
sized  Fe-N-C  catalyst  at  900
C  possessed  better  ORR  electrocatalytic
activity, higher peak potential and half-wave potential.

◦

◦

◦

4.2.2. Metal-free carbon catalysts

To  further  save  cost,  metal-free  carbon  catalysts  have  sparked
research  interest.  The  researchers  successfully  synthesized  a  batch  of
non-metal  heteroatoms-doped  carbon  catalysts  using  the  template-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110118

Y. Chen et al.

(3.04)

methods by taking advantage of the high electronegativity of N, P, S and
other non-metal elements with atomic radii similar to that of C [309,
310]. The principle is illustrated by N as an example. Since N is more
electronegative
it  has  a  greater  ability  of
electron-withdrawing. This allows N to have a more complete electron
density around it, which is beneficial for reactions like ORR that require
electrons.  In  addition,  since  N  has  excess  electrons,  doping  into  pure
carbon  materials  increases  the  electron  cloud  density,  effectively
improving the ORR performance of carbon materials [311].

than  C,

Earliest,  Gong  et  al.  [104]  reported  a  VA-NCNTs  catalyst  which
possessed  higher  ORR  activity  than  commercial  Pt/C  catalyst  under
alkaline  condition.  Since  then,  the  research  on  metal-free  hetero-
atoms-doped  carbon  catalysts  has  entered  a  rapid  development  stage
[312].  Zhu  et  al.  [313]  successfully  synthesized  a  N-doped  carbon
nanotube (N-CNT) catalyst by the use of tubular pyridine-functionalized
porous polycarbazole (Py-PCz) as a self-template. The catalyst exhibited
a  higher  half-wave  potential  (0.88  V)  and  better  methanol  tolerance
under alkaline condition. In addition, after 10000 electrochemical cy-
cles, the half-wave potential decreased by 17 mV compared to 46 mV for
the  commercial  Pt/C catalyst, indicating  the  superior  electrochemical
stability of this N-CNT catalyst.

In addition to N, other heteroatoms (P [314], S [315], B [316] and so
on) doped carbon materials can also have the effect of enhancing the
ORR  activity.  Zhao  et  al.  [317]  successfully  synthesized  a  P-doped
mesoporous carbon (P-MC) catalyst using organophosphonic acid as the
P source and P127 as a soft-template. The catalyst possesses a high ORR
catalytic activity and a more efficient 4-electron ORR electron transfer
pathway.  This  durability  test  indicated  that  this  catalyst  was  able  to
maintain  91.7%  of  the  initial  current  after  12000  s  under  a  constant
potential of 0.6 V (vs. RHE). Through a carbon-bath pyrolysis method of
urea and thiourea as both the sacrificial template and source of N and S,
and glucose as the carbon precursor, Ye et al. [318] successfully syn-
thesized  a  N,S-codoped  graphene-like  carbon  (GLC)  which  showed  a
half-wave  potential  of  0.82  V  higher  than  that  of  commercial  Pt/C
catalyst (0.8 V). Also, this typical catalyst exhibited the better electro-
chemical stability and superior methanol tolerance compared with the
commercial  20  wt%  Pt/C  catalyst.  Li  et  al.  [319]  designed  a
single-atom-like B-N3  structure in the ordered macroporous carbon by
SiO2 spheres as the template and hydrogen-bonded organic framework
as the carbon and nitrogen sources. For this catalyst, the co-doping of
B/N and ordered macroporous structures together promote the excellent
ORR catalytic performance. In addition, the adsorption sites and surface
adsorption energies of several B-C3  and B-Nx  (x = 1, 2 and 3) models
were simulated by DFT calculations and the results showed that the B-N3
structure accelerated the ORR electrocatalysis process by the promoted
formation  of  *OH/*OOH  intermediates  derived  from  the  abundant
favorable  *OOH  and  *OH  adsorption  sites  on  the  B  center.  As
mentioned, more and more reports have shown that templates-induced
non-metallic  carbon catalysts  can effectively catalyze  ORR,  especially
when  multiple  dopants  act  in  concert  [320].  Duraisamy  et  al.  [321]
successfully  synthesized  a  N  and  S  diatom-doped  mesoporous  carbon
(NSMC) using SBA-15 as a hard template and L-cysteine as a source of N
and S. The excellent electrochemical performance of this NSMC catalyst
is  mainly  attributed  to  the  N  and  S  double  atom  doping,  further
enhancing  the  asymmetric spin  distribution on  the  carbon  atoms  and
thus  providing  more  defect  sites.  Xing  et  al.  [322]  reported  a  new
scheme  for  the  synthesis  of  N  and  P  co-doped  carbon  nanosheets  by
using C3N4 as the self-template and giving full play to the template effect
and  the  synergistic  effect  of  N  and  P.  The  final  catalyst  has  not  only
abundant mesopores of 6–10 nm, but also a large specific surface area of
(cid:0) 1.  After  optimization  of  the  experimental  conditions,  the
838.4  m2  g
optimal catalyst has an excellent ORR performance with an onset po-
tential of 0.93 V and a half-wave potential of 0.85 V.

4.2.3. Defective carbon catalysts

In addition to the heteroatoms-doping, researchers have also found

that  the  inherent  defects  in  carbon  materials  can  enhance  the  ORR
performance  of  catalysts  [323].  This  is  mainly  because  the  inherent
defects of carbon materials can change the electronic configuration of
carbon atoms [91]. Typically, the inherent defects have different forms
of existence frequently observed in carbon nanomaterials.

One  of  the  major  forms  is  the  topological  defects,  such  as  some
pentagonal,  heptagonal,  octagonal  and  pentagon-heptagonal  defect
structures [324]. Zhang et al. [36] performed the DFT simulations on
different topological defect structures and the results showed that only
specific defects, such as octagonal and pentagonal rings, can effectively
enhance  the  ORR  performance.  Cao  et  al.  [325]  reported  a  universal
defect-engineering method by the vaporization of NaCl to modify the
zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) at the elevated temperature for
the defect-rich Z8&NaCl1:1-950 catalyst (Fig. 11a). This catalyst shows a
higher half-wave potential of 0.85 V (Fig. 11b), a smaller Tafel slope of
(cid:0) 1 (Fig. 11c), and better stability (Fig. 11d) and resistance to
64 mV dec
methanol toxicity (Fig. 11e) compared to the commercial Pt/C, which
should be ascribed to the abundant sp3-hybridized defects induced by
volatile halide salts. Comparing the free-energy changes in Fig. 11f-i, it
can be found that the introduction of pentagonal or heptagonal carbon
defects can effectively enhance the ORR performance compared to the
doping of pyridinic-N.

The vacancy defect or hole is also a kind of familiar inherent defect.
The exposure of defective sites makes it easier to immobilize or func-
tionalize foreign atoms, further optimizing the electrocatalytic behavior
[326]. Zhao et al. [327] successfully synthesized a porous carbon ma-
terial by the carbonization of Zn-MOF template at 950
C to make the
removal of Zn atoms. The catalyst, free of any metal and heteroatom
doping, exhibits excellent electrocatalytic activity, resistance to meth-
anol  poisoning  and  long-term  durability.  DFT  calculations  confirmed
that the vacancy defects and porous structures were responsible for the
high ORR activity.

◦

In addition, edge defects are considered to be another inherent defect
in carbon nanomaterials. Many studies suggest that the abundant edge
defects have higher ORR activity than the basal carbon atoms due to the
electronic structure of the edges similar to the doping sites [328]. Shen
et al. [124] devoted a detailed study of ORR electrocatalysis to the edge
defects by depositing an air-saturated electrolyte solution droplet either
on the edge or on the basal plane of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite
(HOPG). It can be found that the edge carbon atoms of HOPG show more
excellent ORR performance than the basal-plane ones. Meanwhile, DFT
calculations  illustrate  that  the  excellent  ORR  performance  is  mainly
attributed  to  the  delocalized  charge  distribution  on  the  edge  carbon
atoms. Jiang et al. [329] also proposed a strategy to exploit edge defects
for  the  development  of  ORR  catalysts.  A  N-doped  carbon  nanosheets
(cid:0) 1 and rich edge
(NCNs) catalyst with a specific surface area of 1793 m2 g
defects has been successfully synthesized by the simple pyrolysis of citric
acid and NH4Cl, showing an excellent ORR activity. DFT calculations
indicate that the carbon atoms located at the armchair edge play a role
in promoting ORR activity. That is, the excellent ORR performance of
this NCNs catalyst is mainly attributed to its abundant edge defects.

5. Applications in polymer electrolyte fuel cells

As  a  kind  of  clean  and  efficient  energy  conversion  devices,  both
PEMFCs and AEMFCs have been considered as a key part of building a
renewable  energy  structure  for  future  society,  due  to  their  high  con-
version efficiency, high power density and low pollution. According to
the different transfer substances, polymer electrolyte fuel cells can be
classified  as  protonic  and  anionic.  Among  them,  the  PEMFCs  mainly
include  H2-Air  (O2)  PEMFCs,  direct  methanol  fuel  cells  (DMFCs)  and
high  temperature HT-PEMFCs.  The  most  typical  AEMFCs  are  alkaline
polymer  electrolyte  fuel  cells  (APEFCs).  However,  both  PEMFCs  and
AEMFCs still consume massive Pt because of the sluggish ORR kinetics.
Luckily,  some  low-Pt  and  non-noble  carbon-based  catalysts  by
templates-induced  advanced  carbons  as  supports  and  catalysts

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110119

Y. Chen et al.

Fig. 11. (a) Schematic diagram of the defect-rich Z8&NaCl1:1-950 catalyst. (b) ORR polarization curves at 1600 rpm and (c) the corresponding Tafel plots and slopes
for the three catalysts. (d) Z8&NaCl1:1-950 catalyst for ADT experiments. (e) Methanol tolerance test of Z8&NaCl1:1-950 and commercial Pt/C catalysts. free energy
diagrams of (f) graphene, (g) pyridinic-N, (h) pentagonal defective carbon and (i) heptagonal defective carbon for ORR. Reprinted from Ref. [325] with permission
from the Elsevier.

respectively have shown superior catalytic performance than the com-
mercial Pt-based catalysts in RDE tests. It need devote enough endeavor
into  the  applications  of  these  high-performance  low/non-Pt  carbon-
based catalysts in both PEMFCs and AEMFCs.

5.1. Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs)

5.1.1. H2-air (O2) PEMFCs

Pt-based catalysts have been used as the ideal ORR electrocatalysts in
H2-Air (O2) PEMFCs. Therefore, it will be the sustained goal of reducing
Pt usage while keeping the high-performance of Pt-based catalysts. It is
self-evident that Pt-SACs will have the highest Pt utilization. However,
such Pt-SACs could not perform well when being applied in the cathodes
of PEMFCs. For instance, Liu et al. [330] reported a maximum power
(cid:0) 2.  And,  more  researchers  have  devoted
density  of  only  200  mW  cm
themselves to the Pt [60] and PtM alloy catalysts mainly including PtPd
[331], PtNi [332], PtCo [333,334], PtAg [335], PtCu [336,337], PtFe
[338,339], and so on. For example, by the 20 nm silica bead as a hard
template,  Kwon  et  al.  [56]  successfully  synthesized  a  Fe-Nx  doped
porous carbon (DPC) support with high specific surface area of 740 m2
(cid:0) 1, well-defined porous structure, and proper N-doping of ~4.9 at%.
g
The single fuel cell with Pt/DPC as a cathode catalyst exhibited higher
power  density  and  electrochemical  stability  compared  with  the  con-
ventional Pt/C,  which  should be due to the  particular interaction  be-
tween  Pt  and  the  template-induced  DPC  support.  To  minimize  the  Pt
usage,  Choi  et  al.  [339]  successfully  fabricated  the  carbonized  block

copolymer (cBCP) template as support of carbon shell encapsulating the
PtFe nanoparticle and the as-prepared cBCP-PtFe catalyst possessed an
ultralow Pt loading of 1 wt%. Further as a cathodic catalyst, the single
(cid:0) 2. After
cell showed the highest initial power density of 960 mW cm
30000 cycles of single cell tests, it can provide a maintainable power
(cid:0) 1  at 0.9  V.
density of 905 mW cm
Overall, performances of single cells by applying the template-induced
low-Pt  catalysts  in  the  cathodes  of  the  H2-Air  (O2)  PEMFCs  are  sum-
marized in Table 1.

(cid:0) 2  and mass activity  of 0.81 A mgPt

In  the  prior  studies,  the  performances  of  non-noble  carbon-based
catalysts were hardly comparable to that of Pt/C catalyst. Fortunately in
recent years, the template methods have made the PEMFCs performance
of  non-noble M-N-C  catalysts a  great  breakthrough, even  greatly nar-
rowed the gap with Pt/C. Wang et al. [343] reported a FeNx/C catalyst
with a high half-wave potential of up to 0.82 V in 0.1 M H2SO4 solution
by  high-temperature  treatment  of  carbon  black  supported  poly
(m-phenylenediamine)  and  FeCl3  precursors.  The  H2-O2  protonic  sin-
gle cell with such FeNx/C as  cathode catalyst reached to a maximum
(cid:0) 2. Wu
power density of 350 mW cm
et  al.  [344]  prepared  a  porous  Fe-N-C  catalyst  with  novel
three-dimensional structures using ZnCl2 salts and SiO2 microspheres as
composite templates. This novel design of template method can improve
the density and utilization of well-exposed active sites, which greatly
enhance the ORR catalytic activity with a half-wave potential of 0.785 V
under  acidic  condition.  When  this  Fe-N-C  catalyst  is  applied  in  the
(cid:0) 2  can  be
PEMFCs  cathode,  a  maximal  power  density  of  480  mW  cm

(cid:0) 2 at the catalyst loading of 4 mg cm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110120

Y. Chen et al.

Table 1
Performances of template-induced low-Pt ORR catalysts applied in the H2-Air (O2) PEMFCs.

Catalysts

Catalyst loading (mgPt cm

(cid:0) 2)

Back pressure (MPa)

Operation temperature (

◦

C)

Peak powder density (W cm

(cid:0) 2)

Pt3Mn intermetallic/C
Pt-Fe-N-C
Pt5/FeNC
cBCP-PtFe
PtCu3@PWOx/XC-72
PtCu/CNT
PtNi/C
O-Pt3Co NWs

0.15
0.015
0.18
0.01
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.05

H2-O2/0.2
H2-O2/0.1
H2-O2/0.2
H2-O2/0.15
H2-air/0.15
H2-O2/0.2
H2-air/0.12
H2-O2/0.18

65
80
80
80
80
60
80
70

0.58
1.08
0.84
0.96
0.218
0.452
0.936
1.22

Ref.

[340]
[341]
[338]
[339]
[342]
[337]
[332]
[334]

(cid:0) 2. Co-N-C catalysts are
achieved at an ultra-low loading of 0.5 mg cm
also the promising alternatives for Pt/C, although the corresponding fuel
cell  performances  are  still  relatively  poor  [345].  However,  such
Co-based carbon catalysts have the advantage of superior stability than
Fe-N-C catalysts [346]. He et al. [347] successfully developed a Co-N-C
catalyst with core-shell structure via a surfactant-assisted ZIF-8 nano-
crystals template. The new strategy of surfactant-assisted confinement
could  well  create  the  core-shell  structure  and  effectively  increase  the
number of active sites. Under acidic condition, this Co-N-C catalyst was
(cid:0) 2  and encouraging dura-
able to reach a power density of 0.87 W cm
bility in a H2-O2 protonic fuel cell. Currently, most of the studies on the
M-N-C catalysts have focused on Fe-N-C and Co-N-C materials. Besides,
Cu-N-C [348,349], Mn-N-C [350], Cr-N-C [351] and Ni-N-C [352] also
exhibit some ORR catalytic activity, but their catalytic activities are still
somehow different compared with Fe-N-C and Co-N-C.

In  addition,  dual  transition  metals  and  nitrogen  co-doped  carbon
(M1-M2-N-C)  catalysts  have  also  attracted  a  lot  of  attention  from  re-
searchers in recent years. It was shown that M1-M2-N-C catalysts would
have better ORR catalytic activity, mainly due to the formation of dual
active sites for catalytic ORR. The dual active sites can elongate the bond
length of O-O bonds and promote the breakage of O-O bonds, which can
accelerate the ORR reaction process and enhance the catalytic activity of
the catalysts [353]. Wang et al. [354] reported a host-guest design to
construct  a  Fe-Co  dual  sites  embedded  on  N-doped  porous  carbon
catalyst (Fig. 12a), based on the control over bonding between Co nodes
(host) and adsorbed Fe ions (guest) within the confined space of MOF
template. The hollow (Fe,Co)-N-C catalyst exhibited very good catalytic
activity with a half-wave potential of up to 0.863 V for ORR under acidic
condition. Finally, the PEMFCs tests revealed that this cathode catalyst
(cid:0) 2  at back
exhibited maximum power densities of 0.85 and 0.98 W cm
pressures of 0.1 and 0.2 MP under H2-O2 condition (Fig. 12b) and a peak
(cid:0) 2  in a H2/air fuel cell (Fig. 12c), respec-
power density >505 mW cm
tively.  DFT  calculations  confirm  that  the  Fe-Co  dual  sites  should  be
favored for activation of O-O, crucial for highly-effective ORR process. A
novel ORR catalyst with Zn-Co bimetallic sites on a N-containing carbon
support  (Zn/Co-N-C)  was  constructed  by  Lu  et  al.  [355]  through  a
competitive complexation strategy of using ZnCl2 and cobalt acetate as
the metal sources and chitosan as the C and N precursors. The catalyst
exhibited  good  ORR  catalytic  activity  with  a  half-wave  potential  of
0.796 V in acidic condition and a maximum power density of 705 mW
cm

(cid:0) 2 in a H2-O2 fuel cell test.
Although metal-free carbon catalysts have the relatively unsatisfac-
tory  performance  compared  with  M-N-C,  they  have  attracted  great
attention due to their low cost. Through one-step pyrolysis of the freeze-
dried glucose, trithiocyanuric acid and phosphoric acid templates, Long
et al. [357] successfully synthesized a N,P,S triatomically doped holey
carbon (NPS-HC), with a high heteroatoms content of 7.57 at%, large
(cid:0) 1  and abundant holes and edges.
specific surface area of 1656.0 m2  g
Furthermore, the NPS-HC was used as the cathode catalyst in PEMFCs,
an open circuit voltage of 0.865 V and a peak current density of 275.1
(cid:0) 2  were  achieved.  The  performances  of  the  template-induced
mW  cm
non-precious  carbon-based  ORR  catalysts  in  the  H2-Air  (O2)  PEMFCs
are summarized in Table 2.

5.1.2. Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs)

Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) are one of the promising PEMFCs,
with  liquid  methanol  as  anode  fuel  which  is  convenient  to  store  and
transport compared to hydrogen [363]. As well, the practical cathode
catalysts  for  DMFCs  are  also  the  Pt-based  catalysts  [364].  Therefore,
reducing the Pt usage while ensuring catalytic efficiency and developing
the new non-noble catalysts will be the ongoing challenges. Typically,
the DMFCs performances of the template-induced low-Pt (Table 3) and
non-noble (Table 4) carbon-based ORR catalysts are summarized. Wang
et al. [365] declared the successful synthesis of an ordered Pt nanotube
arrays on gas diffusion layer via combining sacrificial template method
and in-situ galvanic replacement. The resulted catalyst possesses a high
(cid:0) 1. Serving it as the
electrochemical specific surface area of 77.48 m2 g
cathode in DMFC with the ultra-low Pt loading of approximately 1/7
(cid:0) 2) of the conventional MEA, the peak power density of the
(0.12 mg cm
cell is comparable with that of the conventional one. Lee et al. [366]
successfully prepared a carbon-encapsulated Pt catalyst by carboniza-
tion of Pt-aniline complex-coated carbon nanofibers. The catalyst pos-
sesses high methanol tolerance due to a special structure, with carbon
shell  effective  in  preventing  methanol  from  passing  the  Pt  core  and
allowed  O2  to  permeate  into  the  Pt  core  to  participate  in  ORR.  As  a
result,  in  a  single  DMFC,  the  catalyst  exhibits  high  performance  and
stability.

In  recent  years,  the  development  of  non-noble  carbon-based  ORR
catalysts for DMFCs has been growing rapidly [371]. Martinaiou et al.
[372] synthesized a Fe-N-C graphene-sheet by heat-treating the mixture
powder  of  iron  acetate,  dicyandiamide  and  polyaniline  precursors.
Furthermore, there is a successful operation of this Fe-N-C catalyst in
DMFC. Meanwhile, the researchers investigated the effect of different
temperatures,  and  the  results  showed  that  the  cell  performance
improved  with  increasing  temperature.  In  addition,  metal-free  car-
bon-based ORR catalysts were also studied [373]. Liu et al. [374] re-
ported  a  scalable  synthesis  of  N-doped  hierarchical  porous  carbon
nanosheets  (N-HPCNSs)  by  high-temperature  pyrolyzing  the  biomass
water lettuces. This novel N-HPCNS with high-density of various active
sites  has  been  successfully  implemented  as  a  highly  efficient  cathode
catalyst in DMFC. By a CTAB-induced soft-template method, Shu et al.
[375] synthesized N-doped yolk-shelled carbon spheres (N-YS-CS) with
a  controllable  mesoporous  surface  and  large  specific  surface  area.
Finally, DMFCs with the N-YS-CS cathode could deliver a high power
(cid:0) 2 at 25
density of 55 and 142 mW cm

C, respectively.

C and 60

◦

◦

5.1.3. High-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells (HT-
PEMFCs)

◦

Generally,  PEMFCs  operates  below  80

C  due  to  the  nature  of
membrane  itself,  which  results  in  poor  catalyst  tolerance  to  impurity
gases such as CO and significantly reduced thermal efficiency [378]. To
solve  the  above  problems,  increasing  the  operating  temperature  of
PEMFCs is an effective way. The high temperature not only enhances the
ORR kinetic, but also reduces the adsorption of impurity molecules such
as CO and SO2 on the surface of catalyst, leading to a significant increase
in  the  tolerance  of  the  electrode  to  impurity  molecules  [379].  High
temperature  proton  exchange  membrane  fuel  cells  (HT-PEMFCs)  can
make  a  successful  operation  at  temperatures  between  140–250
C.

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110121

Y. Chen et al.

Fig. 12. (a) Surface structure and preparation flow chart of (Fe-Co)-N-C catalyst. (b) Polarization image of H2-Air (O2) fuel cell. (c) H2-air fuel cell polarization
(cid:0) 2 Pt/C. Reprinted from Ref. [354] with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d)
diagram. Cathode: 0.77 mg cm
Schematic  diagram  of  electrocatalysis  process  and  AEMFC  performance  of  CB@c-pFePc  catalyst  prepared  by  one-pot  microwave  conjugation.  Reprinted  from
Ref. [356] with permission from the American Chemical Society.

(cid:0) 2 of (Fe,Co)/N-C. Anode: 0.1 mg Pt cm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110122

Y. Chen et al.

Table 2
Performances  of  template-induced  non-noble  carbon-based  ORR  catalysts
applied in the H2-Air (O2) PEMFCs.

Catalysts

Catalyst
loading
(mg cm

(cid:0) 2)

Back
pressure
(MPa)

Operation
temperature
◦
(

C)

(Fe,Co)/N-

0.77

C

Zn/Co-N-C
ip-FeNCS-
850

ma-Co-NC
ma-Fe-NC
20Mn-NC-
second

NPC-4-

1100-Zn

NPS-

1&10&2

NSHPC
GNR@CNT

0.255
4

4
4
4

4

4

2.5
0.25/0.5

0.2

0.2
0.2

0.1
0.1
0.1

20 psig

0.2

0.2
0.25

80

80
80

80
80
80

80

80

80
80

Peak
powder
density
(mW
(cid:0) 2)
cm

980

760
413

723
776
460

579

Ref.

[354]

[355]
[358]

[345]
[345]
[359]

[360]

275.1

[357]

276.3
520/235

[361]
[362]

Phosphoric acid (PA) is the most advanced material for electrolyte and
MEA  preparation  under  high  temperature  conditions.  By  developing
new  PA-doped  MEA,  researchers  have  further  improved  the  proton
transfer  performance  [380].  For  the  cathodic  catalyst  materials  in
HT-PEMFCs, nowadays, it is still focus on the Pt-based catalysts along
with the development of high-performance non-noble catalysts. Li et al.
[381]  successfully  synthesized  a  Cu  doped  PtFe  ordered  intermetallic
alloy  embedded  into  N-doped  carbon  (Cu-PtFe/NC)  using  tetraethyl
orthosilicate as a template by stepwise high-temperature pyrolysis and
template removal operations. The corresponding HT-PEMFC exhibited a
(cid:0) 2  with the low-Pt loading of 0.5
peak power density of 793.5 mW cm
◦
mgPt  cm
C using a PA-doped polybenzimidazole (PBI) mem-
brane.  Cheng  et  al.  [382]  prepared  an  Fe  single  atoms  on  graphene
(FeSA-G) by high-temperature pyrolysis of graphene as a template and
dicyandiamide as a N source. The catalyst exhibits ORR activity com-
parable to and stability well beyond commercial Pt/C catalyst in acidic
media. In HT-PEMFCs tests, this FeSA-G catalyst exhibited a higher peak
(cid:0) 2  at  230
power  density  of 325  mW cm
C better  than that (313 mW
(cid:0) 2) of commercial Pt/C catalyst. Razmjooei et al. [383] also synthe-
cm
sized a highly micro/meso-porous Fe-N-C catalyst via a simple pyrolysis
of  ethylenediaminetetraacetic  acid  (EDTA)-Fe  complexes  and  silica

(cid:0) 2  at 160

◦

template.  After  testing  the  optimal  single-atom  Fe  catalyst  in
(cid:0) 2
HT-PEMFC, it was found a high peak power density of 260 mW cm
which should be likely correlated with the highly porous structure, the
efficient  active  sites,  and  the  immunity  to  phosphate  adsorption  of
Fe-N-C catalysts. Table 5 summarized the performances of the different
template-induced low-Pt and non-noble carbon-based ORR catalysts in
HT-PEMFCs.

5.2. Anion exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs)

Alkaline exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs) are a new class of
polymer  electrolyte  fuel  cells,  mainly  relying  on  the  rapid  anionic
transport of hydroxide ion. In comparison with the PEMFCs, the greatest
merit of AEMFCs is  the opportunity to theoretically enable the appli-
cation  of  completely  non-noble  catalysts.  Nowadays,  the  templates-
induced  non-noble  carbon  catalysts  based  on  M-N-C  (M  = Fe
[388–390], Co [391], Mn [392]) and polyatomic co-doping [393], are
considered  as  the  more  suitable  cathode  ORR  catalysts  for  APEFCs
applications.

Among  them,  Fe-N-C  catalysts  have  better  catalytic  activity  and
stability  under  alkaline  conditions.  Ren  et  al.  [388]  successfully  syn-
thesized  an  Fe-N-C  catalyst  with  the  Fe-containing  N-doped  carbon
structures by polymerization and carbonization of adenosine biomole-
cule template, FeCl3  and ZnCl2. Where, ZnCl2  as a pore-forming agent
can  be  volatilized  at  high  temperature  to  create  the  abundant  pores
which can make the large specific surface area for the uniform disper-
sion of Fe on carbon support. At a moderate Fe-N-C catalyst loading of 2
(cid:0) 2  in  cathode,  the  H2-O2  APEFC  exhibited  a  high  peak  power
mg  cm
(cid:0) 2,  which  is  attributed  to  the
density  of  greater  than  450  mW  cm
high-dense Fe-N4 active sites and good electronic conductivity. Through
a one-pot microwave conjugation, Zhang et al. [356] designed a poly-
merized iron-phthalocyanine (pFePc) coated  on the surface  of carbon
black  (CB)  template.  As  shown  in  Fig.  12d,  the  high-performance
CB@pFePc catalyst has well-defined Fe-N4  structure, making a power
(cid:0) 2  in APEFC. Subsequently, Adabi et  al. [389]
density  of 452 mW cm
investigated  a  commercial  Fe-N-C  catalyst  prepared  by  the  silica
hard-template.  The  AEMFC  with  such  Fe-N-C  cathode  showed  a
(cid:0) 2  in H2-O2  condition
ultra-high power density of exceeding 2 mW cm
and good voltage durability for more than 150 h. With H2-air reacting
(cid:0) 2.  The  performances  of
gases,  it  can  be  also  over  1  W  cm
template-induced non-noble carbon-based ORR catalysts in APEFCs are
shown in Table 6.

Table 3
Performances of template-induced low-Pt ORR catalysts applied in the DMFCs.

Cathode
catalysts

Cathode loading (mgPt
cm

(cid:0) 2)

Anode catalysts/Loading (mg
cm

(cid:0) 2)

Operation Temperature
◦
(

C)

Peak powder density (mW
cm

(cid:0) 2)

Methanol concentration
(M)

Ref.

Pt/ZnO/GDL
Pt@CS/

CNF900

PtFe/C
Pt1Pd4.8/N-

CNF

0.12
0.3

1
1.2

Pt-g-C3N4-CNT
Pt/FeNC

1
0.08

Pt-Ru/2
Pt-Ru/2

Pt-Ru/2
Pt-Ru/3

Pt-Ru/0.5
Pt-Ru/2

25
70

90
60

60
100

15.1
123

120
110

2.5
33

2
1

1
1

1
5

Table 4
Performances of template-induced non-noble carbon catalysts applied in the DMFCs.
(cid:0) 2)

Anode catalysts/Loading (mg cm

Cathode loading (mg cm

Cathode Catalysts

(cid:0) 2)

Operation Temperature (

◦

C)

Peak powder density (mW cm

(cid:0) 2)

Fe-N-C (S)
Co/N/C aerogels
Fe-ABZIM (THT)
Fe/Co-N-C
N-HPCNSs
N-YS-CS

1.7
10
3
5
5
10

Pt-Ru/1.5
Pt-Ru/4
Pt-Ru/1
Pt-Ru/4
Pt-Ir/2
Pt-Ru/6

80
60
90
80
25
60

13
53
48
135
38.15
142

[365]
[366]

[367]
[368]

[369]
[370]

Ref.

[372]
[376]
[371]
[377]
[374]
[375]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110123

Y. Chen et al.

Table 5
Performances of template-induced low-Pt and non-noble carbon-based catalysts applied in the HT-PEMFCs. Cathode loading: mgPt cm
for non-noble catalysts.

(cid:0) 2 for low-Pt catalysts; mg cm

(cid:0) 2

Cathode Catalysts

Cathode loading

Anode catalysts/Loading (mg cm

(cid:0) 2)

◦
Operation Temperature (

C)

Peak powder density (mW cm

(cid:0) 2)

Membranes

Ref.

Cu-PtFe/NC
PtFe/NC
c/PyPBI/Pt
Cu-Pt/NC
PtCo@PFN
FeCu/N-CNTs
Fe SA-G
LEDFe5-NH3
BP-FeNC

0.5
0.5
0.45
0.5
0.55
4
3
3.8
7.8

Pt-C/0.5
Pt-C/0.5
Pt-C/0.5
Pt-C/0.5
Pt-C/0.6
Pt-C/1
Pt-C/1
Pt-C/1
Pt-C/1.6

160/200
160
120
160
160
230
230
150
160

793.5/882.3
676.4
342
578.7
650
302
325
260
185

PA/PBI
PA/PBI
PA/PBI
PA/PBI
PA/PBI
PA/PBI
PA/PBI/SiO2
PA/PBI
PA/PBI

[381]
[381]
[384]
[381]
[385]
[386]
[382]
[383]
[387]

6. Summary, challenges and perspectives

6.2. Challenges and perspectives

6.1. Summary

The  development  of  low-cost  and  high-performance  low/non-Pt
carbon-based catalysts is essential to promote the large-scale commer-
cialization of both PEMFCs and AEMFCs. Carbon black supported Pt and
its alloys are still the-state-of-the-art commercial ORR electrocatalysts.
Unfortunately, the Pt source is scarce. Also, the currently used carbon
black is susceptible to corrosion, itself inactive and weakly binding with
Pt.  Templates-induced  advanced  carbons  have  various  unique  advan-
tages, for examples, as low-Pt catalyst supports to effectively control the
composition, size and shape as well as directly as the non-noble carbon
catalysts  to  develop  the  abundant,  low-cost  and  high-performance
transition  metal-nitrogen-carbons,  metal-free  carbons  and  defective
carbons. This review summarizes the advanced carbons synthesized by
the various template methods, including hard-template, soft-template,
self-template and combined-template. Further, such advanced carbons
have been systematically evaluated as low-Pt catalyst supports and non-
noble  carbon  catalysts.  Overall,  this  paper  presents  a  comprehensive
overview  on  the  templates-induced  advanced  carbons  as  well  as  the
carbon-based  low/non-Pt  catalysts  and  their  applications  in  the  cath-
odes of both PEMFCs and AEMFCs, including the corresponding prep-
aration  methodologies,  functional  properties,  growth  mechanisms,
electrocatalytic  fundamentals  and  principles,  as  well  as  effects  of  the
templates on catalysts performance and the low/non-Pt catalysts on the
performances of both PEMFCs and AEMFCs.

Table 6
Performances  of  template-induced  non-noble  carbon-based  ORR  catalysts
applied in the AEMFCs.

Catalysts

Catalyst
loading
(mg cm

(cid:0) 2)

Back
pressure
(MPa)

Operation
temperature
◦
(

C)

Fe/N/C
Fe-N-C
pFePc
Fe-CoPc/

C
FeNx-

CNTs
N-C-CoOx
CoPPY/C
CoMn/
pNGr
(2:1)
N-CNT
FU
GU
MH-

DCNTs

2
1
0.15
0.3

4

2.4
2
2

5
1
1
0.34

0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2

0.2

0.2
0.2
0.2

0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3

60
80
60
80

60

65
60
50

50
60
60
85

Peak
powder
density (W
(cid:0) 2)
cm

0.473
2.05
0.452
1.26

Ref.

[388]
[389]
[356]
[393]

1.15

[390]

1.05
0.04
0.035

0.037
0.703
0.403
0.25

[391]
[394]
[392]

[395]
[396]
[396]
[397]

The importance of template-induced advanced carbons as supports
for low-Pt carbon-based catalyst and as non-noble carbon catalysts in
fuel cells is perfectly evident. Templates-method has numerous advan-
tages  for  developing  high-performance  low/non-Pt  catalysts  in  regu-
lating the morphology/component/size, pore structure, specific surface
area,  electronic/ionic
conductivity,  mechanical/thermal/electro-
chemical  stability,  and  so  on.  In  recent  years,  templates-induced
advanced  carbons  for  low/non-Pt  carbon-based  catalysts  to  further
apply  in  PEMFCs  and  AEMFCs  has  been  rapidly  developed,  however,
there are still many challenges in this research field. (1) In the final step
of templates-method, the used hard/soft-templates need to be removed.
It  usually  requires  environmentally  unfriendly  acid/base  and  tedious
procedures. Moreover, such post-processing can inevitably destroy the
catalyst structure. (2) Templates-method is susceptible to the influences
of temperature, pH, precursor concentration, etc. Thus, it is generally
not easy to accurately control the structure of product. (3) Although the
multi-templates method can compensate for the shortcomings of single
template, it needs to strictly control the interactions between different
templates. To solve these issues, many strategies and possible research
directions are also proposed in this review, as follows:

(1)  Developing  the  eco-friendly  and  energy-efficient  templates-
method. As is well-known, the removal of templates requires the
acid/base etching. This processing procedure is complicated and
also easy to damage the sample structure. Therefore, it may be
more practical to simplify the post-processing, as well as intro-
duce  the  appropriate  template  materials  such  as  the  tractable
salts (NaCl, ZnCl2) and ice hard-templates, new ionic liquids soft-
templates,  versatile  self-templates,  and  multifunctional  com-
bined-templates.

(2)  Recommending the self-templates method. On the one hand, self-
templates do not need to be removed. On the other hand, versatile
self-templates  can  be  suitable  for  the  sustainable  large-scale
production of advanced carbons and carbon-based catalysts.
(3)  Exploring the advantages of single/combined-templates to adjust
the precise structure of advanced carbons for highly-dense active
sites, enhanced the metal-support interactions, and fast electron/
ion/gas transport and design the high-performance low/non-Pt
ORR catalysts.

(4)  Employing  the  advanced  characterization  techniques.  High-
resolution  and  ex-situ/in-situ/operando  physical  and  electro-
chemical techniques can be considered for in-depth analysis of
the  catalyst  structure,  morphology,  and  electrocatalytic  perfor-
mance, such as high-angle annular dark field special aberration
corrected  scanning  transmission  electron  microscope  (HAADF-
AC-STEM),  X-ray  absorption  fine  structure  (XAFS),  M ̈ossbauer,
Fourier  transform  infrared  (FTIR),  Raman,  electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectroscopy, etc.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110124

Y. Chen et al.

(5) Performing the DFT-based machine learning and artificial intel-
ligence  to  explore  the  interactions  between  different  templates
and the electrocatalytic mechanisms of novel catalysts.

(6) Building the bridge between catalyst materials and fuel cell de-
vices to make the high-performance ORR electrocatalysts in RDE
for the efficient expression in polymer electrolyte fuel cells.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Yizhe Chen: Methodology, Data curation, Investigation, Writing –
original  draft.  Shiming  Zhang:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,
Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Supervision,  Funding  acquisition.  Joey
Chung-Yen Jung: Formal analysis. Jiujun Zhang: Writing – review &
editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

The data that has been used is confidential.

Acknowledgements

This work was sponsored by the National Natural Science Founda-
tion  of  China  (Grant  No.  22272105),  Natural  Science  Foundation  of
Shanghai (Grant No. 23ZR1423900) and Shanghai Rising-Star Program
(18QB1404400).

References

[1] Zheng Y, Chen Z, Zhang J. Solid oxide electrolysis of H2O and CO2  to produce
hydrogen and low-carbon fuels. Electrochem Energy Rev 2021;4:508–17.
[2] Farias CBB, Barreiros RCS, da Silva MF, Casazza AA, Converti A, Sarubbo LA. Use

of hydrogen as fuel: a trend of the 21st century. Energies 2022;15:311.

[3] Wu H, Feng C, Zhang L, Zhang J, Wilkinson DP. Non-noble metal electrocatalysts

for the hydrogen evolution reaction in water electrolysis. Electrochem Energy
Rev 2021;4:473–507.

[4] Sarkodie SA, Ahmed MY, Owusu PA. Ambient air pollution and meteorological

factors escalate electricity consumption. Sci Total Environ 2021;795:148841.
[5] Mohideen MM, Liu Y, Ramakrishna S. Recent progress of carbon dots and carbon

nanotubes applied in oxygen reduction reaction of fuel cell for transportation.
Appl Energy 2020;257:114027.

[6] Banham D, Ye S. Current status and future development of catalyst materials and

catalyst layers for proton exchange membrane fuel cells: an industrial
perspective. ACS Energy Lett 2017;2:629–38.

[7] Guo Y, Pan F, Chen W, Ding Z, Yang D, Li B, et al. The controllable design of

catalyst inks to enhance PEMFC performance: a review. Electrochem Energy Rev
2021;4:67–100.

[8] Ge C, Li Q, Hu M, Wang G, Xiao L, Lu J, et al. Application of rock-salt-type Co–Mn
oxides for alkaline polymer electrolyte fuel cells. J Power Sources 2022;520:
230868.

[9] Xue J, Zhang J, Liu X, Huang T, Jiang H, Yin Y, et al. Toward alkaline-stable

anion exchange membranes in fuel cells: cycloaliphatic quaternary ammonium-
based anion conductors. Electrochem Energy Rev 2022;5:348–400.

[10] Baroutaji A, Arjunan A, Robinson J, Wilberforce T, Abdelkareem MA, Olabi AG.

PEMFC poly-generation systems: developments, merits, and challenges.
Sustainability 2021;13:11696.

[11] Liu J, Jiao M, Mei B, Tong Y, Li Y, Ruan M, et al. Carbon-supported divacancy-
anchored platinum single-atom electrocatalysts with superhigh Pt utilization for
the oxygen reduction reaction. Angew Chem Int Ed 2019;58:1163–7.

[12] Kaewsai D, Hunsom M. Comparative study of the ORR activity and stability of Pt
and PtM (M = Ni, Co, Cr, Pd) supported on polyaniline/carbon nanotubes in a
PEM fuel cell. Nanomaterials 2018;8:299.

[13] Zhang S, Chen M, Zhao X, Cai J, Yan W, Yen JC, et al. Advanced noncarbon

materials as catalyst supports and non-noble electrocatalysts for fuel cells and
metal–air batteries. Electrochem Energy Rev 2021;4:336–81.

[14] Liu M, Xu Q, Miao Q, Yang S, Wu P, Liu G, et al. Atomic Co–N4  and Co

nanoparticles confined in COF@ZIF-67 derived core–shell carbon frameworks:
bifunctional non-precious metal catalysts toward the ORR and HER. J Mater
Chem A 2022;10:228–33.

[15] Kiani M, Tian XQ, Zhang W. Non-precious metal electrocatalysts design for

oxygen reduction reaction in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells: recent

advances, challenges and future perspectives. Coord Chem Rev 2021;441:
213954.

[16] Chen Y, Xu P, Wang R, Pan X. Homogeneously supported PtGa NPs on nitrogen-
doped mesoporous carbon as an enhanced ORR electro-catalyst. Mater Lett 2021;
286:129266.

[17] Zhang L, Kim J, Dy E, Ban S, Tsay K-c, Kawai H, et al. Effect of template size on

the synthesis of mesoporous carbon spheres and their supported Fe-based ORR
electrocatalysts. Electrochim Acta 2013;108:814–9.

[18] Ferrero GA, Fuertes AB, Sevilla M, Titirici M-M. Efficient metal-free N-doped

mesoporous carbon catalysts for ORR by a template-free approach. Carbon 2016;
106:179–87.

[19] Schwanke AJ, Gomes JF, Bernardo-Gusm ̃ao K, Pergher S. Combining soft- and
hard-templating approaches in MWW-type zeolites. Molecules 2020;25:3335.

[20] Wroblowa HS, Yen Chi P, Razumney G. Electroreduction of oxygen: a new
mechanistic criterion. J Electroanal Chem Interfacial Electrochem 1976;69:
195–201.

[21] Kim HW, Bukas VJ, Park H, Park S, Diederichsen KM, Lim J, et al. Mechanisms of

two-electron and four-electron electrochemical oxygen reduction reactions at
nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide. ACS Catal 2020;10:852–63.
[22] Lv B, Li X, Guo K, Ma J, Wang Y, Lei H, et al. Controlling oxygen reduction

selectivity through steric effects: electrocatalytic two-electron and four-electron
oxygen reduction with cobalt porphyrin atropisomers. Angew Chem Int Ed 2021;
60:12742–6.

[23] He F, Zheng Y, Fan H, Ma D, Chen Q, Wei T, et al. Oxidase-Inspired Selective 2e/

4e Reduction of Oxygen on Electron-Deficient Cu. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
2020;12:4833–42.

[24] Chai G-L, Boero M, Hou Z, Terakura K, Cheng W. Indirect four-electron oxygen

reduction reaction on carbon materials catalysts in acidic solutions. ACS Catal
2017;7:7908–16.

[25] Xiao Y, Hong J, Wang X, Chen T, Hyeon T, Xu W. Revealing kinetics of two-
electron oxygen reduction reaction at single-molecule level. J Am Chem Soc
2020;142:13201–9.

[26] Zhang L, Jiang S, Ma W, Zhou Z. Oxygen reduction reaction on Pt-based

electrocatalysts: four-electron vs. two-electron pathway. Chin J Catal 2022;43:
1433–43.

[27] Huang Z-F, Song J, Dou S, Li X, Wang J, Wang X. Strategies to break the scaling
relation toward enhanced oxygen electrocatalysis. Matter 2019;1:1494–518.
[28] Wang H-F, Tang C, Zhang Q. A review of precious-metal-free bifunctional oxygen
electrocatalysts: rational design and applications in Zn(cid:0) Air batteries. Adv Funct
Mater 2018;28:1803329.

[29] Zhang J, Yang HB, Zhou D, Liu B. Adsorption energy in oxygen electrocatalysis.

Chem Rev 2022;122:17028–72.

[30] Nematollahi P, Barbiellini B, Bansil A, Lamoen D, Qingying J, Mukerjee S, et al.
Identification of a robust and durable FeN4Cx catalyst for ORR in PEM fuel cells
and the role of the fifth ligand. ACS Catal 2022;12:7541–9.

[31] Pan J, Fang Q, Xia Q, Hu A, Sun F, Zhang W, et al. Dual effect of the coordination
field and sulphuric acid on the properties of a single-atom catalyst in the
electrosynthesis of H2O2. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2021;23:21338–49.

[32] Nørskov JK, Rossmeisl J, Logadottir A, Lindqvist L, Kitchin JR, Bligaard T, et al.

Origin of the overpotential for oxygen reduction at a fuel-cell cathode. J Phys
Chem B 2004;108:17886–92.

[33] Keith JA, Jacob T. Theoretical studies of potential-dependent and competing

mechanisms of the electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction on Pt(111). Angew
Chem Int Ed 2010;49:9521–5.

[34] Ramaswamy N, Tylus U, Jia Q, Mukerjee S. Activity descriptor identification for
oxygen reduction on nonprecious electrocatalysts: linking surface science to
coordination chemistry. J Am Chem Soc 2013;135:15443–9.

[35] Li Q, Noffke BW, Wang Y, Menezes B, Peters DG, Raghavachari K, et al.

Electrocatalytic oxygen activation by carbanion intermediates of nitrogen-doped
graphitic carbon. J Am Chem Soc 2014;136:3358–61.

[36] Zhang L, Xu Q, Niu J, Xia Z. Role of lattice defects in catalytic activities of
graphene clusters for fuel cells. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:16733–43.
[37] Zhang X, Li H, Yang J, Lei Y, Wang C, Wang J, et al. Recent advances in Pt-based

electrocatalysts for PEMFCs. RSC Adv 2021;11:13316–28.

[38] Huang J, Peng B, Stracensky T, Liu Z, Zhang A, Xu M, et al. 1D PtCo nanowires as
catalysts for PEMFCs with low Pt loading. Sci China Mater 2022;65:704–11.

[39] Chen Q, Chen Z, Ali A, Luo Y, Feng H, Luo Y, et al. Shell-thickness-dependent

Pd@PtNi core–shell nanosheets for efficient oxygen reduction reaction. Chem Eng
J 2022;427:131565.

[40] Fiorenza R, Spitaleri L, Gulino A, Scir`e S. Ru–Pd bimetallic catalysts supported on

CeO2-MnOX  oxides as efficient systems for H2  purification through CO
preferential oxidation. Catalysts 2018;8:203.

[41] Chen L-W, Liang H-W. Ir-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water

splitting. Catal Sci Technol 2021;11:4673–89.

[42] Matsumoto T, Komatsu T, Arai K, Yamazaki T, Kijima M, Shimizu H, et al.

Reduction of Pt usage in fuel cell electrocatalysts with carbon nanotube
electrodes. Chem Commun (Camb) 2004:840–1.

[43] Mazumder V, Chi M, More KL, Sun S. Synthesis and characterization of

multimetallic Pd/Au and Pd/Au/FePt core/shell nanoparticles. Angew Chem Int
Ed 2010;49:9368–72.

[44] Tang M, Zhang S, Chen S. Pt utilization in proton exchange membrane fuel cells:

structure impacting factors and mechanistic insights. Chem Soc Rev 2022;51:
1529–46.

[45] Stamenkovic V, Mun BS, Mayrhofer KJJ, Ross PN, Markovic NM, Rossmeisl J,

et al. Changing the activity of electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction by tuning the
surface electronic structure. Angew Chem 2006;118:2963–7.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110125

Y. Chen et al.

[46] Bu L, Zhang N, Guo S, Zhang X, Li J, Yao J, et al. Biaxially strained PtPb/Pt core/
shell nanoplate boosts oxygen reduction catalysis. Science 2016;354:1410–4.

[47] Paulus UA, Wokaun A, Scherer GG, Schmidt TJ, Stamenkovic V, Radmilovic V,
et al. Oxygen reduction on carbon-supported Pt(cid:0) Ni and Pt(cid:0) Co alloy catalysts.
J Phys Chem B 2002;106:4181–91.

[48] Stamenkovic VR, Mun BS, Arenz M, Mayrhofer KJ, Lucas CA, Wang G, et al.

Trends in electrocatalysis on extended and nanoscale Pt-bimetallic alloy surfaces.
Nat Mater 2007;6:241–7.

[49] Gao J, Liu B. Progress of electrochemical hydrogen peroxide synthesis over single

atom catalysts. ACS Mater Lett 2020;2:1008–24.

[50] Zhang J, Yang H, Liu B. Coordination engineering of single-atom catalysts for the
oxygen reduction reaction: a review. Adv Energy Mater 2021;11:2002473.
[51] Liu J, Jiao M, Lu L, Barkholtz HM, Li Y, Wang Y, et al. High performance platinum
single atom electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. Nat Commun 2017;8:
15938.

[76] Chen M, Chen Y, Yang Z, Luo J, Cai J, Jung JC-Y, et al. Synergy of staggered
stacking confinement and microporous defect fixation for high-density atomic
FeII-N4  oxygen reduction active sites. Chin J Catal 2022;43:1870–8.
[77] Zhang S, Zhang H, Liu Q, Chen S. Fe–N doped carbon nanotube/graphene

composite: facile synthesis and superior electrocatalytic activity. J Mater Chem A
2013;1:3302–8.

[78] Fu X, Jiang G, Wen G, Gao R, Li S, Li M, et al. Densely accessible Fe-Nx active sites
decorated mesoporous-carbon-spheres for oxygen reduction towards high
performance aluminum-air flow batteries. Appl Catal B 2021;293:120176.
[79] Deng D, Yu L, Chen X, Wang G, Jin L, Pan X, et al. Iron encapsulated within pod-

like carbon nanotubes for oxygen reduction reaction. Angew Chem 2013;125:
389–93.

[80] Moisala A, Nasibulin AG, Kauppinen EI. The role of metal nanoparticles in the
catalytic production of single-walled carbon nanotubes—a review. J Phys:
Condens Matter 2003;15:S3011–35.

[52] Shao Y, Liu J, Wang Y, Lin Y. Novel catalyst support materials for PEMfuelcells:

[81] Varnell JA, Tse EC, Schulz CE, Fister TT, Haasch RT, Timoshenko J, et al.

current status and future prospects. J Mater Chem 2009;19:46–59.

[53] Yu X, Ye S. Recent advances in activity and durability enhancement of Pt/C
catalytic cathode in PEMFC: Part II: degradation mechanism and durability
enhancement of carbon supported platinum catalyst. J Power Sources 2007;172:
145–54.

Identification of carbon-encapsulated iron nanoparticles as active species in non-
precious metal oxygen reduction catalysts. Nat Commun 2016;7:12582.

[82] Deng D, Yu L, Chen X, Wang G, Jin L, Pan X, et al. Iron encapsulated within pod-
like carbon nanotubes for oxygen reduction reaction. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl
2013;52:371–5.

[54] Jung WS, Lee WH, Oh H-S, Popov BN. Highly stable and ordered intermetallic

[83] Strickland K, Miner E, Jia Q, Tylus U, Ramaswamy N, Liang W, et al. Highly

PtCo alloy catalyst supported on graphitized carbon containing Co@CN for
oxygen reduction reaction. J Mater Chem A 2020;8:19833–42.

active oxygen reduction non-platinum group metal electrocatalyst without direct
metal-nitrogen coordination. Nat Commun 2015;6:7343.

[55] Jung WS, Popov BN. Hybrid cathode catalyst with synergistic effect between

[84] Deng Y, Tian X, Shen G, Gao Y, Lin C, Ling L, et al. Coupling hollow Fe3O4

carbon composite catalyst and Pt for ultra-low Pt loading in PEMFCs. Catal Today
2017;295:65–74.

nanoparticles with oxygen vacancy on mesoporous carbon as a high-efficiency
ORR electrocatalyst for Zn-air battery. J Colloid Interface Sci 2020;567:410–8.

[56] Kwon S-H, Lee S-G, Han S-B, Park K-W. Synergistically enhanced electrocatalytic
stability of Pt catalyst supported by doped porous carbon nanostructure for
oxygen reduction reaction. Electrocatalysis 2020;11:497–504.

[57] Jasinski R. A new fuel cell cathode catalyst. Nature 1964;201:1212–3.
[58] Zhu C, Shi Q, Xu BZ, Fu S, Wan G, Yang C, et al. Hierarchically porous M–N–C (M
= Co and Fe) single-atom electrocatalysts with robust MNx active moieties enable
enhanced ORR performance. Adv Energy Mater 2018;8:1801956.

[59] Liu J, Wan X, Liu S, Liu X, Zheng L, Yu R, et al. Hydrogen passivation of M–N–C
(M = Fe, Co) catalysts for storage stability and ORR activity improvements. Adv
Mater 2021;33:2103600.

[60] Zhang T, Wang F, Yang C, Han X, Liang C, Zhang Z, et al. Boosting ORR

performance by single atomic divacancy Zn–N3C–C8  sites on ultrathin N-doped
carbon nanosheets. Chem Catal 2022;2:836–52.

[61] Zhang X, Lu P, Zhang C, Cui X, Xu Y, Qu H, et al. Towards understanding ORR
activity and electron-transfer pathway of M-N/C electro-catalyst in acidic media.
J Catal 2017;356:229–36.

[62] Svane KL, Reda M, Vegge T, Hansen HA. Improving the activity of M-N4 catalysts
for the oxygen reduction reaction by electrolyte adsorption. ChemSusChem 2019;
12:5133–41.

[63] Fei H, Dong J, Feng Y, Allen CS, Wan C, Volosskiy B, et al. General synthesis and
definitive structural identification of MN4C4 single-atom catalysts with tunable
electrocatalytic activities. Nat Catal 2018;1:63–72.

[85] Li T, Li M, Zhang M, Li X, Liu K, Zhang M, et al. Immobilization of Fe3N

nanoparticles within N-doped carbon nanosheet frameworks as a high-efficiency
electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction in Zn-air batteries. Carbon 2019;
153:364–71.

[86] Zhang R, Huang K, Wang D, Hussain N, Zhang A, Wei H, et al. Ultrafine Fe/Fe3C
nanoparticles on nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon by low-temperature
synthesis for highly efficient oxygen reduction. Electrochim Acta 2019;313:
255–60.

[87] Guo J, Niu Q, Yuan Y, Maitlo I, Nie J, Ma G. Electrospun core–shell nanofibers
derived Fe–S/N doped carbon material for oxygen reduction reaction. Appl Surf
Sci 2017;416:118–23.

[88] Wang Y, Gan R, Liu H, Dirican M, Wei C, Ma C, et al. Fe3O4/Fe2O3/Fe

nanoparticles anchored on N-doped hierarchically porous carbon nanospheres as
a high-efficiency ORR electrocatalyst for rechargeable Zn–air batteries. J Mater
Chem A 2021;9:2764–74.

[89] Liu X, Liu H, Chen C, Zou L, Li Y, Zhang Q, et al. Fe2N nanoparticles boosting
FeNx moieties for highly efficient oxygen reduction reaction in Fe-N-C porous
catalyst. Nano Res 2019;12:1651–7.

[90] Yabu H, Nakamura K, Matsuo Y, Umejima Y, Matsuyama H, Nakamura J, et al.

Pyrolysis-free oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) electrocatalysts composed of
unimolecular layer metal azaphthalocyanines adsorbed onto carbon materials.
ACS Appl Energy Mater 2021;4:14380–9.

[64] Zitolo A, Ranjbar-Sahraie N, Mineva T, Li J, Jia Q, Stamatin S, et al. Identification

[91] Yan X, Jia Y, Yao X. Defects on carbons for electrocatalytic oxygen reduction.

of catalytic sites in cobalt-nitrogen-carbon materials for the oxygen reduction
reaction. Nat Commun 2017;8:957.

[65] Shi Z, Yang W, Gu Y, Liao T, Sun Z. Metal-nitrogen-doped carbon materials as

highly efficient catalysts: progress and rational design. Adv Sci 2020;7:2001069.
[66] He Y, Liu S, Priest C, Shi Q, Wu G. Atomically dispersed metal–nitrogen–carbon
catalysts for fuel cells: advances in catalyst design, electrode performance, and
durability improvement. Chem Soc Rev 2020;49:3484–524.

[67] Yang Y, Lai L, Wei L, Chen Y. Degradation: a critical challenge for M–N–C

electrocatalysts. J Energy Chem 2021;63:667–74.

[68] Li Y, Liu X, Zheng L, Shang J, Wan X, Hu R, et al. Preparation of Fe–N–C catalysts
with FeNx (x = 1, 3, 4) active sites and comparison of their activities for the
oxygen reduction reaction and performances in proton exchange membrane fuel
cells. J Mater Chem A 2019;7:26147–53.

[69] Miao Z, Wang X, Zhao Z, Zuo W, Chen S, Li Z, et al. Improving the stability of non-
noble-metal M–N–C catalysts for proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells through
M–N bond length and coordination regulation. Adv Mater 2021;33:2006613.
[70] Chung HT, Cullen DA, Higgins D, Sneed BT, Holby EF, More KL, et al. Direct
atomic-level insight into the active sites of a high-performance PGM-free ORR
catalyst. Science 2017;357:479–84.

[71] Zitolo A, Goellner V, Armel V, Sougrati MT, Mineva T, Stievano L, et al.

Identification of catalytic sites for oxygen reduction in iron- and nitrogen-doped
graphene materials. Nat Mater 2015;14:937–42.

[72] Artyushkova K, Matanovic I, Halevi B, Atanassov P. Oxygen binding to active sites
of Fe–N–C ORR electrocatalysts observed by ambient-pressure XPS. J Phys Chem
C 2017;121:2836–43.

[73] Workman MJ, Serov A, Tsui L-k, Atanassov P, Artyushkova K. Fe–N–C catalyst

graphitic layer structure and fuel cell performance. ACS Energy Lett 2017;2:
1489–93.

[74] Wan X, Liu X, Li Y, Yu R, Zheng L, Yan W, et al. Fe–N–C electrocatalyst with dense

active sites and efficient mass transport for high-performance proton exchange
membrane fuel cells. Nat Catal 2019;2:259–68.

[75] Qu X, Li Y, Li G, Ji R, Yin S, Cheng X, et al. Boosting the ORR performance of Fe-
N/C catalyst via increasing the density and modifying the electronic structure of
Fe-NX active sites. Electrochim Acta 2022;403:139604.

Chem Soc Rev 2018;47:7628–58.

[92] Sun M, Davenport D, Liu H, Qu J, Elimelech M, Li J. Highly efficient and

sustainable non-precious-metal Fe–N–C electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction
reaction. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:2527–39.

[93] Yang C, Shang S, Gu Q, Shang J, Li X-y. Metal-organic framework-derived carbon

nanotubes with multi-active Fe-N/Fe sites as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for
zinc-air battery. J Energy Chem 2022;66:306–13.

[94] Tan H, Li Y, Kim J, Takei T, Wang Z, Xu X, et al. Sub-50 nm iron–nitrogen-doped
hollow carbon sphere-encapsulated iron carbide nanoparticles as efficient oxygen
reduction catalysts. Adv Sci 2018;5:1800120.

[95] Yin S-H, Yang J, Han Y, Li G, Wan L-Y, Chen Y-H, et al. Construction of highly
active metal-containing nanoparticles and FeCo-N4 composite sites for the acidic
oxygen reduction reaction. Angew Chem Int Ed 2020;59:21976–9.

[96] Jiang W-J, Gu L, Li L, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Zhang L-J, et al. Understanding the high
activity of Fe–N–C electrocatalysts in oxygen reduction: Fe/Fe3C nanoparticles
boost the activity of Fe–nx. J Am Chem Soc 2016;138:3570–8.

[97] Tylus U, Jia Q, Strickland K, Ramaswamy N, Serov A, Atanassov P, et al.
Elucidating oxygen reduction active sites in pyrolyzed metal–nitrogen
coordinated non-precious-metal electrocatalyst systems. J Phys Chem C 2014;
118:8999–9008.

[98] Abe H, Hirai Y, Ikeda S, Matsuo Y, Matsuyama H, Nakamura J, et al. Fe

azaphthalocyanine unimolecular layers (Fe AzULs) on carbon nanotubes for
realizing highly active oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalytic electrodes. NPG
Asia Mater 2019;11:57.

[99] Jiang L, van Dijk B, Wu L, Maheu C, Hofmann JP, Tudor V, et al. Predoped

oxygenated defects activate nitrogen-doped graphene for the oxygen reduction
reaction. ACS Catal 2022;12:173–82.

[100] Jiang D, Chen H, Xie H, Cheng K, Li L, Xie K, et al. Fe, N, S co-doped cellulose
paper carbon fibers as an air-cathode catalyst for microbial fuel cells. Environ Res
2023;221:115308.

[101] Chen M, Chen Y, Cai J, Yang Z, Tang M, Chung-Yen Jung J, et al. Multi-sites

synergistic modulation in oxygen reduction electrocatalysis. J Colloid Interface
Sci 2023;629:697–705.

[102] Yang S, Feng X, Wang X, Mullen K. Graphene-based carbon nitride nanosheets as
efficient metal-free electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reactions. Angew Chem
Int Ed Engl 2011;50:5339–43.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110126

Y. Chen et al.

[103] Wang J, Yue X, Yang Y, Sirisomboonchai S, Wang P, Ma X, et al. Earth-abundant

[133] Joo SH, Jun S, Ryoo R. Synthesis of ordered mesoporous carbon molecular sieves

transition-metal-based bifunctional catalysts for overall electrochemical water
splitting: a review. J Alloys Compd 2020;819:153346.

[104] Gong K, Du F, Xia Z, Durstock M, Dai L. Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube arrays
with high electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction. Science 2009;323:760–4.
[105] Liu ZW, Peng F, Wang HJ, Yu H, Zheng WX, Yang J. Phosphorus-doped graphite

layers with high electrocatalytic activity for the O2  reduction in an alkaline
medium. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2011;50:3257–61.

[106] Yang Z, Yao Z, Li G, Fang G, Nie H, Liu Z, et al. Sulfur-doped graphene as an
efficient metal-free cathode catalyst for oxygen reduction. ACS Nano 2012;6:
205–11.

[107] Jiang Y, Yang L, Sun T, Zhao J, Lyu Z, Zhuo O, et al. Significant contribution of
intrinsic carbon defects to oxygen reduction activity. ACS Catal 2015;5:6707–12.
[108] Wei P, Li X, He Z, Sun X, Liang Q, Wang Z, et al. Porous N, B co-doped carbon
nanotubes as efficient metal-free electrocatalysts for ORR and Zn-air batteries.
Chem Eng J 2021;422:130134.

[109] Wang S, Liu Y, Liu X, Chen Y, Zhao Y, Gao S. Fabricating N, S Co-doped

hierarchical macro-meso-micro carbon materials as pH-universal ORR
electrocatalysts. ChemistrySelect 2022;7:e202200044.

[110] Zan Y, Zhang Z, Dou M, Wang F. Enhancement mechanism of sulfur dopants on
the catalytic activity of N and P co-doped three-dimensional hierarchically porous
carbon as a metal-free oxygen reduction electrocatalyst. Catal Sci Technol 2019;9:
5906–14.

[111] Zhu J, Mu S. Defect engineering in carbon-based electrocatalysts: insight into

CMK-1. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2001;44–45:153–8.

[134] Doustkhah E, Hassandoost R, Khataee A, Luque R, Assadi MHN. Hard-templated

metal-organic frameworks for advanced applications. Chem Soc Rev 2021;50:
2927–53.

[135] Zhang W, Cheng R-r, Bi H-h, Lu Y-h, Ma L-b, He X-j. A review of porous carbons

produced by template methods for supercapacitor applications. New Carbon
Mater 2021;36:69–81.

[136] Schacht S, Huo Q, Voigt-Martin IG, Stucky GD, Schüth F. Oil-water interface
templating of mesoporous macroscale structures. Science 1996;273:768–71.
[137] Melke J, Schuster R, M ̈obus S, Jurzinsky T, Els ̈asser P, Heilemann A, et al.

Electrochemical stability of silica-templated polyaniline-derived mesoporous N-
doped carbons for the design of Pt-based oxygen reduction reaction catalysts.
Carbon 2019;146:44–59.

[138] Qian S, Wu X, Shi Z, Li X, Sun X, Ma Y, et al. Tuning electrospinning hierarchically
porous nanowires anode for enhanced bioelectrocatalysis in microbial fuel cells.
Nano Res 2022;15:5089–97.

[139] Loeh MO, Badaczewski F, von der Lehr M, Ellinghaus R, Dobrotka S, Metz J, et al.
Hard-templating of carbon using porous SiO2  monoliths revisited - quantitative
impact of spatial confinement on the microstructure evolution. Carbon 2018;129.
552-63.

[140] Li Q, Li L, Wu P, Xu N, Wang L, Li M, et al. Silica restricting the sulfur

volatilization of nickel sulfide for high-performance lithium-ion batteries. Adv
Energy Mater 2019;9:1901153.

intrinsic carbon defects. Adv Funct Mater 2020;30:2001097.

[141] Ran W, Dong J, Sun T, Chen J, Xu L. Iron, cobalt, and nitrogen tri-doped ordered

[112] Tao L, Wang Q, Dou S, Ma Z, Huo J, Wang S, et al. Edge-rich and dopant-free

graphene as a highly efficient metal-free electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction
reaction. Chem Commun 2016;52:2764–7.

[113] Guo R, Lv C, Xu W, Sun J, Zhu Y, Yang X, et al. Effect of intrinsic defects of carbon
materials on the sodium storage performance. Adv Energy Mater 2020;10:
1903652.

[114] Zhao H, Sun C, Jin Z, Wang D-W, Yan X, Chen Z, et al. Carbon for the oxygen

reduction reaction: a defect mechanism. J Mater Chem A 2015;3:11736–9.

[115] Zhang J, Zhang J, He F, Chen Y, Zhu J, Wang D, et al. Defect and doping Co-

engineered non-metal nanocarbon ORR electrocatalyst. Nanomicro Lett 2021;13:
65.

[116] Lim D-H, Wilcox J. Mechanisms of the oxygen reduction reaction on defective

graphene-supported Pt nanoparticles from first-principles. J Phys Chem C 2012;
116:3653–60.

mesoporous carbon as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction
reaction. ChemistrySelect 2019;4:7728–33.

[142] Li J, Zhu X, Wang J, Rui Z, Zhang S, Li Y, et al. Iron-containing porphyrins self-
assembled on ZnO nanoparticles as electrocatalytic materials for oxygen
reduction. ACS Appl Nano Mater 2020;3:742–51.

[143] Wang H, Yu S, Xu B. Hierarchical porous carbon materials prepared using nano-

ZnO as a template and activation agent for ultrahigh power supercapacitors.
Chem Commun 2016;52:11512–5.

[144] Hsu C-H, Chung C-H, Hsieh T-H, Lin H-P. Green and highly-efficient microwave
synthesis route for sulfur/carbon composite for Li-S battery. Int J Mol Sci 2022;
23:39.

[145] Yu S, Sun N, Hu L, Wang L, Zhu Q, Guan Y, et al. Self-template and self-activation
synthesis of nitrogen-doped hierarchical porous carbon for supercapacitors.
J Power Sources 2018;405:132–41.

[117] Jiang S, Li Z, Wang H, Wang Y, Meng L, Song S. Tuning nondoped carbon

[146] Lu X, Xu H, Yang P, Xiao L, Li Y, Ma J, et al. Zinc-assisted MgO template synthesis

nanotubes to an efficient metal-free electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction
by localizing the orbital of the nanotubes with topological defects. Nanoscale
2014;6:14262–9.

of porous carbon-supported Fe-Nx sites for efficient oxygen reduction reaction
catalysis in Zn-air batteries. Appl Catal B 2022;313:121454.

[147] Yan D, Han Y, Ma Z, Wang Q, Wang X, Li Y, et al. Magnesium lignosulfonate-

[118] Zhu J, Huang Y, Mei W, Zhao C, Zhang C, Zhang J, et al. Effects of intrinsic

pentagon defects on electrochemical reactivity of carbon nanomaterials. Angew
Chem Int Ed 2019;58:3859–64.

[119] Yang Q, Xiao Z, Kong D, Zhang T, Duan X, Zhou S, et al. New insight to the role of

edges and heteroatoms in nanocarbons for oxygen reduction reaction. Nano
Energy 2019;66:104096.

[120] Chen X, Gao J, Liu S, Yang Z, Wang S, Su Z, et al. 1D bamboo-like N-doped carbon

nanotubes with encapsulated iron-based nanoparticles as an advanced Zn-air
battery cathode electrocatalyst. J Alloys Compd 2020;828:154435.
[121] Yang L, Jiang S, Zhao Y, Zhu L, Chen S, Wang X, et al. Boron-doped carbon

nanotubes as metal-free electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. Angew
Chem 2011;50:7132–5.

[122] Ding W, Li L, Xiong K, Wang Y, Li W, Nie Y, et al. Shape fixing via salt

recrystallization: a morphology-controlled approach to convert nanostructured
polymer to carbon nanomaterial as a highly active catalyst for oxygen reduction
reaction. J Am Chem Soc 2015;137:5414–20.

[123] Xiao Z, Xie C, Wang Y, Chen R, Wang S. Recent advances in defect

electrocatalysts: preparation and characterization. J Energy Chem 2021;53:
208–25.

[124] Shen A, Zou Y, Wang Q, Dryfe RAW, Huang X, Dou S, et al. Oxygen reduction

reaction in a droplet on graphite: direct evidence that the edge is more active than
the basal plane. Angew Chem Int Ed 2014;53:10804–8.

[125] Matter PH, Zhang L, Ozkan US. The role of nanostructure in nitrogen-containing

carbon catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. J Catal 2006;239:83–96.

[126] Yi S, Qin X, Liang C, Li J, Rajagopalan R, Zhang Z, et al. Insights into KMnO4

etched N-rich carbon nanotubes as advanced electrocatalysts for Zn-air batteries.
Appl Catal B 2020;264:118537.

derived N, S co-doped 3D flower-like hierarchically porous carbon as an advanced
metal-free electrocatalyst towards oxygen reduction reaction. Int J Biol Macromol
2022;209:904–11.

[148] Wang M, Liu H, Zhai DD, Chen XY, Zhang ZJ. In-situ synthesis of highly nitrogen,
sulfur co-doped carbon nanosheets from melamine-formaldehyde-thiourea resin
with improved cycling stability and energy density for supercapacitors. J Power
Sources 2019;416:79–88.

[149] Yi HT, Zhu YQ, Chen XY, Zhang ZJ. A simple Mg(OH)2-assisted template

carbonization method to N-doped nanoporous carbon material from phenidone
and the capacitive improvement with the addition of azobisformamide.
Electrochim Acta 2015;174:111–9.

[150] Shao J, Song M, Wu G, Zhou Y, Wan J, Ren X, et al. 3D carbon nanocage networks
with multiscale pores for high-rate supercapacitors by flower-like template and
in-situ coating. Energy Storage Mater 2018;13:57–65.

[151] Qian M, Wang Y, Xu F, Zhao W, Lin T, Huang F. Extraordinary porous few-layer
carbons of high capacitance from pechini combustion of magnesium nitrate gel.
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:381–8.

[152] Cao J, Zhu C, Aoki Y, Habazaki H. Starch-derived hierarchical porous carbon with
controlled porosity for high performance supercapacitors. ACS Sustainable Chem
Eng 2018;6:7292–303.

[153] Ramesh A, Manigandan R, Ali BM, Dhandapani K, Da CT, Nguyen-Le M-T.
Selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol over sulphated zirconia incorporated
ordered mesoporous carbon by a hard template method. J Alloys Compd 2022;
918:165729.

[154] Li G, Chen Y, Yan L, Gong Q, Chen G, Yang L, et al. The composite-template
method to construct hierarchical carbon nanocages for supercapacitors with
ultrahigh energy and power densities. Small 2022;20:2107082.

[127] Wang Y, Zhang M, Shen X, Wang H, Wang H, Xia K, et al. Biomass-derived carbon

[155] Li J, Liu J, Chen C, Guo J, Bi R, Chen S, et al. Pt nanoclusters anchored on ordered

materials: controllable preparation and versatile applications. Small 2021;17:
2008079.

macroporous nitrogen-doped carbon for accelerated water dissociation toward
superior alkaline hydrogen production. Chem Eng J 2022;436:135186.

[128] Wang J, Wan J, Wang D. Hollow multishelled structures for promising

[156] Yu Y, Peng H, Du C, Zhang Y, Wan L, Chen J, et al. Alkaline-carbonate-templated

applications: understanding the structure–performance correlation. Acc Chem Res
2019;52:2169–78.

carbon: effect of template nature on morphology, oxygen species and
supercapacitor performances. Appl Surf Sci 2022;575:151771.

[129] Zhang L-L, Tong L, Lv X-H, Yan Q-Q, Ding Y-W, Wang Y-C, et al. A top-down

[157] Luo J, Wang K, Hua X, Wang W, Li J, Zhang S, et al. Pyridinic-N protected

templating strategy toward functional porous carbons. Small 2022;18:2201838.

[130] Kyotani T, Orikasa H, Nishihara H. Synthesis of nano-carbons by using the

synthesis of 3D nitrogen-doped porous carbon with increased mesoporous defects
for oxygen reduction. Small 2019;15:1805325.

template method. Carbon 2009;47:1208.

[131] Martínez de Yuso A, De Fina M, Nita C, Fioux P, Parmentier J, Matei Ghimbeu C.
Synthesis of sulfur-doped porous carbons by soft and hard templating processes
for CO2  and H2  adsorption. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2017;243:135–46.

[132] Zhang W, Cheng R-r, Bi H-h, Lu Y-h, Ma L-b, He X-j. A review of porous carbons
produced by template methods for supercapacitor applications. Carbon 2021;177:
428.

[158] Li J, Chen M, Hou S, Zhao L, Zhang T, Jiang A, et al. Porous organic-inorganic
hybrids with nonlinear optical properties from fullerenols-metal complexation.
Carbon 2022;191:555–62.

[159] Wang G, Liang K, Liu L, Yu Y, Hou S, Chen A. Fabrication of monodisperse hollow
mesoporous carbon spheres by using “confined nanospace deposition” method for
supercapacitor. J Alloys Compd 2018;736:35–41.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110127

Y. Chen et al.

[160] Yang S, Yu J, Yao C, Li S, Xie A. Preparation and electrocatalytic performance of
N-doped hierarchical porous carbon loaded with Fe/Fe5C2 nanoparticles. J Alloys
Compd 2022;903:163874.

[161] Pagaduan JN, Samitsu S, Varma J, Emrick T, Katsumata R. Freeze-burn:

fabrication of porous carbon networks via polymer-templated rapid thermal
annealing. ACS Appl Polym Mater 2022;4:4329–38.

[162] Lee H, Kim D, Ma H, Kim KT. Synthesis of cubic transition-metal networks from

polymer cubosome templates. Chem Commun 2020;56:14059–62.
[163] Song J, Choi S, Lim J, Kim KT. Templated synthesis of microparticles with

carbonaceous skeletal structures using polymer cubosomes as templates. RSC Adv
2022;12:8429–34.

[164] Fujiki J, Yogo K. Water adsorption on nitrogen-doped carbons for adsorption heat
pump/desiccant cooling: experimental and density functional theory calculation
studies. Appl Surf Sci 2019;492. 776-84.

[165] Xing B, Zhang C, Liu Q, Zhang C, Huang G, Guo H, et al. Green synthesis of porous
graphitic carbons from coal tar pitch templated by nano-CaCO3  for high-
performance lithium-ion batteries. J Alloys Compd 2019;795:91–102.

[166] Li H, Yue Q, Xu S, Wang L, Liu J. Fabrication of octahedral carbon nanocages via

an in-situ template approach. Mater Lett 2012;66:353–6.

[167] Zhou Q, Jiang X, Guo Y, Zhang G, Jiang W. An ultra-high surface area mesoporous
carbon prepared by a novel MnO-templated method for highly effective
adsorption of methylene blue. Chemosphere 2018;201:519–29.

[168] Chen D, Yang J, Ding H. Synthesis of nanoporous carbon nitride using calcium
carbonate as templates with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity. Appl
Surf Sci 2017;391:384–91.

[169] Yang J, Tian Q, Zhou Y, Wang X-Y, Zheng X-C. Facile synthesis and superior
capacitive behavior of cattail wool-derived hierarchical porous carbon.
J Electroanal Chem 2021;882:115025.

[188] Wang Y, Yu G, Chen X, Wang A. High capacity nano-sized carbon spheres for

lithium-ion battery anode materials. Polymers 2019;11:645.

[189] Zhang S, Chen S. Surfactant-template preparation of polyaniline semi-tubes for

oxygen reduction. Catalysts 2015;5:1202–10.

[190] Jia S, Guo Q, Shen M, Gao Q, Wang K. Controlled synthesis of carbon spheres via
the modulation of the hydrophobic length of fatty aldehyde for supercapacitors.
Colloids Surf A 2022;636:128064.

[191] Javed H, Pani S, Antony J, Sakthivel M, Drillet J-F. Synthesis of mesoporous

carbon spheres via a soft-template route for catalyst supports in PEMFC cathodes.
Soft Matter 2021;17:7743–54.

[192] Katchala N, E HM, Bulusu S V, U VV, Tata NR, Srinivasan A. One step synthesized
hierarchical spherical porous carbon as an efficient electrode material for lithium
ion battery. Mater Lett 2019;237:156–60.

[193] Choma J, Jagiello J, Jaroniec M. Assessing the contribution of micropores and

mesopores from nitrogen adsorption on nanoporous carbons: application to pore
size analysis. Carbon 2021;183:150–7.

[194] Li W, Gao Q, Shen M, Li B, Ren C, Yang J. Ionic liquid surfactant-derived carbon

micro/nanostructures toward application of supercapacitors. Inorg Chem Front
2022;9:1609–21.

[195] Chen A, Li Y, Liu L, Yu Y, Xia K, Wang Y, et al. Controllable synthesis of nitrogen-

doped hollow mesoporous carbon spheres using ionic liquids as template for
supercapacitors. Appl Surf Sci 2017;393:151–8.

[196] Wu Q, Gao M, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Liu S, Xie C, et al. Preparation and application
performance study of biomass-based carbon materials with various morphologies
by a hydrothermal/soft template method. Nanotechnology 2019;30:185702.

[197] Fechler N, Zussblatt NP, Rothe R, Schl ̈ogl R, Willinger M-G, Chmelka BF, et al.

Carbon: eutectic syntheses of graphitic carbon with high pyrazinic nitrogen
content (adv. Mater. 6/2016). Adv Mater 2016;28:1328.

[170] Liu J, Li R, Chen T, Liu C, Mu D, Sun S, et al. From bulk to porous: structure

[198] Zhong M, Liu H, Wang M, Zhu YW, Chen XY, Zhang ZJ. Hierarchically N/O-

transformation of nitrogen and phosphorous co-doped carbon material via
sodium chloride assistance and its application in lithium-sulfur batteries. J Alloys
Compd 2020;830:154638.

enriched nanoporous carbon for supercapacitor application: simply adjusting the
composition of deep eutectic solvent as well as the ratio with phenol-
formaldehyde resin. J Power Sources 2019;438:226982.

[171] Mohseni M, Utsch N, Marcks C, Demeestere K, Du Laing G, Yüce S, et al.
Freestanding nitrogen-doped carbons with hierarchical porosity for
environmental applications: a green templating route with bio-based precursors.
Glob Chall 2021;5:2100062.

[172] Bai T, Wang W, Xue G, Li S, Guo W, Ye M, et al. Free-standing, flexible Carbon@
MXene films with cross-linked mesoporous structures toward supercapacitors and
pressure sensors. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2021;13:57576–87.

[173] Biswal L, Nayak S, Parida K. Recent progress on strategies for the preparation of

2D/2D MXene/g-C3N4  nanocomposites for photocatalytic energy and
environmental applications. Catal Sci Technol 2021;11:1222–48.

[174] Pan J, Sun X, Jin Z, Wang T, Zhao Q, Qu H, et al. Constructing two-dimensional
lamellar monometallic carbon nanocomposites by sodium chloride hard template
for lightweight microwave scattering and absorption. Composites Part B 2022;
228:109422.

[175] Ni Y, Qi J, Zhou B, Zhu L, Ren Y, Zhang D. Controllable synthesis of multilayered

porous carbon by ice templating with graphene addition for supercapacitors.
J Mater Sci 2021;56:7533–46.

[176] Patrike A, Suresh K, Wahid M, Chaturvedi V, Shelke MV. Ice-colloidal templated
carbon host for highly efficient, dendrite free Li metal anode. Carbon 2021;179:
256–65.

[177] Zhang Y, Tang W, Zhan R, Liu H, Chen H, Yang J, et al. An N-doped porous

carbon/MXene composite as a sulfur host for lithium–sulfur batteries. Inorg Chem
Front 2019;6:2894–9.

[199] Chen L, Deng J, Song Y, Hong S, Lian H. Deep eutectic solvent promoted tunable
synthesis of nitrogen-doped nanoporous carbons from enzymatic hydrolysis lignin
for supercapacitors. Mater Res Bull 2020;123:110708.

[200] L ́opez-Salas N, Carriazo D, Guti ́errez MC, Ferrer ML, Ania CO, Rubio F, et al.

Tailoring the textural properties of hierarchical porous carbons using deep
eutectic solvents. J Mater Chem A 2016;4:9146–59.

[201] Beurer A-K, Bruckner JR, Traa Y. Influence of the template removal method on

the mechanical stability of SBA-15. ChemistryOpen 2021;10:1123–8.

[202] Liu R, Yan Q, Tang Y, Liu R, Huang L, Shuai Q. NaCl template-assisted synthesis of

self-floating COFs foams for the efficient removal of sulfamerazine. J Hazard
Mater 2022;421:126702.

[203] Zhao N, Hua W, Wang Y, Yang C, Ouyang X, Yuan B, et al. In-situ GISAXS
investigation of the structure evolution mechanism of template removal of
ordered mesoporous films prepared via a soft-templating method. Appl Surf Sci
2019;479:776–85.

[204] Li J, Ding Z, Pan L, Li J, Wang C, Wang G. Facile self-templating synthesis of

layered carbon with N, S dual doping for highly efficient sodium storage. Carbon
2021;173:31–40.

[205] Wang Y, Xue Y, Lei Q, Yang J, Xue Y, Shen S, et al. Carbon nanoarchitectonics

with 3D self-crumpled carbon structures induced by GO-assisted carbonization for
enhanced oxygen evolution performance. J Alloys Compd 2022;920:166005.

[206] Li F, Wang B. Graphene oxide induced graphitic structure in carbon films with

high flexibility. Mater Lett 2018;213:104–8.

[178] Li X, Huang Z, Shuck CE, Liang G, Gogotsi Y, Zhi C. MXene chemistry,

[207] Luo X, Huang J, Huang Y, Cao L, Li J, Wang Y, et al. Self-templated induced

electrochemistry and energy storage applications. Nat Rev Chem 2022;6:
389–404.

carbon-supported hollow WS2  composite structure for high-performance sodium
storage. J Mater Chem A 2021;9:21366–78.

[179] Xu X, Zhang Y, Sun H, Zhou J, Yang F, Li H, et al. Progress and perspective:
MXene and MXene-based nanomaterials for high-performance energy storage
devices. Adv Electron Mater 2021;7:2000967.

[208] Mahsud A, Chen J, Yuan X, Lyu F, Zhong Q, Chen J, et al. Self-templated

formation of cobalt-embedded hollow N-doped carbon spheres for efficient
oxygen reduction. Nano Res 2021;14:2819–25.

[180] Guo M, Zhong S, Xu T, Huang Y, Xia G, Zhang T, et al. 3D hollow MXene (Ti3C2)/
reduced graphene oxide hybrid nanospheres for high-performance Li-ion storage.
J Mater Chem A 2021;9:23841–9.

[209] Gao F, Qu J, Geng C, Shao G, Wu M. Self-templating synthesis of nitrogen-
decorated hierarchical porous carbon from shrimp shell for supercapacitors.
J Mater Chem A 2016;4:7445–52.

[181] Hu Z, Xie Y, Yu D, Liu Q, Zhou L, Zhang K, et al. Hierarchical Ti3C2Tx MXene/
carbon nanotubes for low overpotential and long-life Li-CO2 batteries. ACS Nano
2021;15:8407–17.

[182] Ma J, Qin G, Wei W, Jiang L, Diniz da Costa JC. Asymmetric and hierarchical

porous carbon membranes prepared by a single-step soft-templated method.
Chem Eng Commun 2021;208:166–70.

[183] Libbrecht W, Verberckmoes A, Thybaut JW, Van Der Voort P, De Clercq J. Soft
templated mesoporous carbons: tuning the porosity for the adsorption of large
organic pollutants. Carbon 2017;116:528–46.

[184] Parthiban V, Akula S, Sahu AK. Surfactant templated nanoporous carbon-Nafion
hybrid membranes for direct methanol fuel cells with reduced methanol
crossover. J Membr Sci 2017;541:127–36.

[185] Sun L, Zhou H, Li L, Yao Y, Qu H, Zhang C, et al. Double soft-template synthesis of

nitrogen/sulfur-codoped hierarchically porous carbon materials derived from
protic ionic liquid for supercapacitor. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9:
26088–95.

[186] Gao L, Chandra A, Nabae Y, Hayakawa T. Inducing defects in ordered mesoporous

carbons via the block copolymer-templated high-temperature carbonization of
nitrogen-containing polymeric precursors. Polym J (Tokyo, Jpn) 2018;50:389–96.
[187] Liu X, Song P, Hou J, Wang B, Xu F, Zhang X. Revealing the dynamic formation

process and mechanism of hollow carbon spheres: from bowl to sphere. ACS
Sustainable Chem Eng 2018;6:2797–805.

[210] Liu L, Lu Y, Qiu D, Wang D, Ding Y, Wang G, et al. Sodium alginate-derived

porous carbon: self-template carbonization mechanism and application in
capacitive energy storage. J Colloid Interface Sci 2022;620:284–92.

[211] Flores-Lasluisa JX, Salinas-Torres D, L ́opez-Ram ́on MV,

 ́
Alvarez MA, Moreno-

Castilla C, Cazorla-Amor ́os D, et al. Copper ferrite nanospheres composites mixed
with carbon black to boost the oxygen reduction reaction. Colloids Surf A 2021;
613:126060.

[212] Zhang S, Zhang H, Zhang W, Yuan X, Chen S, Ma Z-F. Induced growth of Fe-Nx

active sites using carbon templates. Chin J Catal 2018;39:1427–35.

[213] Li W, Chu X-s, Wang F, Dang Y-y, Liu X-y, Wang X-c, et al. Enhanced cocatalyst-
support interaction and promoted electron transfer of 3D porous g-C3N4/GO-M
(Au, Pd, Pt) composite catalysts for hydrogen evolution. Appl Catal B 2021;288:
120034.

[214] Lv Y, Wu X, Lin H, Li J, Zhang H, Guo J, et al. A novel carbon support: few-layered
graphdiyne-decorated carbon nanotubes capture metal clusters as effective metal-
supported catalysts. Small 2021;17:2006442.

[215] Zhang S, Liu B, Chen S. Synergistic increase of oxygen reduction favourable Fe–N
coordination structures in a ternary hybrid of carbon nanospheres/carbon
nanotubes/graphene sheets. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2013;15:18482–90.

[216] Ruiz-Camacho B, Palafox-Segoviano JA, P ́erez-Díaz PJ, Medina-Ramírez A.
Synthesis of supported Pt nanoparticles by sonication for ORR: effect of the
graphene oxide-carbon composite. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:26027–39.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110128

Y. Chen et al.

[217] Themsirimongkon S, Maturost S, Waenkaew P, Promsawan N, Pongpichayakul N,

[244] Chen S, Li M, Gao M, Jin J, van Spronsen MA, Salmeron MB, et al. High-

Jakmunee J, et al. The effect of sequentially electrodeposited Pd and Pt metal-
supported graphene oxide on enhanced oxidation of mixed acids from biomass
production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;47:4075–89.

performance Pt–Co nanoframes for fuel-cell electrocatalysis. Nano Lett 2020;20:
1974–9.

[245] Asano M, Kawamura R, Sasakawa R, Todoroki N, Wadayama T. Oxygen reduction

[218] Hou C-C, Zou L, Wang Y, Xu Q. MOF-mediated fabrication of a porous 3D

superstructure of carbon nanosheets decorated with ultrafine cobalt phosphide
nanoparticles for efficient electrocatalysis and zinc–air batteries. Angew Chem Int
Ed 2020;59:21360–6.

[219] Wang Y, Liu T, Lin X, Chen H, Chen S, Jiang Z, et al. Self-templated synthesis of
hierarchically porous N-doped carbon derived from biomass for supercapacitors.
ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 2018;6:13932–9.

[220] Nath K, Bhunia K, Pradhan D, Biradha K. MOF-templated cobalt nanoparticles
embedded in nitrogen-doped porous carbon: a bifunctional electrocatalyst for
overall water splitting. Nanoscale Adv 2019;1:2293–302.

[221] Zhang Q, Liu N-N, Sun C-Z, Fan L-S, Zhang N-Q, Sun K-N. Ultrasmall iron fluoride

nanoparticles embedded in graphitized porous carbon derived from Fe-based
metal organic frameworks as high-performance cathode materials for Li batteries.
ChemElectroChem 2019;6:2189–94.

[222] Li D, Li C, Zhang L, Li H, Zhu L, Yang D, et al. Metal-free thiophene-sulfur
covalent organic frameworks: precise and controllable synthesis of catalytic
active sites for oxygen reduction. J Am Chem Soc 2020;142:8104–8.

[223] Xiang Z, Cao D, Huang L, Shui J, Wang M, Dai L. Nitrogen-doped holey graphitic

carbon from 2D covalent organic polymers for oxygen reduction. Adv Mater
2014;26:3315–20.

[224] Jiang T, Jiang W, Li Y, Xu Y, Zhao M, Deng M, et al. Facile regulation of porous N-
doped carbon-based catalysts from covalent organic frameworks nanospheres for
highly-efficient oxygen reduction reaction. Carbon 2021;180:92–100.

[225] Zhang S, Xia W, Yang Q, Valentino Kaneti Y, Xu X, Alshehri SM, et al. Core-shell

motif construction: highly graphitic nitrogen-doped porous carbon
electrocatalysts using MOF-derived carbon@COF heterostructures as sacrificial
templates. Chem Eng J 2020;396:125154.

[226] Xu M, Wang A, Xiang Y, Ejaz A, Niu J. Self-template bagasse-based porous

carbons for high performance supercapacitors. Industrial Crops and Products
2022;176:114291.

[227] Xue B, Wang X, Feng Y, Chen Z, Liu X. Self-template synthesis of nitrogen-doped

porous carbon derived from rice husks for the fabrication of high volumetric
performance supercapacitors. J Energy Storage 2020;30:101405.

[228] Zhao Q, Meng Y, Li J, Xiao D. Sulfur and nitrogen dual-doped porous carbon
nanosheet anode for sodium ion storage with a self-template and self-porogen
method. Appl Surf Sci 2019;481:473–83.

[229] Martins AC, Huang X, Goswami A, Koh K, Meng Y, Almeida VC, et al. Fibrous
porous carbon electrocatalysts for hydrazine oxidation by using cellulose filter
paper as precursor and self-template. Carbon 2016;102:97–105.

[230] Yan B, Huang H, Qin X, Xiu S, Choi J, Ko D, et al. Facile self-template synthesis of

a nitrogen-rich nanoporous carbon wire and its application for energy storage
devices. ACS Appl Energy Mater 2021;4:13735–47.

[231] Lin J, Zhao W, Qian M, Liu K, Xu J, Huang F. Self-templated synthesis of heavily
nitrogen-doped hollow carbon spheres. Chem Commun 2018;54:4565–8.
[232] Wang X, Qin Z, Yang X, Chen Q, Lin Z. Self-template synthesis of hierarchical
porous carbon for supercapacitors based on bituminous coal. Int J Energy Res
2021;45:2116–25.

[233] Zeng H, Wang W, Li J, Luo J, Chen S. In situ generated dual-template method for
Fe/N/S Co-doped hierarchically porous honeycomb carbon for high-performance
oxygen reduction. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:8721–9.

[234] Chen XY, He YY, Song H, Zhang ZJ. A multi-template carbonization approach to
hierarchically nanoporous carbon for high-performance supercapacitors. J Solid
State Electrochem 2015;19:179–86.

[235] Luo Y, Zhang J, Chen J, Chen Y, Li Z, Shi J, et al. Dual-template construction of

iron–nitrogen-codoped hierarchically porous carbon electrocatalyst for oxygen
reduction reaction. Energy Fuels 2020;34:16720–8.

[236] Luo J, Wang Y, Mao Y, Zhang Y, Su Y, Zou B, et al. Interface engineering of metal

phosphide on hollow carbons by Dual-template method for High-performance
Lithium-sulfur batteries. Chem Eng J 2022;433:133549.

[237] Deng C, Pan L, Ji F, Du W, Zhang J, Sun Y, et al. Hybrid dual-template induced
nitrogen-doped hierarchically porous carbon as highly efficient oxygen reduction
electrocatalyst. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:36167–75.

[238] Zhu Q, Li F, Zheng Y, Cao Y, Xiao Y, Liang S, et al. Dual-template approach to

designing nitrogen functionalized, hierarchical porous carbons for efficiently
selective capture and separation of SO2. Sep Purif Technol 2022;284:120272.
[239] Wu X, Lam CWK, Wu N, Pang S-S, Xing Z, Zhang W, et al. Multiple templates
fabrication of hierarchical porous carbon for enhanced rate capability in
potassium-ion batteries. Mater Today Energy 2019;11:182–91.

[240] Zhou W, Lin Z, Tong G, Stoyanov SD, Yan D, Mai Y, et al. Multi-template synthesis

of hierarchically porous carbon spheres with potential application in
supercapacitors. RSC Adv 2016;6:111406–14.

[241] Nadeem M, Yasin G, Arif M, Bhatti MH, Sayin K, Mehmood M, et al. Pt-Ni@PC900

hybrid derived from layered-structure Cd-MOF for fuel cell ORR activity. ACS
Omega 2020;5:2123–32.

[242] Shao M, Peles A, Shoemaker K. Electrocatalysis on platinum nanoparticles:

particle size effect on oxygen reduction reaction activity. Nano Lett 2011;11:
3714–9.

[243] Yang Z, Ball S, Condit D, Gummalla M. Systematic study on the impact of Pt
particle size and operating conditions on PEMFC cathode catalyst durability.
J Electrochem Soc 2011;158:B1439.

reaction activity for strain-controlled Pt-based model alloy catalysts: surface
strains and direct electronic effects induced by alloying elements. ACS Catal 2016;
6:5285–9.

[246] Torihata M, Nakamura M, Todoroki N, Wadayama T, Hoshi N. Activity for the
ORR on Pt-Pd-Co ternary alloy electrodes is markedly affected by surface
structure and composition. Electrochem Commun 2021;125:107007.

[247] Wan X-K, Samjesk ́e G, Matsui H, Chen C, Muratsugu S, Tada M. Ultrafine Pt–Ni
nanoparticles in hollow porous carbon spheres for remarkable oxygen reduction
reaction catalysis. Dalton Trans 2021;50:6811–22.

[248] Xie Y, Li Z, Liu Y, Ye Y, Zou X, Lin S. Plasmon enhanced bifunctional electro-photo

catalytic properties of Pt-Au/graphene composites for methanol oxidation and
oxygen reduction reaction. Appl Surf Sci 2020;508:145161.

[249] Ling L-L, Liu W-J, Chen S-Q, Hu X, Jiang H. MOF templated nitrogen doped
carbon stabilized Pt–Co bimetallic nanoparticles: low Pt content and robust
activity toward electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction. ACS Appl Nano Mater
2018;1:3331–8.

[250] Deng X, Yin S, Sun M, Zhang S, Xuan W, Xie Z. Shape-tunable Pt–Ag nanocatalysts
with excellent performance for oxygen reduction reaction. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2020;45:16482–8.

[251] Xie Y, Yang Y, Muller DA, Abru ̃na HD, Dimitrov N, Fang J. Enhanced ORR kinetics
on Au-doped Pt–Cu porous films in alkaline media. ACS Catal 2020;10:9967–76.
[252] Gao R, Wang J, Huang Z-F, Zhang R, Wang W, Pan L, et al. Pt/Fe2O3 with Pt–Fe
pair sites as a catalyst for oxygen reduction with ultralow Pt loading. Nat Energy
2021;6:614–23.

[253] Meza D, Morales U, Roquero P, Salgado L. Oxygen reduction on carbon supported

Pt-W electrocatalysts. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:12111–4.

[254] Greeley J, Stephens IEL, Bondarenko AS, Johansson TP, Hansen HA, Jaramillo TF,
et al. Alloys of platinum and early transition metals as oxygen reduction
electrocatalysts. Nat Chem 2009;1:552–6.

[255] Biz C, Fianchini M, Polo V, Gracia J. Magnetism and heterogeneous catalysis: in
depth on the quantum spin-exchange interactions in Pt3M (M = V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co,
Ni, and Y)(111) alloys. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:50484–94.

[256] Wang L, Gao W, Liu Z, Zeng Z, Liu Y, Giroux M, et al. Core–shell nanostructured

cobalt–platinum electrocatalysts with enhanced durability. ACS Catal 2018;8:
35–42.

[257] Chang F, Yu G, Shan S, Skeete Z, Wu J, Luo J, et al. Platinum–nickel nanowire
catalysts with composition-tunable alloying and faceting for the oxygen reduction
reaction. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:12557–68.

[258] Liao W, Zhou S, Wang Z, Liu F, Pan H, Xie T, et al. Engineering Pt nanoparticles

onto resin-derived iron and nitrogen Co-doped porous carbon nanostructure
boosts oxygen reduction catalysis. ChemCatChem 2021;13:4925–30.

[259] Ma Z, Tian H, Meng G, Peng L, Chen Y, Chen C, et al. Size effects of platinum
particles@CNT on HER and ORR performance. Sci China Mater 2020;63:
2517–29.

[260] Shao-Horn Y, Sheng WC, Chen S, Ferreira PJ, Holby EF, Morgan D. Instability of
supported platinum nanoparticles in low-temperature fuel cells. Top Catal 2007;
46:285–305.

[261] Bera RK, Park H, Ko SH, Ryoo R. Highly dispersed Pt nanoclusters supported on

zeolite-templated carbon for the oxygen reduction reaction. RSC Adv 2020;10:
32290–5.

[262] Quinson J, Inaba M, Neumann S, Swane AA, Bucher J, Simonsen SB, et al.

Investigating particle size effects in catalysis by applying a size-controlled and
surfactant-free synthesis of colloidal nanoparticles in alkaline ethylene glycol:
case study of the oxygen reduction reaction on Pt. ACS Catal 2018;8:6627–35.

[263] Yamamoto K, Imaoka T, Chun W-J, Enoki O, Katoh H, Takenaga M, et al. Erratum:

size-specific catalytic activity of platinum clusters enhances oxygen reduction
reactions. Nat Chem 2010;2:789.

[264] P ́erez-Díaz PJ, Medina-Ramírez A, Esquivel IRG, Ruiz GG, Ruiz-Camacho B. Effect
of X zeolite-carbon composite ratio as support of Pt nanoparticles for MOR and
ORR. Ionics 2021;27:1813–28.

[265] Zhao G, Zhao TS, Xu J, Lin Z, Yan X. Impact of pore size of ordered mesoporous
carbon FDU-15-supported platinum catalysts on oxygen reduction reaction. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:3325–34.

[266] Cao J, Hu Y, Chen L, Xu J, Chen Z. Nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dot/graphene

hybrid nanocomposite as an efficient catalyst support for the oxygen reduction
reaction. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:2931–42.

[267] Wang X, Zhao Z, Sun P, Li F. One-step synthesis of supported high-index faceted
platinum–cobalt nanocatalysts for an enhanced oxygen reduction reaction. ACS
Appl Energy Mater 2020;3:5077–82.

[268] Bharti A, Cheruvally G. Influence of various carbon nano-forms as supports for Pt

catalyst on proton exchange membrane fuel cell performance. J Power Sources
2017;360:196–205.

[269] Li M, Zhao Z, Cheng T, Fortunelli A, Chen C-Y, Yu R, et al. Ultrafine jagged
platinum nanowires enable ultrahigh mass activity for the oxygen reduction
reaction. Science 2016;354:1414–9.

[270] Jukk K, Kongi N, Rauwel P, Matisen L, Tammeveski K. Platinum nanoparticles

supported on nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets as electrocatalysts for oxygen
reduction reaction. Electrocatalysis 2016;7:428–40.

[271] Shen L, Sun T, Zhuo O, Che R, Li D, Ji Y, et al. Alcohol-tolerant platinum

electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction by encapsulating platinum nanoparticles
inside nitrogen-doped carbon nanocages. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:
16664–9.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110129

Y. Chen et al.

[272] Li G, Li J, Zhou Z, Li C, Cai C, Guo B, et al. Silica-polydopamine core–shell self-
confined templates for ultra-stable hollow Pt anchored N-doped carbon
electrocatalysts. Dalton Trans 2017;46:16419–25.

[273] Nie Y, Deng J, Jin W, Guo W, Wu G, Deng M, et al. Engineering multi-hollow PtCo
nanoparticles for oxygen reduction reaction via a NaCl-sealed annealing strategy.
J Alloys Compd 2021;884:161063–4.

[274] Zhang H, Zeng Y, Cao L, Yang L, Fang D, Yi B, et al. Enhanced electrocatalytic

performance of ultrathin PtNi alloy nanowires for oxygen reduction reaction.
Front Energy 2017;11:260–7.

[275] Zhang L, Roling LT, Wang X, Vara M, Chi M, Liu J, et al. Platinum-based

nanocages with subnanometer-thick walls and well-defined, controllable facets.
Science 2015;349:412–6.

[276] Wang X, Figueroa-Cosme L, Yang X, Luo M, Liu J, Xie Z, et al. Pt-based

icosahedral nanocages: using a combination of {111} facets, twin defects, and
ultrathin walls to greatly enhance their activity toward oxygen reduction. Nano
Lett 2016;16:1467–71.

[277] Ercolano G, Cavaliere S, Rozi`ere J, Jones DJ. Recent developments in

electrocatalyst design thrifting noble metals in fuel cells. Curr Opin Electrochem
2018;9:271–7.

[278] Cai J, Chen J, Chen Y, Zhang J, Zhang S. Engineering carbon semi-tubes

supported platinum catalyst for efficient oxygen reduction electrocatalysis.
iScience 2023;26:106730.

[279] Park J-H, Kaur P, Park J-S, Sekhon SS. Soil-templated synthesis of mesoporous

carbons from biomass wastes for ORR catalysis. Catal Today 2022;403:2–10.

[280] Fei H-F, Li W, Bhardwaj A, Nuguri S, Ribbe A, Watkins JJ. Ordered nanoporous
carbons with broadly tunable pore size using bottlebrush block copolymer
templates. J Am Chem Soc 2019;141:17006–14.

[281] Lee J, Lee YA, Yoo C-Y, Yoo JJ, Gwak R, Cho WK, et al. Self-templated synthesis of
interconnected porous carbon nanosheets with controllable pore size: mechanism
and electrochemical capacitor application. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2018;
261:119–25.

[282] Han X-F, Batool N, Wang W-T, Teng H-T, Zhang L, Yang R, et al. Templated-

assisted synthesis of structurally ordered intermetallic Pt3Co with ultralow
loading supported on 3D porous carbon for oxygen reduction reaction. ACS Appl
Mater Interfaces 2021;13:37133–41.

[283] Liu M, Li J, Cai C, Zhou Z, Ling Y, Liu R. A polyacrylonitrile copolymer-silica

template for three-dimensional hierarchical porous carbon as a Pt catalyst support
for the oxygen reduction reaction. Dalton Trans 2017;46:9912–7.

[284] Zhou T, Zhou Y, Ma R, Liu Q, Zhu Y, Wang J. Achieving excellent activity and

stability for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis by hollow mesoporous
iron–nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon spheres. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:
12243–51.

[285] Chen M, Chen J, Jia C, Luo J, Yang Z, Chung-Yen Jung J, et al. Metal-free carbon
semi-tubes for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis. Cell Rep Phys Sci 2023;4:
101204.

[286] Wang H, Yang D, Liu S, Yin S, Yu H, Xu Y, et al. Cage-bell structured Pt@N-doped

hollow carbon sphere for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis. Chem Eng J 2021;
409:128101.

[287] Cheng Y, Lu H, Zhang K, Yang F, Dai W, Liu C, et al. Fabricating Pt-decorated

three dimensional N-doped carbon porous microspherical cavity catalyst for
advanced oxygen reduction reaction. Carbon 2018;128:38–45.

[288] Wang C, Kuai L, Cao W, Singh H, Zakharov A, Niu Y, et al. Highly dispersed Cu

atoms in MOF-derived N-doped porous carbon inducing Pt loads for superior
oxygen reduction and hydrogen evolution. Chem Eng J 2021;426:130749.

[289] Jasinski R. A new fuel cell anode catalyst. Nature 1969;201:95–105.
[290] Li Y, Wang N, Lei H, Li X, Zheng H, Wang H, et al. Bioinspired N4-

metallomacrocycles for electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction. Coord Chem
Rev 2021;442:213996.

[291] Gonz ́alez-Gait ́an C, Ruiz-Rosas R, Morall ́on E, Cazorla-Amor ́os D. Relevance of

the interaction between the M-phthalocyanines and carbon nanotubes in the
electroactivity toward ORR. Langmuir 2017;33:11945–55.

[292] Luo J, Chen M, Zhang Z, Wang K, Zhang S, Chen S. In-situ formed micropores as

footholds enabling well-dispersed high-density Fe-nx active sites for oxygen
reduction reaction. J Phys Chem C 2021;125:24988–95.

[300] Dinesh MM, Liang D, Zhang H, Ma X, Zhou X, Huang T, et al. Catalytic

performances of NiCuP@rGO and NiCuN@rGO for oxygen reduction and oxygen
evolution reactions in alkaline electrolyte. ChemistrySelect 2020;5:5855–63.

[301] Patniboon T, Hansen HA. Acid-stable and active M–N–C catalysts for the oxygen

reduction reaction: the role of local structure. ACS Catal 2021;11:13102–18.

[302] Wang Y, Pan Y, Zhu L, Yu H, Duan B, Wang R, et al. Solvent-free assembly of Co/

Fe-containing MOFs derived N-doped mesoporous carbon nanosheets for ORR
and HER. Carbon 2019;146:671–9.

[303] Noh WY, Lee JH, Lee JS. Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube–graphene hybrid

stabilizes MxN (M = Fe, Co) nanoparticles for efficient oxygen reduction reaction.
Appl Catal B 2020;268:118415.

[304] Xiao Y, Ge J, Xiao M, Fateev V, Liu C, Xing W. Nitrogen, iron-codoped

mesoporous carbon with bimodal-pores as an efficient catalyst for the oxygen
reduction reaction. Electrochim Acta 2016;209:551–6.

[305] Bai S, Zhang X, Yu Y, Li J, Yang Y, Wei H, et al. Fabricating nitrogen-rich Fe(cid:0) N/C
electrocatalysts through CeO2-assisted pyrolysis for enhanced oxygen reduction
reaction. ChemElectroChem 2019;6:4040–8.

[306] Hou K, Sun Z, Liu Y, Guan L. A NH4Cl–NaCl mixed salts assisted pyrolysis route
for preparation of a high performance Fe/N/C oxygen reduction reaction catalyst.
Inorg Chem Front 2020;7:2932–40.

[307] Kabir S, Artyushkova K, Serov A, Atanassov P. Role of nitrogen moieties in N-

doped 3D-graphene nanosheets for oxygen electroreduction in acidic and alkaline
media. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:11623–32.

[308] Li L, Shen S, Wei G, Li X, Yang K, Feng Q, et al. A comprehensive investigation on
pyrolyzed Fe–N–C composites as highly efficient electrocatalyst toward the
oxygen reduction reaction of PEMFCs. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:
14126–35.

[309] Kim D-w, Li OL, Saito N. Enhancement of ORR catalytic activity by multiple
heteroatom-doped carbon materials. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:407–13.

[310] Feng X, Bai Y, Liu M, Li Y, Yang H, Wang X, et al. Untangling the respective effects
of heteroatom-doped carbon materials in batteries, supercapacitors and the ORR
to design high performance materials. Energy Environ Sci 2021;14:2036–89.

[311] Moosapour Siahkalroudi Z, Aghabarari B, Vaezi M, Rodríguez-Castell ́on E,

Martínez-Huerta MV. Effect of secondary heteroatom (S, P) in N-doped reduced
graphene oxide catalysts to oxygen reduction reaction. Mol Catal 2021;502:
111372.

[312] Li Y, Huang H, Chen S, Wang C, Liu A, Ma T. Killing two birds with one stone: a
highly active tubular carbon catalyst with effective N doping for oxygen reduction
and hydrogen evolution reactions. Catal Lett 2019;149:486–95.

[313] Zhu X, Zhu Y, Tian C, Jin T, Yang X, Jin X, et al. Pyrolysis of conjugated

nanoporous polycarbazoles to mesoporous N-doped carbon nanotubes as efficient
electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. J Mater Chem A 2017;5:
4507–12.

[314] Yang M, Shu X, Zhang J. A defect-rich N, P Co-doped carbon foam as efficient

electrocatalyst toward oxygen reduction reaction. ChemCatChem 2020;12:
4105–11.

[315] Zheng Y, Chen S, Zhang KAI, Guan J, Yu X, Peng W, et al. Template-free

construction of hollow mesoporous carbon spheres from a covalent triazine
framework for enhanced oxygen electroreduction. J Colloid Interface Sci 2022;
608:3168–77.

[316] Sun T, Wang J, Qiu C, Ling X, Tian B, Chen W, et al. N codoped and defect-rich
nanocarbon material as a metal-free bifunctional electrocatalyst for oxygen
reduction and evolution reactions. Adv Sci 2018;5:1800036.

[317] Zhao H, Hu Z-P, Zhu Y-P, Ge L, Yuan Z-Y. P-doped mesoporous carbons for high-

efficiency electrocatalytic oxygen reduction. Chin J Catal 2019;40:1366–74.

[318] Ye X-w, Hu L-b, Liu M-c, Wang G, Yu F. Improved oxygen reduction performance
of a N, S co-doped graphene-like carbon prepared by a simple carbon bath
method. New Carbon Mater 2020;35:531–9.

[319] Li X, Fan L, Xu B, Shang Y, Li M, Zhang L, et al. Single-Atom-like B-N3  sites in
ordered macroporous carbon for efficient oxygen reduction reaction. ACS Appl
Mater Interfaces 2021;13:53892–903.

[320] Huang B, Liu Y, Huang X, Xie Z. Multiple heteroatom-doped few-layer carbons for
the electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:
22277–86.

[293] Mukherjee M, Samanta M, Das GP, Chattopadhyay KK. Investigation of ORR

[321] Duraisamy V, Venkateshwaran S, Thangamuthu R, Senthil Kumar SM. Hard

performances on graphene/phthalocyanine nanocomposite in neutral medium.
Microsc Microanal 2019;25:1416–21.

[294] Wada N, Nakamura M, Hoshi N. Structural effects on the oxygen reduction

reaction on Pt single-crystal electrodes modified with melamine. Electrocatalysis
2020;11:275–81.

[295] Wang Q, Zhang Z, Shi S, Wu F, Zhang Z, Li G, et al. Highly active cobalt- and
nitrogen-doped carbon derived from ZIF-67@melamine towards oxygen
reduction reaction. J Electroanal Chem 2021;894:115397.

[296] Osmieri L. Transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts for oxygen

reduction reaction. Insights on synthesis and performance in polymer electrolyte
fuel cells. ChemEngineering 2019;3:16.

[297] Nguyen-Thanh D, Frenkel AI, Wang J, O’Brien S, Akins DL.

Cobalt–polypyrrole–carbon black (Co–PPY–CB) electrocatalysts for the oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells: composition and kinetic activity. Appl
Catal B 2011;105:50–60.

[298] Lu Y, Li X, Compton RG. Oxygen reduction reaction at single entity multiwalled

carbon nanotubes. J Phys Chem Lett 2022;13:3748–53.

[299] Ran Y, Quan L, Cui J, Liu J, Lin W, Yu X, et al. Ultrafine Fe nanoparticles

embedded in N-doped carbon nanotubes derived from highly dispersed g-C3N4
nanofibers for the oxygen reduction reaction. New J Chem 2021;45:5421–7.

template derived N, S dual heteroatom doped ordered mesoporous carbon as an
efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2022;5:1562.

[322] Xing Z, Jin R, Chen X, Chen B, Zhou J, Tian B, et al. Self-templating construction
of N, P-co-doped carbon nanosheets for efficient eletreocatalytic oxygen reduction
reaction. Chem Eng J 2021;410:128015.

[323] Wang X, Jia Y, Mao X, Zhang L, Liu D, Song L, et al. A directional synthesis for

topological defect in carbon. Chem 2020;6:2009–23.

[324] Ding J, Wu D, Huang S, Lu C, Chen Y, Zhang J, et al. Topological defect-
containing Fe/N co-doped mesoporous carbon nanosheets as novel
electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction and Zn–air batteries. Nanoscale
2021;13:13249–55.

[325] Cao Y, Liu Z, Tang Y, Huang C, Wang Z, Liu F, et al. Vaporized-salt-induced sp3-
hybridized defects on nitrogen-doped carbon surface towards oxygen reduction
reaction. Carbon 2021;180:1–9.

[326] Chen D, Cao W, Liu J, Wang J, Li X, Jiang L. Filling the in situ-generated

vacancies with metal cations captured by C(cid:0) N bonds of defect-rich 3D carbon
nanosheet for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis. J Energy Chem 2021;59:
47–54.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110130

Y. Chen et al.

[327] Zhao X, Zou X, Yan X, Brown CL, Chen Z, Zhu G, et al. Defect-driven oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR) of carbon without any element doping. Inorg Chem
Front 2016;3:417–21.

[328] Wang K, Chai H, Cao Y. Using anion-exchange to induce the formation of edge
defects in CoNx to enhance ORR activity. ChemCatChem 2022;14:e202200146.
[329] Jiang H, Gu J, Zheng X, Liu M, Qiu X, Wang L, et al. Defect-rich and ultrathin N
doped carbon nanosheets as advanced trifunctional metal-free electrocatalysts for
the ORR, OER and HER. Energy Environ Sci 2019;12:322–33.

[330] Liu Q, Li Y, Zheng L, Shang J, Liu X, Yu R, et al. Sequential synthesis and active-

site coordination principle of precious metal single-atom catalysts for oxygen
reduction reaction and PEM fuel cells. Adv Energy Mater 2020;10:2000689.

[331] Thanasilp S, Hunsom M. Effect of Pt: Pd atomic ratio in Pt–Pd/C electrocatalyst-
coated membrane on the electrocatalytic activity of ORR in PEM fuel cells.
Renewable Energy 2011;36:1795–801.

[332] Wang J, Li B, Yang D, Lv H, Zhang C. Preparation optimization and single cell

application of PtNi/C octahedral catalyst with enhanced ORR performance.
Electrochim Acta 2018;288:126–33.

[333] Lv H, Wang J, Yan Z, Li B, Yang D, Zhang C. Carbon-supported Pt-Co nanowires as

a novel cathode catalyst for proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Fuel Cells
2017;17:635–42.

[334] Kim HY, Kim JM, Ha Y, Woo J, Byun A, Shin TJ, et al. Activity origin and

multifunctionality of Pt-based intermetallic nanostructures for efficient
electrocatalysis. ACS Catal 2019;9:11242–54.

[335] Zhao Q, Wang C, Wang H, Wang J, Tang Y, Mao Z, et al. Synthesis of a high-

performance low-platinum PtAg/C alloyed oxygen reduction catalyst through the
gradual reduction method. New J Chem 2020;44:3728–36.

[336] Kim H-E, Kwon J, Lee H. Catalytic approaches towards highly durable proton

exchange membrane fuel cells with minimized Pt use. Chem Sci 2022;13:
6782–95.

[337] Rivera-Lugo YY, Salazar-Gast ́elum MI, L ́opez-Rosas DM, Reynoso-Soto EA, P ́erez-
Sicairos S, Velraj S, et al. Effect of template, reaction time and platinum
concentration in the synthesis of PtCu/CNT catalyst for PEMFC applications.
Energy 2018;148:561–70.

[354] Wang J, Huang Z, Liu W, Chang C, Tang H, Li Z, et al. Design of N-coordinated
dual-metal sites: a stable and active Pt-free catalyst for acidic oxygen reduction
reaction. J Am Chem Soc 2017;139:17281–4.

[355] Lu Z, Wang B, Hu Y, Liu W, Zhao Y, Yang R, et al. An isolated zinc–cobalt atomic
pair for highly active and durable oxygen reduction. Angew Chem Int Ed 2019;58:
2622–6.

[356] Zhang H, Zhang S, Wang Y, Si J, Chen Y, Zhuang L, et al. Boosting the

performance of iron-phthalocyanine as cathode electrocatalyst for alkaline
polymer fuel cells through edge-closed conjugation. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
2018;10:28664–71.

[357] Long Y, Ye F, Shi L, Lin X, Paul R, Liu D, et al. N, P, and S tri-doped holey carbon
as an efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction in whole pH range for fuel cell
and zinc-air batteries. Carbon 2021;179:365–76.

[358] Shi J, Lv S, Zhang L, Li J, Zhou S, Qu K, et al. Porogen-in-Resin-Induced Fe, N-

doped interconnected porous carbon sheets as cathode catalysts for proton
exchange membrane fuel cells. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2021;13:48962–70.
[359] Li J, Chen M, Cullen DA, Hwang S, Wang M, Li B, et al. Atomically dispersed
manganese catalysts for oxygen reduction in proton-exchange membrane fuel
cells. Nat Catal 2018;1:935–45.

[360] Zhu J, Xiao M, Song P, Fu J, Jin Z, Ma L, et al. Highly polarized carbon nano-

architecture as robust metal-free catalyst for oxygen reduction in polymer
electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Nano Energy 2018;49:23–30.

[361] Li R, Liu F, Zhang Y, Guo M, Liu D. Nitrogen, sulfur Co-doped hierarchically

porous carbon as a metal-free electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and carbon
dioxide reduction reaction. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:44578–87.
[362] Xue L, Li Y, Liu X, Liu Q, Shang J, Duan H, et al. Zigzag carbon as efficient and
stable oxygen reduction electrocatalyst for proton exchange membrane fuel cells.
Nat Commun 2018;9:3819.

[363] Sharma S, Pollet BG. Support materials for PEMFC and DMFC electrocatalysts—a

review. J Power Sources 2012;208:96–119.

[364] Yang Y, Tan C, Yang Y, Zhang L, Zhang B-W, Wu K-H, et al. Pt3Co@Pt Core@shell

nanoparticles as efficient oxygen reduction electrocatalysts in direct methanol
fuel cell. ChemCatChem 2021;13:1587–94.

[338] Park J-Y, Kwak D-H, Ma K-B, Han S-B, Chai GS, Kim S-K, et al. Enhanced oxygen

[365] Wang G, Lei L, Jiang J, Zhou Y, Huang Q, Zou Z, et al. An ordered structured

reduction reaction of Pt deposited Fe/N-doped bimodal porous carbon
nanostructure catalysts. J Catal 2018;359:46–54.

[339] Choi J, Lee YJ, Park D, Jeong H, Shin S, Yun H, et al. Highly durable fuel cell

catalysts using crosslinkable block copolymer-based carbon supports with
ultralow Pt loadings. Energy Environ Sci 2020;13:4921–9.

cathode based on vertically aligned Pt nanotubes for ultra-low Pt loading passive
direct methanol fuel cells. Electrochim Acta 2017;252:541–8.

[366] Lee D, Gok S, Kim Y, Sung Y-E, Lee E, Jang J-H, et al. Methanol tolerant Pt–C

core–shell cathode catalyst for direct methanol fuel cells. ACS Appl Mater
Interfaces 2020;12:44588–96.

[340] Lim J, Jung C, Hong D, Bak J, Shin J, Kim M, et al. Atomically ordered Pt3Mn

[367] Li W, Xin Q, Yan Y. Nanostructured Pt–Fe/C cathode catalysts for direct methanol

intermetallic electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in fuel cells.
J Mater Chem A 2022;10:7399–408.

fuel cell: the effect of catalyst composition. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:
2530–8.

[341] Xiao F, Wang Q, Xu G-L, Qin X, Hwang I, Sun C-J, et al. Atomically dispersed Pt
and Fe sites and Pt–Fe nanoparticles for durable proton exchange membrane fuel
cells. Nat Catal 2022;5:503–12.

[342] Chen R, Shu T, Zhao F, Li Y, Yang X, Li J, et al. PtCu3  nanoalloy@porous PWOx

[368] Kim J, Jang J-S, Peck D-H, Lee B, Yoon S-H, Jung D-H. Methanol-tolerant

platinum-palladium catalyst supported on nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber for
high concentration direct methanol fuel cells. Nanomaterials 2016;6:148.
[369] Zhang W, Yao Q, Jiang G, Li C, Fu Y, Wang X, et al. Molecular trapping strategy to

composites with oxygen container function as efficient ORR electrocatalysts
advance the power density of room-temperature hydrogen-air fuel cells. Nano Res
2022;15:9010–8.

[343] Wang Q, Zhou Z-Y, Lai Y-J, You Y, Liu J-G, Wu X-L, et al. Phenylenediamine-
based FeNx/C catalyst with high activity for oxygen reduction in acid medium
and its active-site probing. J Am Chem Soc 2014;136:10882–5.

[344] Wu R, Song Y, Huang X, Chen S, Ibraheem S, Deng J, et al. High-density active
sites porous Fe/N/C electrocatalyst boosting the performance of proton exchange
membrane fuel cells. J Power Sources 2018;401:287–95.

[345] Im K, Jang J-H, Heo J, Kim D, Lee K-S, Lim H-K, et al. Design of Co-NC as efficient
electrocatalyst: the unique structure and active site for remarkable durability of
proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Appl Catal B 2022;308:121220.

[346] Wang R, Zhang P, Wang Y, Wang Y, Zaghib K, Zhou Z. ZIF-derived Co–N–C ORR
catalyst with high performance in proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Prog Nat
Sci Mater Int 2020;30:855–60.

[347] He Y, Hwang S, Cullen DA, Uddin MA, Langhorst L, Li B, et al. Highly active
atomically dispersed CoN4  fuel cell cathode catalysts derived from surfactant-
assisted MOFs: carbon-shell confinement strategy. Energy Environ Sci 2019;12:
250–60.

[348] Wang Q, Zhang Z, Wang M, Liu F, Jiang L, Hong B, et al. Bioinspired fiber-like
porous Cu/N/C electrocatalyst facilitating electron transportation toward oxygen
reaction for metal–air batteries. Nanoscale 2018;10:15819–25.

[349] Lu F, Fan K, Cui L, Yang Y, Wang W, Zhang G, et al. Cu-N4 single atoms derived
from metal-organic frameworks with trapped nitrogen-rich molecules and their
use as efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction. Chem Eng J 2022;
431:133242.

[350] Zhang R, Zhang J, Ma F, Wang W-y, Li R-f. Preparation of Mn-N-C catalyst and its

electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline medium.
J Fuel Chem Technol 2014;42:467–75.

[351] Luo E, Zhang H, Wang X, Gao L, Gong L, Zhao T, et al. Single-atom Cr(cid:0) N4  sites
designed for durable oxygen reduction catalysis in acid media. Angew Chem Int
Ed 2019;58:12469–75.

[352] Du J, Cheng F, Wang S, Zhang T, Chen J. M(Salen)-derived nitrogen-doped M/C
(M = Fe, Co, Ni) porous nanocomposites for electrocatalytic oxygen reduction. Sci
Rep 2014;4:4386.

[353] Chao G, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Zong W, Zhang N, Xue T, et al. Nitrogen-coordinated
single-atom catalysts with manganese and cobalt sites for acidic oxygen
reduction. J Mater Chem A 2022;10:5930–6.

stabilize subnanometric Pt clusters for highly active electrocatalysis. ACS Catal
2019;9:11603–13.

[370] Kosmala T, Bibent N, Sougrati MT, Draˇzi ́c G, Agnoli S, Jaouen F, et al. Stable,
active, and methanol-tolerant PGM-free surfaces in an acidic medium: electron
tunneling at play in Pt/FeNC hybrid catalysts for direct methanol fuel cell
cathodes. ACS Catal 2020;10:7475–85.

[371] Sebasti ́an D, Serov A, Artyushkova K, Gordon J, Atanassov P, Aric`o AS, et al. High
performance and cost-effective direct methanol fuel cells: Fe-N-C methanol-
tolerant oxygen reduction reaction catalysts. ChemSusChem 2016;9:1986–95.

[372] Martinaiou I, Monteverde Videla AHA, Weidler N, Kübler M, Wallace WDZ,

Paul S, et al. Activity and degradation study of an Fe-N-C catalyst for ORR in
direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC). Appl Catal B 2020;262:118217.

[373] Qu Y, Zhang W, Guang B, Xiao Y, Liu X, Zhai C, et al. Poly(ionic liquids) derived

N, S co-doped carbon nanorod from in situ and template-free method as an
efficient metal-free bifunctional electrocatalysts for direct methanol fuel cells.
J Alloys Compd 2022;912:165261.

[374] Liu L, Zeng G, Chen J, Bi L, Dai L, Wen Z. N-doped porous carbon nanosheets as
pH-universal ORR electrocatalyst in various fuel cell devices. Nano Energy 2018;
49:393–402.

[375] Shu C, Song B, Wei X, Liu Y, Tan Q, Chong S, et al. Mesoporous 3D nitrogen-doped

yolk-shelled carbon spheres for direct methanol fuel cells with polymer fiber
membranes. Carbon 2018;129:613–20.

[376] Wei Y, Shengzhou C, Weiming L. Oxygen reduction on non-noble metal

electrocatalysts supported on N-doped carbon aerogel composites. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2012;37:942–5.

[377] Shi Q, He Y, Bai X, Wang M, Cullen DA, Lucero M, et al. Methanol tolerance of
atomically dispersed single metal site catalysts: mechanistic understanding and
high-performance direct methanol fuel cells. Energy Environ Sci 2020;13:
3544–55.

[378] Rosli RE, Sulong AB, Daud WRW, Zulkifley MA, Husaini T, Rosli MI, et al.

A review of high-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cell (HT-PEMFC)
system. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:9293–314.

[379] Arslan F, Chuluunbandi K, Freiberg ATS, Kormanyos A, Sit F, Cherevko S, et al.

Performance of quaternized polybenzimidazole-cross-linked poly(vinylbenzyl
chloride) membranes in HT-PEMFCs. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2021;13:
56584–96.

[380] Byeon A, Lee KJ, Lee MJ, Lee JS, Lee IH, Park H-Y, et al. Effect of catalyst pore
size on the performance of non-precious Fe/N/C-based electrocatalysts for high-
temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. ChemElectroChem 2018;5:
1805–10.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110131

Y. Chen et al.

[381] Li W, Wang D, Liu T, Tao L, Zhang Y, Huang Y-C, et al. Doping-modulated strain

enhancing the phosphate tolerance on PtFe alloys for high-temperature proton
exchange membrane fuel cells. Adv Funct Mater 2022;32:2109244.

[382] Cheng Y, He S, Lu S, Veder J-P, Johannessen B, Thomsen L, et al. Iron single atoms
on graphene as nonprecious metal catalysts for high-temperature polymer
electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Adv Sci 2019;6:1802066.

[383] Razmjooei F, Yu J-H, Lee H-Y, Lee B-J, Singh KP, Kang T-H, et al. Single-atom
iron-based electrocatalysts for high-temperature polymer electrolyte membrane
fuel cell: organometallic precursor and pore texture tailoring. ACS Appl Energy
Mater 2020;3:11164–76.

[384] Yang Z, Moriguchi I, Nakashima N. Durable Pt electrocatalyst supported on a 3D

nanoporous carbon shows high performance in a high-temperature polymer
electrolyte fuel cell. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2015;7:9800–6.

[385] Lim SY, Martin S, Gao G, Dou Y, Simonsen SB, Jensen JO, et al. Self-standing
nanofiber electrodes with Pt–Co derived from electrospun zeolitic imidazolate
framework for high temperature PEM fuel cells. Adv Funct Mater 2021;31:
2006771.

[386] Cheng Y, Wang M, Lu S, Tang C, Wu X, Veder J-P, et al. First demonstration of

phosphate enhanced atomically dispersed bimetallic FeCu catalysts as Pt-free
cathodes for high temperature phosphoric acid doped polybenzimidazole fuel
cells. Appl Catal B 2021;284:119717.

[387] Hu Y, Jensen JO, Pan C, Cleemann LN, Shypunov I, Li Q. Immunity of the Fe-N-C

catalysts to electrolyte adsorption: phosphate but not perchloric anions. Appl
Catal B 2018;234:357–64.

[388] Ren H, Wang Y, Yang Y, Tang X, Peng Y, Peng H, et al. Fe/N/C nanotubes with
atomic Fe sites: a highly active cathode catalyst for alkaline polymer electrolyte
fuel cells. ACS Catal 2017;7:6485–92.

[389] Adabi H, Shakouri A, Ul Hassan N, Varcoe JR, Zulevi B, Serov A, et al. High-

performing commercial Fe–N–C cathode electrocatalyst for anion-exchange
membrane fuel cells. Nat Energy 2021;6:834–43.

[390] He Q, Zeng L, Wang J, Jiang J, Zhang L, Wang J, et al. Polymer-coating-induced
(cid:0) 2

synthesis of FeNx enriched carbon nanotubes as cathode that exceeds 1.0 W cm
peak power in both proton and anion exchange membrane fuel cells. J Power
Sources 2021;489:229499.

[391] Peng X, Omasta TJ, Magliocca E, Wang L, Varcoe JR, Mustain WE. Nitrogen-

doped carbon–CoOx nanohybrids: a precious metal free cathode that exceeds 1.0
(cid:0) 2  peak power and 100 h life in anion-exchange membrane fuel cells.
W cm
Angew Chem Int Ed 2019;58:1046–51.

[392] Singh SK, Kashyap V, Manna N, Bhange SN, Soni R, Boukherroub R, et al. Efficient
and durable oxygen reduction electrocatalyst based on CoMn alloy oxide
nanoparticles supported over N-doped porous graphene. ACS Catal 2017;7:
6700–10.

[393] Wang L, Bellini M, Miller HA, Varcoe JR. A high conductivity ultrathin anion-
exchange membrane with 500+ h alkali stability for use in alkaline membrane
(cid:0) 2 at 80
C. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:15404–12.
fuel cells that can achieve 2 W cm
[394] Hu Q, Li G, Pan J, Tan L, Lu J, Zhuang L. Alkaline polymer electrolyte fuel cell

◦

with Ni-based anode and Co-based cathode. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:
16264–8.

[395] Venkateswara Rao C, Ishikawa Y. Activity, selectivity, and anion-exchange

membrane fuel cell performance of virtually metal-free nitrogen-doped carbon
nanotube electrodes for oxygen reduction reaction. J Phys Chem C 2012;116:
4340–6.

[396] Lu Y, Wang L, Preuß K, Qiao M, Titirici M-M, Varcoe J, et al. Halloysite-derived
nitrogen doped carbon electrocatalysts for anion exchange membrane fuel cells.
J Power Sources 2017;372:82–90.

[397] Pham CV, Britton B, B ̈ohm T, Holdcroft S, Thiele S. Doped, defect-enriched carbon
nanotubes as an efficient oxygen reduction catalyst for anion exchange membrane
fuel cells. Adv Mater Interfaces 2018;5:1800184.

Yizhe Chen is currently a Ph.D. student in College of Science/
Institute for Sustainable Energy at Shanghai University. Yizhe
Chen received his M.S. degree in Environmental Engineering
from  Shanghai  Polytechnic University  in  2022.  His  expertise
areas  are  electrochemical  energy  technologies,  such  as  elec-
trocatalysis and fuel cells.

Shiming Zhang is currently an Associate Professor in College
of Sciences/Institute for Sustainable Energy at Shanghai Uni-
versity. Dr. Zhang received his Ph.D. in Electrochemistry from
Wuhan  University  in  2014,  with  an  experience  of  exchange
student  during  2013  at  Nanyang  Technological  University,
Singapore.  He  then  mainly  carried  out  the  postdoctoral
research from 2015 to 2019 at Shanghai Electrochemical En-
ergy  Device  Engineering  Technology  Research  Center,
Shanghai  Jiao  Tong  University.  He  was  selected  for  the
Shanghai Rising-Star Program in 2018. His expertise areas are
electrochemical energy technologies, such as electrocatalysis,
fuel cells, and Li-ion batteries.

Jiujun Zhang is a Professor in College of Sciences/Institute for
Sustainable Energy at Shanghai University, a former Principal
Research  Officer  at  National  Research  Council  of  Canada
(NRC).  Dr.  Zhang is a Fellow  of Canadian Academy of Engi-
neering (CAE), Fellow of The Academy of Science of The Royal
Society of Canada (FRSCCA), Fellow of The Engineering Insti-
tute of Canada (EIC), Fellow of International Society of Elec-
trochemistry  (ISE),  and  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  of
Chemistry (RSC-UK). Dr. Zhang received his B.S. and M.S. in
Electrochemistry  from  Peking  University  in  1982  and  1985,
respectively,  and  his  Ph.D.  in  Electrochemistry  from  Wuhan
University in 1988. Dr. Zhang’s main research areas are Elec-
trochemistry,  Electrocatalysts,  Fuel  cells,  Lithium  batteries,

Metal-air batteries, Supercapacitors, and H2O/CO2 electrolysis.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience98(2023)10110132
