Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Analysis of solid oxide fuel and electrolysis cells operated in a real-system
environment: State-of-the-health diagnostic, failure modes, degradation
mitigation and performance regeneration

Vanja Suboti ́c *, Christoph Hochenauer

Institute of Thermal Engineering, Graz University of Technology, Inffeldgasse 25/B, Graz 8010, Austria

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC)
Solid oxide electrolysis (SOE) degradation
State-of-the-health monitoring (SoH)
Degradation prevetion
Regeneration

Solid oxide cells (SOC) play a major role in strategic visions to achieve decarbonization and climate-neutrality.
With its multifuel capability, this technology has received rapidly growing amount of attention from researchers
worldwide. Due to the great flexibility of SOCs with respect to the fuels that can be used, not only hydrogen, but
also biogas, natural gas, diesel reformates and many other conventional and alternative fuels can be used. This
makes  it  possible  to  couple  SOCs  with  diverse  sustainable  fuel  sources  to  generate  electricity  or  to  generate
valuable fuels such as syngas when utilizing renewable electricity. In this paper, the reader is provided with a
review of the existing knowledge about solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) and solid oxide electrolysis (SOE) systems
and how to safely operate them over the long-term, placing a special focus on real-world operating environments.
Both the utilization and generation of real commercially available fuels are taken into consideration. Different
failure modes can appear during the system operation under real-world conditions and reduce the SOC lifetime,
an  aspect  that  is  extensively  discussed  in  this  review.  Firstly,  a detailed  discussion  of  the  difference between
carbon-free and carbon-containing fuels is presented, considering different impurities and their impacts on the
SOC  performance,  stability and lifetime.  Secondly,  unfavorable operating  conditions  are presented  and possi-
bilities for the early identification of different failure modes are explored. An overview of available conventional
and non-conventional diagnostic tools and their applications is provided here. Overall, this review paper presents
a guideline for all relevant degradation issues related to SOCs operated in a real-world environment, describing
(i) how these issues appear and how to understand them, (ii) how to predict them, (iii) how to identify them and
(iv) how to prevent them, as well as, if required, how to reverse them. To achieve this goal, individual chapters
specifically address failure modes, degradation prediction, degradation prevention and performance regenera-
tion. The reader is provided with necessary knowledge about the long-term and short-term operating stability
and  the  degradation  provoked  in  a  compact  summary.  The  available  knowledge  about  specific  process  fre-
quencies is summarized in one diagram, which is a novel contribution of this review. This enables researchers to
rapidly  identify  all  occurring  process  mechanisms  with  SOFCs  and  SOECs.  Moreover,  suggestions  for  how  to
accelerate degradation and how to regenerate performance are summarized in several tables.

1. Overview and scope of this review

Solid oxide cells (SOCs) present a great solution for ensuring a sus-
tainable  energy  future,  especially  when  they  are  compared  with  the
available  conventional  technologies.  To  achieve  a  sustainable  energy
future, three main technological challenges must be overcome: (i) en-
ergy demand savings, (ii) improving the efficiency of energy generation
technologies  and  (iii)  implementing  renewable  energy  and  replacing
fossil fuels. Addressing these challenges means radically rethinking the

available energy system [1–5]. Solid oxide cells enable us to overcome
the  second  and  third  challenges.  Firstly,  they  have  an  electrical  effi-
ciency of more than 60% when used in real systems [6], resulting in a
significant emissions decrease. Secondly, they can be operated with a
variety of fuels, such as conventional diesel fuel and natural gas, but also
alternative  biogas,  biomass  gasification  products,  ammonia,  or
hydrogen.  SOCs  thus  embody  a  synthesis  of  traditional  and  radically
new systems and principles. Among other available fuel cell types, SOCs
feature  the  highest  efficiency  and  fuel  flexibility  [7].  These  features

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: vanja.subotic@tugraz.at (V. Suboti ́c).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101011
Received 6 October 2021; Received in revised form 11 March 2022; Accepted 30 April 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101011Availableonline18August20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

indicate that they bridge the gap between conventional and alternative
technologies, leading us toward the leading future climate-friendly en-
ergy technologies. Moreover, SOCs offer a unique opportunity to employ
a single unit to generate both (i) electricity and heat when operating in a
solid  oxide  fuel  cell  (SOFC)  mode  and  (ii)  valuable  fuels,  such  as
hydrogen or syngas, when operating in the solid oxide electrolysis (SOE)
mode [8].

Despite the great suitability and flexibility of solid oxide cells for real
system  applications,  thus  including  both  SOFCs  and  SOEs,  several
challenges presented by degradation, possibilities to identify and reverse
it, material suitability and general lifetime issues must still be addressed
to  accelerate  their  commercialization  and  use  in  present  and  future
energy systems. It is important to fully understand their behavior and
operating issues and to discover options that can improve their opera-
tion and lifetime, especially at the level of industrial-sized cells, stacks
and, ultimately, systems. This paper provides a comprehensive review
that summarizes all of the possible failure modes and their impacts on
SOC performance, suggestions for the early identification of undesired
failures and degradation mechanisms, their mitigation and performance
regeneration. Such a condensed presentation of all these relevant points
in a single paper has been lacking up until now, but is critically neces-
sary for members of the scientific community.

This  review was  carried  out  to  provide  a  comprehensive,  reliable,
critical and accessible summary of information about SOCs, addressing
the most important issues that affect the improvement of the SOC life-
time.  This  review  paper  combines  comprehensive  aspects  of  SOCs  to
describe how (i) to recognize relevant characteristics of the operating
environment regarding the SOC reliability and durability, (ii) to identify
failure modes and all of the individual degradation mechanisms, (iii) to
apply appropriate SoH diagnostic tools and (iv) to provide strategies that
can  be  employed  to  mitigate  degradation  and  improve  SOC  stability
throughout the entire lifetime. All of these aspects are addressed under
real-system conditions. This review, therefore, is of great importance to
the  community,  since  it  presents  a  preliminary  SOC  guideline  for  re-
searchers,  students, system  applicants  and  operators, as  well  as  other
interested stakeholders.

1.1. Structure of this work

This  review  was  carried  out  to  summarize  information  about  the
application of SOC single cells, and especially of industrial-sized cells
and  cells  as  they  are  used  in  stacks  and  real  systems,  under  real-life
operating conditions. We discuss the influence of the real system envi-
ronment on the performance and morphological behavior of the cells, as
well as possible degradation mechanisms and the strategies that can be
used to inhibit the undesired negative effects and to reverse degradation
that has already occurred. This paper begins with an introduction, ends
with  a  concluding  discussion,  and  contains  four  main  thematic  sub-
sections:

• Lifetime issues and failure modes encountered when running SOCs
• Failure prediction and accelerated degradation tests
• State-of-the-health diagnostics for running SOCs
• Degradation mitigation and performance regeneration

Lifetime issues and failure modes in running SOCs - The degradation of
electrochemical  performance  can  have  different  causes,  such  as  the
coarsening  of  catalytic  particles,  contamination  of  active  sites  by  im-
purities,  carbon  deposition,  electrode  delamination  and  system
component degradation. The effects of most of these degradation causes
are closely related to the (i) fuels used, such as the fuel composition, gas
quality  and  impurities  contained,  and  (ii)  set  operating  conditions,
encompassing the operating temperature, degree of reactant utilization,
operating current and other factors. Identification and quantification of
diverse  degradation  processes  at  different  levels  is  required  to  select
optimal  system  operating  conditions.  To  achieve  this  aim,  different

degradation mechanisms are summarized and discussed in Section 2.

Failure prediction and accelerated degradation tests - This section pro-
vides more detailed insight into diverse strategies used to identify failure
modes  that  may  occur  within  the  SOC  systems  and  to  predict  their
impact on the performance behavior. The failure prediction can be based
on numerical data, experimental data or even a combination of these.
Therefore, in this section, we focus on: (i) model-driven and data-driven
predictions  tools  and  (ii)  accelerating  stress  testing.  Employing  such
tools, it is possible to collect information about the expected SOCs life-
time  and  degradation  mechanisms  that  can  occur  without  having  to
perform  long-term  real-life  testing.  Accelerating  stress  testing  is  of
crucial importance for the further development and commercialization
of SOC technology. This type of test has to be properly designed. The
topic  of  accelerated  degradation  testing  for  SOCs  has  not  yet  been
comprehensively addressed, and no review of the current literature was
previously available. Therefore, special attention is given to this topic in
Section 3.

State-of-the-health (SoH) diagnostics for running SOCs - In this section,
we describe how researchers can identify failure modes and degradation
mechanisms  in  the  running  SOC  systems  at  an  early  stage,  thus,  pre-
venting irreversible degradation. Once reliable online SoH estimate can
be made, and the likely end of life can be anticipated, optimal mainte-
nance actions can be planned to prevent damage to equipment and a loss
of  operability.  No  review  of  the  current  literature  was  previously
available to provide an insight into all available conventional tools for
SOC application and a comparison of their applications with those of
SOC cells, stacks and systems. The results of this review are found in
Section 4.

Degradation  mitigation  and  performance  regeneration  -  This  section
contains a summary of strategies used to mitigate, limit and reverse SOC
degradation and extend their durability. Appropriate measures can be
applied  to  prolong  the  lifetime  of  the  SOC  systems.  These,  however,
differ in terms of their diverse degradation modes, operating modes and
the types of SOC employed; therefore, they must be carefully designed.
In Section 5, we analyze and summarize the strategies that have already
been  used  to  mitigate,  limit  and  reverse  degradation  as  well  as  to
regenerate SOC performance.

This review enables the reader/SOC operator to prepare a suitable
operating  environment,  select  an  appropriate  fuel,  gain  insight  into
possible  failure  modes,  employ  appropriate  SoH  tools  to  identify  all
changes  that  occur,  and  finally,  to  mitigate  and  reverse  degradation.
This is also illustrated in Fig. 1. Here, we present four steps that were
employed on the basis of the knowledge presented in the four sections:
(i) predicting SOC performance under specific operating conditions; (ii)
using performance data to prepare experimental design; (iii) using the
information available in the Section 4, to select appropriate diagnostic
tools; and (iv) selecting suitable mitigation and regeneration strategies
to prolong the SOC lifetime and enable stable long-term operation.

Previous  reviews  reported  only  specific  topics  considered  in  the
present  study.  The  results  of  an  analysis  of  the  SOFC  suitability  for
operation with carbon-based fuels and their impact on the performance
degradation was reported by Gür [9], who focussed on methane fuel,
and Lanzini et al. [10], who reviewed the impact of fuel contaminants in
biogas-fed SOFCs. Boldrin et al. [11] provided a comprehensive review
of strategies used with carbon- and sulfur-tolerant SOFC materials, thus
conducting  a  detailed  examination  of  degradation  effects  and  ap-
proaches
tolerance.  Regarding
increase  electrode
high-temperature  electrolysis  operation,  Mocoteguy  et  al.  [12]  and
Wang et al. [13] reviewed and analysed degradation mechanisms and
phenomena  in  SOEs,  while  Chen  and  Jiang  [14]  reviewed  material
degradation  processes  in  SOEs.  For  more  information  on  recent  ad-
vances  in  SOEs,  we  refer  the  reader  to  [15,16].  Huang  et  al.  [17]
reviewed  AC  impedance  modeling  and  validation,  while  Fasmin  and
Srinivasan  [18] reported results of the nonlinear impedance spectros-
copy, although these were not directly correlated with the SOC processes
or  mechanisms.  In  this  study,  we  provide  a  detailed  review  of  the

taken

to

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010112

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 1. Illustrated main scope of this review.

Fig. 2. Effect of different impurities on the SOC morphology: (i) phosphine, reprinted from [29] and [30] with permission from Elsevier, (ii) chlorine, reprinted from
[31] and [32] with permission from Elsevier, (iii) sulfur, reprinted from [33] with permission from Elsevier, (iv) chromium, reprinted from [34] and [35] with
permission from Elsevier, and (v) siloxane, reprinted from [32] with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010113

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

following topics: (i) failure modes that occur during the SOC operation
under real-world operating conditions, (ii) options for failure prediction,
(iii)  accelerating  degradation  tests,  (iv)  state-of-the-health  diagnostic
tools,  (v)  degradation  mitigation,  and  (vi)  performance  regeneration.
Such a review has not appeared in the available literature until now, but
is critically necessary.

2. Lifetime issues and failures encountered when running SOCs

are optimized for SOFC operation, and their further optimization for use
in  an  SOE  mode  is  necessary  to  further  avoid  undesired  degradation.
Long-term degradation processes are beyond scope of this review and
are not further discussed.

In  this  section,  we  describe  the  effects  of  short-term  degradation,
which are mainly influenced by the operating conditions and for which
appropriate  counteractions  can  be  taken.  Detailed  descriptions  are
provided below.

In  this  chapter,  we  discuss  SOC  reliability  and  durability  issues,
which can be disturbed by different failure modes and the subsequent
performance and morphology degradation. Depending on the degrada-
tion  mechanisms,  this  can  be  identified  as  long-term  or  short-term
degradation.  Long-term  degradation  is  correlated  with  the  perfor-
mance losses over time that mainly occur as a result of the morphology
degradation.  These  cannot  be  significantly  adjusted  by  the  operating
environment. This type of degradation still presents the main challenge
regarding SOC development and requires improvements in the materials
used or development of new optimized materials. A short overview of
degradation rates observed in both SOFC and SOE operating modes for
single-cells and stacks is presented in Table 1. The most recent material
developments decreased the degradation rate for SOFCs down to 0.5%/
1,000 h [14,19,20], while the lowest degradation rate for SOEs recorded
is  1.5%/1,000  h  after  3,600  h  at  1  A/cm2  [21],  both  of  which  were
observed for Forschungszentrum Jülich stacks. The materials employed

Table 1
Summary of selected reported degradation rates.

Operating
mode

Operating
unit

Degradation rate

SOFC

SOFC

SOFC

SOFC

SOE

SOE

SOE

SOE

SOE

SOE

3%/1,000 h

0.64%/1,000 h

0.2%/1,000 h

0.6%/1,000 h

3.8%/1,000 h

4.26%/1,000 h

2.1%/1,000 h
after initial 1,000
h, 3.9%/1,000h
after next 1,000 h
1.5%/1,000 h

3.2%/1,000 h a

8.9%/1,000 h a

Fuel
electrode-
supported
planar cell
Electrolyte-
supported
button cell
4-cell fuel
electrode-
supported
stack
2-cell fuel
electrode-
supported
stack

Fuel
electrode-
supported
circular cell

Electrolyte-
supported
button cell

Metal-
supported
circular cell

2-cell fuel
electrode-
supported
stack
10-cell
electrolyte
supported
stack

5-cell fuel
electrode-
supported
stack

Operating
conditions

750∘C, 0.7 V,
2,000 h, H2/H2O/
N2=48.5/48.5/3

800∘C at 0.5 A/
cm2, 120 h

700∘C, 0.5 A/cm2,
35,000 h, H2/
H2O=80/20

700∘C, 0.5 A/cm2,
70,000 h, H2/
H2O=80/20, fuel
utilization 40%

778∘C± 6∘C, 1 A/
cm2, 80% H2O,
36% H2O
utilization, 9,000
h
800∘C, 0.5 A/cm2,
300 h after initial
120 h SOFC
operation
800∘C, 0.3 A/cm2,
2,000 h, H2/
H2O=57/43

3,600 h, 0.875 A/
cm2, H2/H2O=1,
H2O utilization
44%
800∘C, variation
between 0.25 A/
cm2  and 0.317 A/
cm2, 1,000 h,
H2O=56%
800∘C, 0.2 A/cm2,
1,000 h,
H2O=56%

Source

[22]

[23]

[19]

[24]

[25,

26]

[23]

[27]

[21]

[28]

[28]

2.1. Contaminants and their impact on the SOC performance

The  great  advantage  of  SOCs  is  that  variety  of  fuels  can  be  used.
However, a big challenge is still how to achieve long-term SOC operation
without  experiencing  undesired  failure  modes,  which  occur  due  to
multifuel capability. The first step is to provide contaminant-free fuels.
However, many conventional and alternative fuels appropriate for SOC
operation,  such  as  natural  gas,  diesel  or  biogas,  contain  impurities
(phosphine, sulfur, siloxane). They mainly influence the fuel electrode.
On the air electrode, chromium is the most commonly-known contam-
inant. Different impurities cause both performance and morphological
degradation of the running cells. The impact of the most common im-
purities available in the relevant SOC fuels on the SOC performance is
described  below  and  illustrated  in  Fig.  2.  Moreover,  the  sources  of
specific impurities and their impacts on specific electrodes are summa-
rized in Table 2. Since all of these impurities cause significant perfor-
mance degradation, which is often seen as irreversible, only the impact
on the SOC morphology is summarized in this table.

2.1.1. Sulfur poisoning

Sulfur is the most commonly present impurity in a number of SOFC-
relevant fuels, such as natural gas (>1%), coal syngas (100-300 ppm)
and  biogas  (50-200  ppm)[36–38].  Sulfurous  species  are  especially
harmful  for  SOC  fuel  electrodes  and  cause  detrimental  performance
degradation [39–41]. Their presence accelerates Ni sintering and carbon
deposition  [40,42]  and  even  completely  changes  the  electrode
morphology,  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  For  this  reason,  it  is  important  to
remove sulfur from the fuels used, which is possible by using desulfur-
ization units. Nevertheless, although the amount of sulfur is significantly
reduced by using desulfurization technologies, residual concentrations
still fall within the range of a few ppm [43]. Even such low concentra-
tions can cause undesired degradation effects, since Ni-catalysts exhibit
restricted  tolerance  toward  sulfur  [10].  Increasing  concentrations  of
sulfurous  species  result  in  rising  degradation  rates.  In  general,  the
presence of sulfur initially results in a rapid performance drop, which is
seen  as  the  first  degradation stage.  In  the  second stage,  initial  degra-
dation is followed either by stable performance without further degra-
dation, continuing degradation with a lower degradation rate for only a
period of several hours, or further continuous degradation [44]. It is also
interesting to mention at this stage that, although several studies report
that  increasing  the  amount  of  sulfur  carbon  formation  is  enhanced,
Chattanathan et al. [45] reported contradictory results, namely, that the
presence of H2S in biogas prevents coking.

Brightman et al. [46] reported that exposure of Ni/CGO electrodes to
up to 3 ppm H2S for 90 min causes a rapid increase in losses but also that
this process is reversible. Sulfur poisoning as a reversible process under
short exposure times was also reported in [47,48]. In the recently pub-
lished study by Pongratz et al. [48], synthetic product gas from wood
steam gasification including 1–10 ppm H2S was used as a fuel for SOFC,
while  the  operating  temperature  varied  between  750∘C  and  800∘C.
Although  performance  deterioration  occurred  during  the  operation,
removing  the  sulfurous  species  from  the  fuel  enabled  the  authors  to
regenerate the overall performance and regain the initial performance.
This  conclusion  was
fuel  electrode-  and
electrolyte-supported SOFC. Appari et al. [49], however, reported, that
sulfur poisoning is reversible only at higher temperatures such as 800∘C,
while  the  operation  at  lower  temperatures  such  as  700∘C  resulted  in

for  both

reached

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010114

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Table 2
Summary of relevant contaminants and their impacts on SOC based on references provided in Section 2.1.

Impurity source

Threshold

Affected component

Observations

Impurity

Operating
mode

Sulfur

SOFC

Sulfur

SOE

Chlorine

SOFC

Chlorine

SOE

Phosphine

SOFC

SOFC

Siloxane/
silicon

Silicon/
silica

Natural gas, syngas,
biogas, biomass
Inlet CO2  gas

Coal gas, biogas,
biomass
Inlet gas mixture for co-
electrolysis

Syngas, coal gas,
biogas, biomass
Biogas, digester gas

∼3 ppm

∼ppb

∼5 ppm

∼10 ppm @OCV, ∼5
ppm under
polarization
∼3 ppb

∼ppb

Fuel electrode

Fuel electrode

Fuel electrode

Fuel electrode

Fuel electrode

Fuel electrode

SOE

Glass sealing, water

N/A

Chromium

SOFC SOE

Fe-Cr alloy metallic
interconnects

N/A

Fuel electrode, Air
electrode, Electrolyte/ fuel
electrode interface
Air electrode

Boron and
sulfur

SOFC SOE

Metallic interconnects,
air stream, glass sealing

N/A

Air electrode

Irreversible Ni morphology changes, formation of Ni sulfides,
accelerated Ni sintering and C deposition
Locally increasing potential and as a consequence higher CO-
concentration and accelerated C deposition, covered Ni sites
Blocking the Ni catalyst, formation of Ni chlorides, irreversible
morphology change, metal dusting
Cl adsorption on Ni, reduction of the electrochemical activity
and catalytic reactions

Formation of Ni phosphides, formation of secondary phases, Ni
agglomeration
SiO2  formation and deposition within electrode, Si deposition
on fuel electrode support and contact layer, TPB, interconnects,
reduced fuel electrode porosity, Si deposition
Segregation on the electrolyte/fuel electrode interface, fuel
electrode passivation, SiO2  deposition, Si deposition, SiO2/Si
inclusion into Ni particles
Formation of different secondary phases (e.g., SrCrO4, CrO2.5,
Cr2O3) on the air electrode and electrolyte, air electrode phase
decomposition, inhibited oxygen reduction reaction, inhibited
oxygen evolution reaction
Damaging influence on the air electrode stability, its
disintegration and delamination, boron deposition at electrode/
electrolyte interface, interaction with air electrode materials,
accelerated Sr segregation, formation of secondary phases

irreversible degradation. The reversibility of the degradation, however,
is mainly a function of the H2S concentration and the SOFC exposure to
it.

Moreover, Brightman et al. [46] reported that increasing the oper-
ating  current  further  decreased  the  degradation  rate.  Other  studies
indicate  that  increasing  the  current  density  results  in  an  increasing
sulfur coverage [46,50]. Hauch et al. [51] showed that reversible per-
formance losses occurred when operating at a low overpotential, while
the  microstructure  remained  unchanged  in  this  case.  However,  in-
vestigations  performed  at  high  cell  overpotential  levels  showed  that
both  reversible  performance  and  irreversible  morphological  degrada-
tion can occur during the SOFC exposure to H2S. Hagen et al. [52] and
Riegraf et al. [53] claimed that losses caused by sulfur are more severe at
high current densities. The authors identified sulfur as having the most
pronounced  impact  on  mass  transfer/fuel  reforming  processes  and
charge transfer/TPB processes.

When operating SOC in a CO2  electrolysis mode, even ppb concen-
trations of sulfur can have detrimental effects on the SOE performance
[54].  Sulfur  accelerates  carbon  deposition  in  this  case  and  makes  it
possible for carbon to occur outside the theoretically calculated range.
The goal is to minimize the amount of sulfur deposited on the fuel
electrode during the SOC operation and, if possible, to reduce it down to
zero.  Different  purification  methods  for  sulfur  removal  are  available,
including solvent absorption, biofiltration (biotrickling filter, biofilter,
bio scrubber), adsorption for primary (bulk) sulfur removal with a high
capacity  based  on  iron  oxide,  hot  guard  beds  for  achieving  ultra-low
amounts  of  sulfur  contaminants,  metal  organic  frameworks  (MOFs)
and  hydro-desulfurization  beds  (HDS).  Discussing  the  principles  un-
derlying these specific purification technologies is beyond the scope of
this  work,  but  detailed  descriptions  can  be  found  in  the  review  by
Lanzini et al. [10].

for

the  Ni/YSZ

loss  of  approximately  3%

formation  of  nickel  chloride  compounds  on  the  surface  [58–60].  The
nickel chloride and nickel sulfide compounds formed are volatile, and
their removal results in fuel electrode damage that cause metal dusting
[61]. Marina et al. [62] reported that reversible poisoning was observed
when the Ni/YSZ fuel electrodes of the fuel electrode-supported (FESC)
SOFC  were  exposed  to  coal  gas  containing  up  to  800  ppm  HCl.  The
magnitude  of  this  poisoning  decreased  as  the  temperature  increased.
The  authors  reported  that  performance  losses  were  observable  up  to
concentrations  of  approximately  100  ppm  HCl,  but  no morphological
changes  could  be  observed  due  to  the  HCl  poisoning.  Moreover,
increasing  the  HCl  amount above  100  ppm  resulted  in  no  observable
additional  performance  deterioration.  Xu  et  al.  [31]  also  reported  a
performance
fuel
electrode-supported SOFC fed with a syngas containing 100 ppm HCl,
but  unlike  to  the  previous  study,  this  was  followed  by  significant
morphological  changes  in  the  Ni  catalyst.  Moreover,  stainless  steel
exhaust  tubing  was  used  in  this  study,  which  was  attacked  by  HCl,
leading to rust deposition on the cell. The study carried out by Reeping
and  Walker  [63]  showed  highly  aggressive  performance  degradation
with  approximately  15%/hour  when  chlorine  was  combined  with
methane (CH3Cl/CH4=110 sccm/20 sccm=5.5), while the degradation
grade was very low for CH3Cl/CH4=110 sccm/100 sccm=1.1 mixture.
The possible reason for these results could be significantly higher vol-
ume fraction of chlorine in methane than in hydrogen. Here, we must
also emphasize that dry methane significantly accelerates degradation,
since  methane  cracking  and  thus  the  carbon  formation  reaction  is
favored.  The  occurrence  of  a  specific  carbon  peak  observed  when
employing  operando  Raman  spectroscopy  became  less  stable  when
introducing CH3Cl, and its intensity was reduced by 50% after 29 min.
When the operating time was increased up to approximately 174 min,
thus  increasing  the  exposure  to  chlorine,  the  carbon  intensity  and
observable carbon accumulation decreased.

2.1.2. Chlorine poisoning

The  effect  of  chlorine  poisoning  of  the  fuel  electrode  on  the  SOC
performance has been reported in several studies, most of which refer to
SOFC [55–57]. Available studies show that chlorine poisoning occurs in
two stages, as in the case of sulfur poisoning. The first stage is identified
as  reversible  adsorption  and  blocking  of  the  nickel  catalyst  surface,
while the second stage is observed to be irreversible degradation and

The recently published study by Jeanmonod et al. [64] examined the
impact of chlorine on performance during co-electrolysis operation. The
authors reported that exposure of the Ni/YSZ electrode to biogas con-
taining 10 ppm of HCl and at OCV did not impact the SOE performance,
whereby the exposure to biogas containing 5 ppm HCl under polariza-
tion  resulted  in  a  significant  irreversible  performance  degradation.
Increasing  operating  current  proportionally  increased  the  losses.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010115

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Moreover, durability tests performed at 0.5 A/cm2  under a biogas con-
taining 1 ppmv showed that steadily increasing voltage resulting in a
high degradation rate. Cl was identified as reducing the electrochemical
activity and catalytic reaction of nickel, even causing Ni depletion.

2.1.3. Phosphine poisoning

Phosphine  (PH3)  is  another  contaminant  that  can  impact  the  per-
formance of the fuel electrode. It is present in coal syngas at a concen-
tration of approximately 10 ppm. Its presence in an SOFC fuel even in
very low concentrations of 1–10 ppm can be detrimental to the SOFC
performance [65]. A number of studies reported observing morpholog-
ical changes in the Ni/YSZ fuel electrodes in the presence of phosphine
[66–69], all of which are related to the SOFC operation. This exposure
resulted  in  the  formation  of  new  phases,  mainly  nickel  phosphides
[70–72],  but  also  nickel  phosphates  [73],  which  is  identified  as  an
irreversible change and negatively affects the overall performance. Xu
et al. [70] reported dramatic irreversible performance degradation as a
result of the functional damage of the Ni/YSZ fuel electrode and espe-
cially the functional layer near the electrolyte. Operation at 10 ppm PH3
caused a loss of porosity, Ni agglomeration and even Ni migration, as
well as a loss of the TPB length. The authors claimed that even much
lower concentrations of < 2 ppm could lead to significant degradation.
Marina et al. [29] reported observing a very strong interaction between
nickel and phosphine, even at very low concentrations of < 0.5 ppm.
Further  research  by  Haga  et  al.  [74]  showed  that  phosphine  is  detri-
mental even at ppb concentrations, defining a threshold as ∼3 ppb at
800∘C. The authors reported the formation of the secondary phase on
both  the  Ni  catalyst  and  current  collector  as  well  as  subsequent  Ni
agglomeration.  They  also  observed  that  rapid  and  fatal  degradation
occurs at higher operating temperatures, while gradual degradation was
observed  at  lower  operating  temperatures.  Moreover,  if  present  in
higher  concentrations,  phosphine  can  cause  immediate  degradation,
while  it  can  lead  to  slow  performance  and  structural  degradation  at
lower  concentrations.  The  time  required  to  cause  the  total  system
breakdown depends on the fuel electrode thickness and thus the avail-
ability  of  the  catalyst,  which  means  that  it  will  appear  earlier  for
electrolyte-supported (ESC) than for fuel electrode-supported cells [65].
Based on the observations reported in the previously available studies,
phosphine is not suitable to be converted in SOFCs, but must definitively
be removed from fuel.

2.1.4. Silica poisoning

Silicon  based  impurities  represent  another  poison  that  can  affect
both  the  fuel  and  air  electrodes.  In  biogas  or  digester  gas,  siloxanes
appear as the main impurities, but studies report that their impact on
SOFC  performance  is  restricted.  Moreover,  silicon  and/or  silica  are
present  in  glass  sealing  and  can  also  be  found  in  water  during  the
electrolysis, which may lead to a degradation in SOE performance.

Haga  et  al.  [32]  revealed  in  their  study  that  operation  under
3%-humidified hydrogen with 10 ppm siloxane resulted in strong fatal
degradation,  independent  of  the  operating  temperature.  Rapid  degra-
dation from the beginning of the operation appeared regardless of the
operating  temperature,  namely,  800∘C,  900∘C  and  1,000∘C.  Morpho-
logical  changes  were  observed  as  SiO2  deposition  under  and  on  the
porous fuel electrode surface. Madi et al. [75] observed high degrada-
tion rates even when fueling SOFC with biogas containing several ppb of
siloxanes.  Si  was  deposited  within  the  entire  fuel  side,  and  thus  in-
terconnects, the fuel electrode contact layer, fuel electrode support and
TPB. Papurello and Lanzini also identified siloxane as reducing the fuel
electrode  porosity  and  disturbing  the  fuel  distribution within  the  cell
[76].  This  resulted  in  a  strong  increase  in  polarization  losses.  Si con-
denses  and deposits everywhere within the fuel electrode, which was
also shown in [77]. The authors suggested that performance recovery is
much more effective at OCV than under polarized cell conditions. Tian
and Milcarek [78] also reported increasing losses and voltage degrada-
tion rate as the siloxane concentration increased. Summarizing all the

results published, siloxanes have to be completely removed from the fuel
in order to protect the cell from the irreversible degradation.

Another issue is presence of silica in glass sealing or the water during
the steam electrolysis. Silica-containing impurities can segregate on the
interface  between  the  fuel  electrode  and  electrolyte  thus  inhibiting
further electrochemical reactions and causing electrode passivation, as
presented in [79,80]. The cause for SiO2 deposition after its evaporation
from the glass sealing was found to be the high steam partial pressure.
The authors identified SiO2 depositions rather than Si deposition, which
was identified only on the interconnects. How SiO2  is deposited on the
nickel and how the inclusion of SiO2/Si to Ni particles occurs are aspects
described and illustrated in [81]. Silica available in the glass sealing was
further identified to cause the electrolysis deactivation and performance
loss by Schefold et al. [82]. Perz et al. [83] investigated the impact of
silicon poisoning on the LSCF electrode and these authors reported that
even small amounts of silicon resulted in a strong deactivation of the
oxygen reduction.

2.1.5. Chromium poisoning

Chromium  poisoning  was  reported  in  the  literature  as  one  of  the
main causes for the air electrode degradation, which is mainly generated
from  the  Fe-Cr  alloy  metallic  interconnects  [34,84].  The  presence  of
steam  in  the  air  can  accelerate  the  process  of  chromium  evaporation
from the interconnect plates and their deposition onto the air electrode,
thus  accelerating  undesired  degradation  mechanism,  as  reported  by
Sitte  et  al.  [85–87].  Many  of  the  findings  have  been  obtained  under
SOFC operating conditions, during which different Cr phases are formed
due to chromium evaporation from the interconnect, its diffusion into
the porous air electrode and its eventual deposition [88]. The formation
of  such  phases  deteriorates  the  electrochemical  and  catalytic  perfor-
mance  of  the  SOFC  electrodes  and  may  also  prevent  the  diffusion  of
oxygen.  Moreover,  phase  decomposition  as  a  consequence  of
Cr-poisoning has been observed [89,90]. The deactivation of the elec-
trode activity and performance degradation were observed for different
electrode materials, LSM and LSF in [91] as well as LSCF [92]. More-
over, Wang et al. [93] investigated the impact of operating temperature
on  Cr  deposition  and  Sr  segregation  in  LSCF  electrodes.  The  authors
observed  that  more  chromium  deposition  and  SrCrO4  phase  was
detected as the temperature increased. Chromium deposits inhibited the
diffusion  processes  and  surface  electrochemistry.  Next,  the  authors
assumed that the decrease in chromium depositions that they observed
as  the  temperature  decreased  can  be  correlated  directly  with  the
significantly decreasing Sr segregation.

When  taking  into  consideration  SOE  operation,  chromium  oxides
and strontium chromate have been reported in the literature as occur-
ring  and  depositing  both  on  the  electrode  inner  surface  and  on  the
electrolyte  [94].  Based  upon  the  observed  results,  Chen  et  al.  [94]
claimed that Cr deposition is a chemical process which results in for-
mation of many different secondary phases in the electrode and on the
electrolyte surface. Placing a focus on the LSCF electrode during the SOE
operation, Wei et al. [95] identified the formation of SrCrO4, CrO2.5 and
Cr2O3  phases and correlated these with the SrO segregation under air
electrode polarization conditions. The formation of such phases, in turn,
inhibits the oxygen evolution reaction.

In conclusion, the effect of chromium poisoning seems to be inde-

pendent of the operation mode.

Besides  chromium,  boron  and  sulfur,  which  can  also  be  found  in
interconnects,  the  air  stream,  or  glass  sealing,  were  reported  in  the
literature as having a damaging influence on the activity and stability of
the air electrode in both the SOFC [96–101] and SOE operating mode
[102].

2.2. Impact of carbonaceous species on fuel electrode degradation

Specific impurities can cause detrimental SOC performance degra-
dation and strong morphological changes, as discussed above. However,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010116

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

while impurities have an undesired impact on the SOC performance and
its  microstructure,  the  main  fuel  components  can  also  cause  SOC
degradation under specific operating environment. The best example of
such behavior is the impact of carbon-containing fuels, which can lead to
carbon deposition, thus damaging and completely destroying the elec-
trode morphology and leading to irreversible performance deterioration
or even an abrupt performance decrease down to zero.

2.2.1. Carbon deposition

Carbon deposition appears as a major issue when operating SOFCs
with carbon-containing fuels, such as hydrocarbons or carbon monox-
ide. Fuels such as natural gas, biogas, biomass gasification products and
diesel  reformates  contain  high  concentrations  of  methane,  carbon
monoxide and carbon dioxide. CO and CO2  are present in a high con-
centration also during the co-electrolysis and CO2-electrolysis processes,
in  which  CO  and  CH4  are  produced.  For  the  past  few  decades,  great
effort has been invested in increasing the understanding of the carbon
formation and deposition phenomena for SOFC operating under polar-
ized conditions as well as under OCV. In the case of the OCV, this is equal
to the pure catalyst deactivation. Regarding the SOE operating mode,
most studies have been performed on steam electrolysis. More attention
has recently been directed toward the co-electrolysis of CO2  and H2O,
but only  a limited  number of studies  provide any insight into  carbon
deactivation.  The  information  available  for  CO2  electrolysis  is  even
more  restricted.  Nevertheless,  the  main  carbon  forming  reactions  are
chemical  reactions  linked  to  the  Ni-based  SOC  catalysts,  and  under-
standing how these processes occur is relevant in both operating modes.
CO and CH4 are, in this case, the main carbon-forming species, and their
impact on the carbon formation processes is described below.

Taking into account the methane influence, carbon formation and its
deposition on Ni-based catalysts during the natural gas reforming pro-
cess  are  well-known  phenomena  that  are  frequently  reported  in  the
literature [40,103–109]. Methane reforming reactions are related to the
methane conversion employing steam (Eq. (1) or carbon dioxide (Eq. 3)
as oxidants, which occur on the catalytic active sites. If higher hydro-
carbons  are  employed  as  a  fuel,  the  reaction  illustrated  in  Eq.  (2)  is
expected  to  occur.  In  the  steam-reforming  process,  different  steam/-
carbon (S/C) ratios can be utilized. To achieve the maximum efficiency,
researchers attempt to achieve the stoichiometric ratio of S/C=1. The
same  applies  to  dry  reforming,  for  which  a  stoichiometric  ratio  of
CO2/CH4=1 is tailored. However, this can lead to undesired hydrocar-
bon dissociation reaction, also known as cracking or pyrolysis, as pre-
sented in Eq. (6) and Eq. (13).

If we consider the carbon formation from carbon monoxide, the main
carbon  forming  reactions  are  the  Boudouard  reaction  (Eq.  (14))  and
reversible steam gasification (Eq. (15)). Reactions relevant for carbon
formation are shown in Table 3; based on these reactions, the possibility
for carbon to form when fueling the porous SOC with CO or CH4  is very
high.

Carbon  formation  mainly  begins  at  the  Ni  catalyst,  whether  the
carbon originates from CH4 or CO. Bartholomew [117] examined carbon
deposition  during  steam  reforming  and  methanation  processes  and
discovered that many different types of carbon can be deposited in these
processes. In 1982, he described these as polymeric, adsorbed, graphitic,
vermicular or filamentous carbon and carbides. In 2014, Yurkiv [118]
reviewed  the  available  literature  and  the  already  known  processes,
reporting that all different carbon types can be described as follows: (i)
heterogeneous  carbon,  which  deposits  on  the  catalytic  Ni  sites  and
which is similar to polymeric carbon, whereby such carbon is mainly
formed  under  OCV  and  inhibits  reactions;  (ii)  homogeneously/heter-
ogeneously formed pyrolytic carbon or soot, which reduces the electrode
porosity by covering the gas channels and increasing the overall resis-
tance, and eventually (iii) heterogeneously formed carbon on and in the
fuel electrode, which diffuses into Ni-particles. This changes the elec-
trode  morphology  and  leads  to  Ni  dusting,  explained  in  more  detail
below. In the same study, the author illustrated the carbon formation

Table 3
Possible carbon formation reactions according [123–126].

CH4 + H2O⇌3H2 + CO
(

CnHm + nH2O⇌nCO +

n + m

)

H2

1
2

CH4 + CO2⇌2H2 + 2CO
CO + H2O⇌H2 + CO2
C + 2H2O⇌CO2 + 2H2

CH4⇌C + 2H2
CH4 + 1
O2⇌C + H2 + H2O
2
CH4 + O2⇌C + 2H2O
CH4 + CO⇌2C + H2 + H2O
CH4 + 2CO⇌3C + 2H2O
CH4 + 3CO⇌3C + CO2 + H2 + H2O
CH4 + CO2⇌2C + 2H2O
CnHm→nC + m
2
2CO⇌C + CO2
CO + H2⇌C + H2O
CO2 + 2H2⇌C + 2H2O
CH4 + 2CO⇌3C + 2H2O
C + 1
O2⇌CO
2
C + O2⇌CO2
C + H2O⇌CO + H2

H2

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)
(7)

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)

(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)

(19)
(20)

path graphically, claiming that carbon formation always begins at the Ni
catalyst. The carbon type and its amount are a function of the operating
temperature, the fuel composition, polarization state and exposure type.
This type can differ significantly for different SOC types. An overview of
carbon  types  extracted  from  the  present  literature  is  summarized  in
Fig. 2.

Numerous studies have discussed carbon formation in relation to the
Ni catalyst. However, this formation has also been confirmed by the fact
that methane reforming and carbon formation also occur on the ionic
YSZ surface [119,120]. In contrast, the GDC layer is reported to provide
more resistance towards carbon deposition [121]. Moreover, numerous
investigations have confirmed that CO and CH4  have different impacts
on  the  performance  degradation  and  type  of  carbon  formed.  Stoeckl
et al. [111] identified carbon occurrence when fueling SOFCs with either
methane or carbon monoxide, but its appearance strongly differed as a
function of the specific fuel components.

After  feeding  the  cell  with  CO,  carbon  covered  solely  Ni  catalytic
sites,  as  a  solid  layer  encapsulating  the  Ni  grains.  Carbon  from  CH4,
however, covered both Ni and YSZ and appeared in the form of amor-
phous carbon. The difference in the carbon appearance is clearly pre-
sented in Fig. 2. It seems as though even low concentration of CH4 in fuel
enables  carbon  to  cover  both  Ni  and  YSZ,  a  hypothesis  supported  by
[122].  These  authors  fueled  SOFC  with  diesel  reformate  with  a  low
methane concentration and amorphous carbon covered both YSZ and Ni
on the fuel electrode surface. Increasing the amount of methane in the
fuel mixture resulted in the additional formation of carbon nanofibers,
especially  along  the  boundary  between  the  fuel  electrode  functional
layer and the electrolyte, as reported in [115].

Chen et al. [113] also examined the carbon deposition phenomenon
as  a  function  of  different  syngas  variations,  testing  the  effects  of  the
operating  temperature  factor.  At  650∘C,  the  authors  observed  solid
carbon depositing inside the fuel electrode, which inhibited further fuel
diffusion  and  electrochemical  reactions.  At  750∘C,  carbon  mainly
covered the electrode surface, thus influencing the conductivity. More-
over,  when  operating  the  SOFC  at  750∘C  with  a  syngas  containing
approximately  24%  CH4  for  2  h,  Ni-grains  became  encapsulated  in
carbon shell, resulting in loss of available catalytic active sites.

Taking into account the effects of dry reforming, Lanzini et al. [110]
showed that catalyst deactivation cannot be avoided, regardless of the
CO2  amount;  lower  CO2  concentrations  led  to  carbon  depositions,
whereby carbon deposition could be reduced at higher CO2  concentra-
tions,  but  catalyst  deactivation  still  occurred  and  carbon  was  still

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010117

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 3. Different types of carbon formed as a function of different fuels: (i) CH4  due to dry and steam reforming, reprinted from [110] and [111] with permission
from Elsevier and [112] with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry, (ii) different fuel mixtures as syngas (reprinted from [113] with permission from
Elsevier),  biomass  gasification  producer  gas  (reprinted  from  [114]  with  permission  from  Elsevier)  and  diesel  reformate  mixture  (reprinted  from  [115]  with
permission from the Journal of the Electrochemical Society), (iii) CO reprinted from [116] and [111] with permission from Elsevier.

formed, mainly as carbon nano-fibers.

Next,  rapid  degradation  due  to  the  presence  of  long  chain  hydro-
carbon was reported in [127]. In order to further discuss the impact of
the  operating  temperature  on  carbon  formation,  the  equilibrium  for

Fig.  4. Calculated  equilibrium  for  the  Boudouard-reaction  ()  and  methane-
cracking (). Reprinted from [128] with permission from Elsevier.

methane cracking and the Boudouard reaction is shown in Fig. 3. If the
operating  temperature  is  increased,  a  higher  amount  of  carbon  is  ex-
pected  to  occur  due  to  methane  cracking,  while  amount  of  carbon
formed  due  to  Boudouard  reaction  is  higher  at  lower  operating  tem-
peratures.  Such  equilibrium  calculations  are  also  used  as  simple  pre-
diction tools, which enable the user to adjust the operating conditions to
prevent the undesired degradation effects. These are explained in more
detail in Section 5.

Regarding the electrolysis operation, Tao et al. [129] identified the
formation  of  carbon  nanofibers  at  the  electrode/electrolyte  interface,
when operating SOE in an electrolysis mode and at operating current
densities of 2.0–2.5 A/cm2. Carbon fiber deposition resulted in a sub-
sequent interlayer delamination. In [130], the authors stated that car-
bon  forming  during  the  CO2  electrolysis  process  could  influence
performance,  such  as  the  voltage,  gas  composition  and  temperature
distribution, even before it is measured.

While  increasing  the  operating  current  density  during  the  SOFC
operation increases the number of oxygen ions available and, thus, in-
hibits carbon formation, this increase has an opposite effect during the
SOE  operation.  While  operating  SOC  in  a  co-electrolysis  mode,
increasing the current density is reflected by the increasing fraction of
CO and possibly CH4  species, which are seen as the main carbon pre-
cursors,  thus,  accelerating  carbon  formation  and  its  deposition  at  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010118

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

porous fuel electrode.

2.2.2. Metal dusting

The metal dusting process is as well-known as nickel corrosion and
this phenomenon has already been observed both in the fuel cell and
electrolysis  modes.  Since  carbon-containing  fuels  are  indeed  most
commonly used in SOC systems, the metal dusting phenomenon is firstly
correlated with carbon. The reaction initially occurs between the tran-
sition metals on the SOC fuel electrode, such as Ni, and carbon. During
this  reaction  the  amorphous  carbon  is  transformed  into  graphite,  a
process  which  is  known  as  catalytic  graphitization  [131].  The  phe-
nomenon of catalytic graphitization is generally explained based on the
results reported in [132], namely, that carbon dissolves during a solu-
tion  precipitation  mechanism  and  supersaturates  nickel,  eventually
precipitating as graphite. The overall Ni dusting reaction is driven by the
free energy difference between the amorphous and crystalline carbon
states. Chun et al. reports in [133] that nickel-carbide structures are not

stable at temperatures higher than 350 ∘C; however, the metal dusting
phenomenon occurs between 350 and 1,100 ∘C for Ni-based fuel elec-
trodes. Since that study was not performed under polarized conditions,
but under open circuit voltage, the knowledge gained is applicable to
both the SOFC and SOE operating modes. The gas compositions and Ni
surface orientation have strong impacts on the metal dusting process,
while the Ni surface orientation is especially relevant at the initial stage.
For instance, the authors showed that surface graphite intercalates into
Ni  particles  at  CO/H2=25,  causing undesired  Ni corrosion.  When  the
CO/H2  ratio is reduced down to 1, carbon diffusion into the Ni lattice
and the subsequent graphite precipitation in the bulk material occur as
an additional degradation mechanism. This excessive precipitation re-
sults in subsequent Ni disintegration. Increasing the operating temper-
ature accelerates this degradation phenomenon.

Fig. 5. Different types of Ni electrode degradation: (i) Ni reoxidation after (1) SOE operation, reprinted from [134] with permission from Elsevier, (2) reversible SOC
operation, reprinted from [135] with permission from Elsevier, and (3) SOE operation, reprinted from [136] with permission from Elsevier, and (ii) Ni agglomeration
after (1) reversible SOC operation, reprinted from [135] with permission from Elsevier, (2) SOFC operation with biomass gasification producer gas, reprinted from
[114] with permission from Elsevier, and (3) SOE operation, reprinted from [137] with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010119

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

2.3. Instability of the Ni-based electrodes

Aside from the fact that different contaminants and carbon formation
have  harmful  impacts  on  the  fuel  electrodes,  Ni  reoxidation  and
agglomeration are mechanisms that detrimentally effect the SOC per-
formance. While Ni reoxidation is partly reversible, Ni agglomeration
represents an irreversible degradation phenomenon.

2.3.1. Ni reoxidation

Ni  reoxidation  affects  the  fuel  electrode  structure,  after  which
occurrence the initial performance and morphological state of the pre-
reduced electrode  cannot be met.  The phenomenon of  Ni reoxidation
can occur due to (i) redox processes that present a circle of reduction and
oxidation processes of the fuel electrode or, (ii) an excessive number of
oxidizing species on the fuel electrode (steam or air) that can diffuse to
the electrode due to leakage, or be caused by high fuel utilization during
SOFC  operation  and/or  low  steam  utilization  during  SOE  operation.
During  the  electrolysis  operation,  a  high  amount  of  steam  is  used
(>80%),  which  causes  Ni  reoxidation,  if  low  operating  currents  are
employed. If the cell is operated at high operating currents in a fuel cell
mode, high numbers of oxygen ions will be generated and conducted to
the fuel electrode, which can accelerate the oxidation of the functional
layer.  Specific  morphological  changes  and  damage  that  occur  as  a
consequence of Ni reoxidation in both operating modes are illustrated in
Fig. 4.

Ni reoxidation under SOFC operating conditions. After reoxidation, the
size of the Ni particles changes, and a significant increase in the volume
of nickel is observable, which happens as a result of the sintering and
coalescing  processes  [138].  Consequently,  the  electrode  porosity  re-
duces due to the increasing size of the nickel particles. The size of the
dimensional  change  depends  most  notably  on  the  operating  tempera-
ture,  as  shown  by  Pihlatie  et  al.  [139].  Reaction  reversibility  and
re-gaining  the  initial  state  after  reoxidation  was  possible  at  lower
operating temperatures. For example, the authors observed that strong,
irreversible performance degradation occurred when supplying the fuel
electrode with 6% H2O and a high p(H2O)/p(H2)-ratio at 850∘C, while
no negative effect could be identified at 600∘C. The reversibility grade
depends  both  on  the  electrode  microstructure  and  the  sintering  tem-
perature,  requiring  the  microstructure  optimization  [140,141].  The
initial  NiO-reduction  temperature  was  also  identified  as  having  an
impact on cell conductivity. For example, when reducing the substrates
at  1,000∘C,  the  conductivity  was  twice  as  high  as  for  the  substrates
reduced at 800∘C [142]. The reducing temperature also has a significant
impact on the mechanical strain; increasing the temperature increases
the  mechanical  stress  that  arises  during  the  reduction  process  [139].
This can also be correlated with sintering processes and coarsening ef-
fects  observed  at  higher  temperatures.  Similar  results  were  also
observed for the oxidation temperature. Researchers have reported that
microscopic  strain  increases  as  the  oxidizing  temperature  increases
[143–147]. Ettler et al. [148] employed Ni-8YSZ substrates to investi-
gate the effects of temperature, the time of reoxidation and the air-flux
on  the  reoxidation  of  half-cells.  For  the  purpose  of  their  study,  they
varied only one parameter and held the other two parameters constant.
Up to the reoxidation degree of 38%, no cracks were visible. Moreover,
the  authors  reported  that  when  reoxidation  appeared  at  higher  tem-
peratures, a clear border between Ni and NiO was observable. This was
not the case at lower temperatures; after reoxidation at 600∘C, no border
between the Ni and NiO could be seen. Moreover, the authors observed
that the outside of the Ni was oxidized in samples that were re-oxidized
only to a limited degree, while the core remained metallic nickel. If we
examine studies that addressed the cell level, a significant difference can
be observed between the electrolyte- and fuel electrode-supported cells
[134]. While the reoxidation of FESC results in electrolyte cracking, and
eventually the cell cracking, electrode delamination was only observed
after  the  re-oxidation  of  ESC.  Summarizing  results  from  different
studies, the authors reported that redox cycling does not influence the

OCV of ESC, whereby a strong decrease in OCV was observed for FESC,
and  a  final  and complete  failure  was  observed after  50 cycles,  which
correlates with the thickness of the catalyst layer. Moreover, a decrease
in performance was observed after 1000 cycles for both cell types. It is
also  important  to  mention  here  that  a  slight  increase  in  performance
may be observed after first redox cycle in specific cases. Moreover, in
[149], the authors reported that high fuel utilization and a subsequent
fuel starvation significantly accelerated Ni reoxidation.

Ni  reoxidation  under  SOE  operating  conditions.  Regarding  the  SOE
operation, the number of studies that refer to phenomenon of Ni reox-
idation is highly limited. Schefold et al. [82] reported a minor perfor-
mance loss after operating SOE at a reduced operating current density of
0.18 A/cm2  for 66 h, which was correlated with a slight Ni reoxidation
at the rim of the fuel electrode. The Ni reoxidation phenomenon was not
observed  at  higher  operating  current  densities.  In  [136],  SOE  fuel
electrode  was  supplied  with  a  mixture  of  H2/H2O=20/80  during  the
steam electrolysis operation, after which the Ni sites locally reoxidized.
After  80  h  operation  at  600  mA/cm2,  approximately  50%  of  the  Ni
surface oxidized, while this surface seemed to be reduced after operation
at  1,200  mA/cm2.  However,  the  re-oxidation  that  occurred  did  not
significantly impact the electrode porosity, and the electrochemical re-
actions  were  thus  not  influenced.  A  strong  Ni-reoxidation  effect  was
reported for operation under H2O/H2  ⩾90/10, even at the limit voltage
of 1.35 V, which presumes high operating currents [137].

In conclusion, steam amount and operating current density present a
decisive factor regarding Ni reoxidation process. Taking into consider-
ation  the  SOFC  operating  mode,  increasing  the  operating  current  in-
creases  the  steam  concentration,  which,  in  turn,  can  accelerate  Ni
reoxidation. In contrast, high operating current densities are considered
to  have  a  positive  effect  and  enable  to  prevent  Ni  reoxidation  when
operating SOC under electrolysis conditions. Increasing operating cur-
rent density enables to convert steam into hydrogen, thus reducing the
amount  of  the  available  steam  and  the  propensity  towards  Ni
reoxidation.

2.3.2. Ni agglomeration or Ni coarsening

Ni agglomeration or Ni coarsening usually occurs as the operating
time increases because material instability during the long-term opera-
tion and this degradation phenomenon cannot be prevented. However,
specific operating conditions, such as temperature, steam concentration
and,  in  general,  fuel  composition,  can  significantly  accelerate  Ni-
agglomeration  [150].  Applying  appropriate  ionic  conductors  within
the  fuel  electrodes  should  limit  Ni  agglomeration  at  high  operating
temperatures  [151].  The  undesired  phenomenon  of  Ni  agglomeration
deteriorates cell performance, since it reduces the available TPB surface
[152–154]. This also causes the appearance of inactive Ni/YSZ regions
[155]. The same negative effect was reported for operation in both the
SOFC  [149,156]  and  SOE modes  [137].  In  general,  Ni  agglomeration
occurs  independent  of  the  operating  mode  as  a  consequence  of  high
operating temperatures and the specific operating environment [157]. It
can  appear  even  under  OCV.  Zou  et  al.  [158,159]  showed  that  Ni
coarsening  was  observed  after  holding  the  SOC  under  OCV  for  20  h,
which caused the deterioration of the Ni/YSZ interface. Other studies
show  that  high  steam  partial  pressure  accelerates  Ni  agglomeration,
which  is  expected  especially  during  the  electrolysis  operation  [137,
160–162]. The et al. [160] compared the microstructure of SOEs after
operating for 6,100 h and 9,000 h, coming to the conclusion that the
humid  atmosphere  accelerates  Ni  coarsening.  They  also  identified  a
direct correlation between nickel growth rates and H2/H2O.

Holzer et al. [163] quantified the growth of Ni particles after oper-
ating SOFC under both dry (H2/N2=3/97) and humidified atmospheric
conditions  (H2O=60%,  H2/N2  varies)  and  compared  these  with  each
other. They showed that the initial growth rates in the humidified at-
mosphere are high and account for 140%/100 h during the initial 200 h.
Afterwards, during the long-term operation of more than 1,000 h, the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101110

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

growth  rate  seemed  to  be  almost  zero  for  each  100  h.  In  contrast,
operating  under  dry  atmospheric  conditions  resulted  in  lower  degra-
dation  rates  of  approximately  1%/100  h,  but  this  degradation  rate
remained  unchanged  over  the  2,000  h  operating  time.  Carrying  out
simulations  for  Ni  coarsening  in  both  operating  modes,  Hubert  et  al.
[153]  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  coarsening  rate  seems  to  be
slightly lower in the electrolysis mode, i.e., 25% in comparison to 30% in
the SOFC mode, both at 850∘C after 1,000-2,000 h of operating time. The
microscopic  changes  that  occur  as  a  result  of  Ni  agglomeration  and
different operating environments in both the SOFC and SOE modes are
illustrated in Fig. 4.

2.4. Air electrode degradation

Two air electrode types, LSM and LSCF, are the most common rep-
resentatives among air electrodes. LSM electrodes are mainly employed
at higher operating temperatures (800-900∘C), due to their thermal and
chemical  stability  and  acceptable  performance.  At  lower  operating
temperatures,  LSCF  electrodes  are  more  appropriate,  providing  great
performance at intermediate temperatures[13,164,165].

Air electrode degradation under SOFC operating conditions. Tempera-
ture,  operating  current  density and  air  humidity have  been  shown  to
negatively affect the LSCF-based air electrodes leading to the undesired
degradation  mechanisms  while  operating  in  a  fuel  cell  mode  [166].
Increasing the operating temperature or increasing the air humidity can
significantly accelerate surface segregation, which has been identified as
a primary degradation mechanism that has a detrimental effect on the
LSCF  electrodes  stability  [34,167].  Niania  et  al.  [168]  examined  the
impact of the air electrode atmosphere on Sr segregation, comparing air,
oxygen and pure steam. Steam significantly accelerated Sr segregation
in  comparison  to  the  operation  in  air  or  pure  oxygen  atmosphere.
Operation  at  high  current  densities  and  thus  lower  oxygen  partial
pressures resulted in accelerated performance degradation. This occurs
due to morphological changes that occur at the air electrode; thus, Sr
and Co segregation, the formation of SrCoOx  phases from segregated Sr
and Co and subsequently electrode agglomeration occur [169]. Besides
Sr  and  Co  segregation,  La  depletion  was  also  identified  as  a  further
degradation phenomenon that occurs at LSCF air electrodes during the
SOFC operation [170]. Next, Sr segregation, the formation of a Sr layer
on the air electrode, mainly between the electrolyte and the GDC layer
was reported to occur. This happens even without polarization, and may
appear as a function of the operating time and the operating temperature
[171,172]. However, the main reason for formation of a Sr-layer at the
YSZ/GDC  layer  could  be  high sintering  temperatures.  During the  sin-
tering process Sr can diffuse through the GDC, leading to the formation
of  the  secondary  layer  [173,174].  Moreover,  without  presence  of  a
barrier layer, LSCF shows high propensity to chemically react with YSZ,
forming  SrZrO3  phases,  which  can  further  cause  SOFC  degradation
[175]. Taking into account LSM air electrodes while operating in SOFC
mode,  the  most  frequently  reported  degradation  mechanisms  are  the
formation of LaZrO3  and SrZrO3  [176,177], formation of Mn oxides, air
electrode  delamination,  densification,  or  coarsening  [177,178].  The
presence of steam has also been reported to have a detrimental effect on
the SOFC performance, causing a continuous loss of the electrolyte/air
electrode contact, an enhanced Mn removal from the LSM/YSZ interface
and an eventual LSM decomposition [178]. Moreover, operating tem-
perature  is  a  further  factor  that  significantly  impacts  the  electrode
degradation. The loss of the interface stability, both chemical and me-
chanical, was more severe at lower temperatures, e.g. 750∘C [177]. At
850∘C, the degradation effects  were linked mainly to the grain coars-
ening and element diffusion, but their intensity was rather low. [179]
Air  electrode  degradation  under  SOE  operating  conditions.  Regarding
electrolysis operation, Graves et al. [180] reported in their study that
fuel electrode degradation was dominant during the SOE operation at
 ̇
lower  current  densities  (i <0.25
A/cm2),  while  this  changed  at  higher

operating current densities (i >0.5 A/cm2), at which oxygen electrode
degradation seems to be dominant. They concluded that high current
densities can significantly accelerate degradation of the air electrode.
Two  main  degradation  mechanisms  were  determined  that  deteriorate
the performance and microstructure: the (i) delamination of the elec-
trode/electrolyte interlayer and (ii) formation of the secondary phases.
The intensity of these degradation mechanisms is partially influenced by
the type of the electrode used.

Regarding the LSM electrode, increasing the oxygen partial pressure
during the electrolysis operation is seen as critical parameter that can
accelerate  electrode  degradation;  the  appropriate  tolerance  is  not
currently  available  [14,180].  Oxygen  accumulates  within  the  cavities
impacting both the electrolyte and the electrode [181,182]. Increasing
the  oxygen  partial  pressure  causes  cracks/voids  to  form  within  the
electrolyte [183] and within the electrode/electrolyte interlayer [184,
185]. When these accumulate, the effects cause the delamination of the
electrode/electrolyte  boundary  layer.  The  LSM  degradation  is  further
accelerated by the high electromotive potential that occurs under the
high operating current when the concentration of oxygen decreases at
the  fuel  electrode  and  increases  at  the  air  electrode  [186].  Chen  and
Jiang [187] reported the effect of increasing the oxygen partial pressure,
but also that the local disintegration of LSM particles and subsequent
formation of nanoparticles can occur, causing interlayer delamination.
Regarding LSCF electrodes, their excellent electrical and catalytical
performance at intermediate temperatures is crucial for their applica-
tion at these temperatures. Due to the LSCF’s propensity to react with
YSZ,  a  barrier  layer  GDC  is  mainly  used  between  the  electrode  and
electrolyte [13,188]. Schefold et al. [25,82,160] carried out extensive
investigations  of  the  SOE  durability  with  different  SOE  types,  all  of
which contained LSCF electrode, and observed continuous degradation.
They identified the formation of a secondary phase SrZrO3  as the main
degradation mechanism [189–191]. Another degradation phenomenon
that has been observed in many studies is Sr segregation from the air
electrode and diffusion through the GDC layer to the GDC/electrolyte
interface, which causes morphological changes and performance dete-
rioration [136,192,193]. In [192], the authors also reported that diffu-
sion  of  Co  through  the  GDC/YSZ  layer  was  observed.  The  authors
explained that the Sr and Co diffusion was a consequence of the com-
bined  air  electrode  electric  field  and  high  p(O2).  Similar  results  were
presented in [136], suggesting that increasing p(O2) by varying the air
electrode  supply  between  air,  O2/N2=50/50  and  100%  O2  has  an
electrode-protecting effect. In contrast, when increasing p(O2) in air by
increasing  the  operating  current  density,  this  study  revealed  strong
degradation of the air electrode and, thus, Sr segregation and diffusion
as well as interlayer delamination. In addition, the authors observed the
formation  of  a  thin  Sr  layer  between  the  GDC  barrier  layer  and  the
electrolyte. The delamination types mentioned in the available literature
as detected by post-mortem analysis are illustrated in Fig. 5.

2.5. Degradation induced by reversible operation

Many investigations have been carried out to understand degrada-
tion  mechanisms  that  occur  separately  in  either  the  fuel  cell  or  elec-
trolysis  mode.  However,  although  no  new  kinds  of  degradation
mechanisms  are  expected  to  occur  during  the  reversible  operation,
recent investigations devoted to reversibly operated SOCs came to two
opposite  conclusions:  (i)  that  electrodes  and  interfaces  can  be  placed
under greater strain when operating in the reversible mode, and (ii) that
degradation could even be reduced due to the reversible operation. The
available knowledge about degradation mechanisms that occur during
the reversible operation is based primarily on conditions under which
the fuel electrode is fed with H2/H2O mixtures, mainly with a 50/50
ratio,  while  the  air  electrode  is  fed  with  air.  While  almost  all  of  the
studies available reported performance degradation as a consequence of
air electrode degradation [195], Morales-Zapata et al. [196] alluded to a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101111

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

±300 mA/cm2  and 800∘C. Altogether 13 cycles with a cycling duration
of  1  h  were  applied  for  each  mode.  While  operating  the  SOC  in  the
electrolysis mode, delamination of the GDC layer and YSZ electrolyte
occurred,  which  resulted  in  an  overall  performance  degradation  of
5.9%. During the fuel cell mode, the degradation rate was observed to be
more than twice as low as 2.7%. Interestingly, by increasing the SOFC
duration cycle over the SOE cycle, researchers could eliminate degra-
dation  [205].  Choi  et  al.  [206]  claimed  that  both  fuel  cell  and  elec-
trolysis operation are responsible for degradation that occurs during the
reversible  operation  of  cell  containing  LSCF  as  an  air  electrode.  The
identified degradation mechanisms were delamination of the air elec-
trode/electrolyte interface, cobalt segregation, compositional variation
and  the  location  of  internal  pores.  The  above  discussed  findings
collected  from  different  studies  indicate  that  the  degradation  modes
described are mainly related to the degradation of the air electrode and
air electrode/electrolyte interlayer, which, in turn, occurs due to either
the low or high oxygen partial pressure. Detailed description of the air
electrode degradation mechanisms is given in the previous section. On
the fuel electrode, it is necessary to control the operating environment
and H2/H2O ratio in order to inhibit undesired Ni reoxidation.

2.6. Thermal stress

Thermal stress is a further issue that lowers SOC stability and causes
undesired  performance  and  morphology  degradation.  Generally
speaking, SOCs are mainly composed of ceramic materials, which are
brittle  and  very  sensitive  to  stress.  Thermal  stress  can  appear  as  a
consequence of cooling and restarting the SOC operating units known as
thermal cycling, because of an unexpected gas supply shortage or total
gas supply interruption [207], or due to mismatched thermal expansion
coefficients of individual cell or stack components [208,209]. The latter
one  is  considered  as  an  extreme  case  and  should  be  prevented  by
appropriate  material  selection  and  SOC  design.  Thermal  cycling  is
generally  a  process  of  cycling  between  two  specified  temperature  ex-
tremes and, in terms of SOCs, it is mainly related to the range between
ambient  temperature  and  900∘C.  In  the  SOFC  mode,  the  main  degra-
dation  process  that  occurs  as  a  consequence  of  thermal  cycling  was
identified to be delamination of the interface between electrolyte and air
electrode, as shown in [210]. Moreover, in [211], a thermal cycling was
performed on ScSZ/LSCF-GDC half cells. The procedure was designed to
vary  the  temperature  between  400∘C  and  800∘C  with  a  temperature
gradient of 200∘C/h for 100 cycles. After each applied thermal cycle, a
voltage  between  the  cathode  and  the  electrolyte  of  the  half-cell  was
measured  at  a  constant  current density  of  1  A/cm2.  A continuous  in-
crease in ASR was observed with reference to the performance degra-
dation, while morphological changes were observable as delamination
and changes of the cathode particles, which became finer. Lie et al. [72]
developed  a  model  that  could  be  used  to  analyze  thermal  stress  and
behavior of both electrolyte- and fuel electrode-supported SOFCs, which
was  also  validated  employing  the  available  experimental  data.  The
peeling  and  interfacial  stress  were  found  to  be  concentrated near  the
SOFC edges, thus validating the damages observed at the cell edges in
the available experiments. Moreover, they observed more pronounced
fuel electrode delamination after thermal cycling, as confirmed by tests
performed  on  electrolyte-supported  SOFCs.  Finally,  they  found  that
porosity and  fuel electrode thickness are  significantly correlated with
the  degradation  mechanisms.  Increasing  porosity  and  the  electrode
thickness reduced a lifetime. Moving towards the stack level, a 5-cell
fuel-electrode  supported  SOFC  stack,  consisting  of  Ni/YSZ  fuel  elec-
trode, LCN electrode and Fe-16Cr alloy-based bipolar plates [212], was
subjected to thermal stress, but very low degradation rate of 0.8% was
reported after 15 cycles between the ambient temperature and 750∘C.
Degradation,  however,  occurred  particularly  on  the  air  electrode.  In
order to reduce stack degradation caused by thermal cycling, Yang et al.
[213]  suggested  improving  stack  design,  placing  a  focus  on  metallic

Fig.  6. Degradation  of  the  (i)  LSM  air  electrode  reprinted  from  [194]  and
[187],  and  the  (ii)  LSCF  air  electrode  reprinted  from  [25]  and  [136],  with
permission from Elsevier.

in  the  SOFC  mode.

slight degradation of the fuel electrode as being caused by high steam
partial pressure and mobility of Ni particles, which could be partially
covered
In  their  study,  they  presented
nickelate-based air electrodes as excellent candidates for air electrodes
and  reversible  operation.  Nickelate-based  air  electrodes  were  also
employed in [197], which was the only study found to report perfor-
mance  improvement  during  the  electrolysis  operation  that  can  be
correlated to the air electrodes employed. Improving materials used in
the air electrode, e.g., Sr-free bismuth oxide-cobaltite [198], resulted in
stable  SOFC  and  SOE  operation,  followed  by  stable  low  degradation
operation, or even enabled the elimination of degradation by using high
oxygen-capacity perovskites [199].

Placing  a  focus  on  air  electrode  degradation,  Hughes  et  al.  [200]
examined durability of symmetric LSM-YSZ electrodes at current den-
sities of ±0.5 A/cm2  and ±1.5 A/cm2  and the operating temperature of
800∘C, comparing reversible operation with applied cycles in a period of
1 and 12 h, with the constant current operation. This investigation also
confirmed the importance of the operating current density and cycling
duration on the degradation rate. During the constant current operation
at ±1.5 A/cm2  significant electrode/electrolyte interface delamination
occurred, which was mapped with an increasing ohmic and polarization
resistance. The cycling at lower current density of ±0.5 A/cm2  resulted
in a stable performance. However, by introducing 12 h cycles, degra-
dation  could  be  significantly  reduced.  Further  degradation  reduction
was possible by reducing the cycling duration down to 1 h. In contrast,
He et al. [201] showed that degradation was more intensified for single
cells when reducing the cycling time from 12 h to 4 h, while operating at
±0.5 A/cm2 and 750∘C. The possibility to employ reversible operation to
partially  or  even  completely  regenerate  deteriorated  electrocatalytic
activity of LSM air electrodes that occurred during the SOE operation,
was also presented by Chen et al.  [202]. Here, the SOFC operating mode
was identified to reduce degradation rate, while longer SOE operation
accelerated  degradation.  Fuel  electrode-supported single  cell modules
and multicell stacks consisting of Ni/YSZ fuel electrode, YSZ electrolyte
and both LSM and LSCF air electrodes were reversibly operated in [203].
The  results  obtained  show  that  electrolysis  operation  accelerated
degradation, which was identified as air electrode/electrolyte interface
delamination of the LSM based air electrodes. Fan et al. [204] reported
degradation  of  LSCF  air  electrodes  during  the  reversible  operation  at

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101112

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

interconnect and sealing. This enabled to reduce the degradation rate
from 50%/1,000 h down to 5%/1.000 h. A glass-ceramic sealant was
identified as the most critical part of a stack that accelerates degradation
due to thermal cycling in [214].

If  thermal  cycling  as  described  above  happens  in  a  controlled
manner,  slight  performance  and  material  degradation  are  expected;
these, however, do not lead to rigorous SOC degradation. In contrast, e.
g., the intermittent renewable energy and its coupling with SOE, could
pose  irregular  load  changes,  causing  irregular  thermal  cycling,  local
temperature hot-spots and undesired degradation in SOEs. Kaur et al.
[215] employed LSScM-GDC composite electrodes as fuel electrode for
the  purpose  of  CO2  electrolysis.  In  order  to  simulate  volatile  power
supply, five thermal cycles were applied, varying the temperature be-
tween the ambient temperature and 800∘C. This resulted in significant
cell  degradation.  Current  collector  coarsening  and  fuel  electrode
cracking were determined as major degradation mechanisms. The un-
desired  changes  in  the  operating  environment  and  the  previously
described degradation mechanisms are more heavily weighted to cause
thermal  stress  within  SOCs  than  carefully-designed  thermal  cycles.
Moreover, the degradation mechanisms mentioned in previous sections
can also lead to thermal stresses, especially formation of local hot-spots
and crack nucleation, which are influenced by the changing electrode
morphology and inhibited chemical and electrochemical reactions.

2.7. Concluding remarks

Summarizing  the  observations  presented  in  this  section,  we  can
divide  the  failures  that  occur  within  cells  into  two  main  classes:  (i)
physical failures that influence the cell performance, its resistance and
losses and (ii) morphological failures that cause damage and irreversible
morphological  changes.  The  second  type  of  failure  always  results  in
physical failure, visible as performance deterioration. The failures that
occur depend on two main factors: the (i) materials employed and (ii)
operating environment. The first degradation type that depends on the
materials  used  is  intensified  as  the  operating  time  increases  and  is
irreversible.  To  reduce  this  degradation  type  or  to  slow  it  down,  the
development  of  improved  new  generation  materials  or  adjustment  of
operating  conditions  is  needed.  With  regard  to  the  latter,  operating
conditions  and  factors  such  as  impurities,  the  steam  concentration,
concentration of carbonaceous species and operating temperature play a
central role. Different impurities, such as sulfur, phosphine and chlorine
can have a detrimental impact on the cell performance, even if present
only in ppb concentrations. They increase the overall losses within both
SOFC and SOE, reduce the available catalytic active sites and block the
gas  channel,  thus  reducing  the  electrode  porosity.  Therefore,  their
removal from the fuel used is critically necessary in order to enable safe
long-term operation. Moreover, carbonaceous species in the fuel flow
increase the propensity of the Ni-based fuel electrodes to form carbon
and to deposit it on and within the SOC fuel electrode. Ni instability,
such  as  Ni  reoxidation  and  Ni  agglomeration,  should  be  prevented
during the operation as discussed above. Thermal cycling is identified as
a further stress factor that can accelerate undesired degradation. Finally,
regarding the reversible operation, the opposite conclusions have been
reached. While researchers have reported that this can negatively affect
the  operating  SOC,  a  number  of  studies  also  reported  their  positive
impact on reducing or even completely eliminating degradation effects
in the SOE mode.

While  various  sources  can  cause  degradation  on  the  cell  level,
degradation can also occur in different system components, such as the
reforming unit, heat exchanger and steam generator; this influences the
stability  of  the  overall  system.  However,  such  degradation  types  are
beyond the scope of this study and are not described here.

Different methods have already been developed to remove undesired
impurities  and  to  mitigate  subsequent  SOC  degradation.  These  are
described in detail in Section 5.

3. Failure prediction and accelerated degradation tests

The broad commercialization of the SOC technology is still an issue,
since unexpected degradation mechanisms can occur during the opera-
tion deteriorating the cell performance and significantly reducing the
system lifetime. In order to prevent unexpected system shut downs, (i)
performance prediction and (ii) state-of-the-health monitoring appear as
first choice solutions. By properly predicting the expected SOC behavior
and possible failure modes, appropriate countermeasures can be devel-
oped and applied at precisely the right time point, reducing the necessity
for maintenance. This means that we have to identify all the emergen-
cies before they occur by identifying the first signs of changes and un-
desired  degradation.  To  date,  performance  degradation  and  lifetime
prediction  is  possible  by  employing  (i)  model-driven  prediction,  (ii)
data-driven  prediction  approaches  and  (iii)  accelerating  stress  testing
(AST). The first approach involves the use and development of complex
numerical models to predict performance and degradation. The second
approach is more closely related to the  experimentally observed data
and their classification when compared with a trained data set or a priori
knowledge, thus enabling researchers to build  behavior models[216].
The  combination  of  both  previously  mentioned  models  is  known  as
hybrid prognostic, which provides the advantages of both the model-
and  data-driven  approach  [217].  The  latter  tool  is  based  on  experi-
mental investigations that employ accelerating aging tests. While much
effort  has  been  invested  to  develop  different  prediction  models  and
make  them  available  to  the  scientific  community,  relatively  limited
knowledge  about  the  accelerating  degradation  is  available.  Neverthe-
less, if all of the presented principles are applied in a holistic and inte-
grated  manner,  the  expected  system  lifetime  can  be  precisely
determined, as illustrated in Fig. 6. In this section, both of these possi-
bilities are discussed.

3.1. Model-driven prediction

When predicting the performance with model-driven fault systems,
0D, 1D, 2D and 3D models are available. 0D-models provide information
about the expected cell performance which are based on simple calcu-
lations and consider, e.g., relevant reactions [218]. However, these do
not  consider  the  impact  of  the  cell  microstructure  and  kinetics.  In
contrast, 1D-models provide more detailed information about the het-
erogeneous chemistry, mass transport and porous media transport [219]
and,  thus,  are  also  appropriate  to  illustrate  dynamic  SOFC  behavior
[220,221]. Nevertheless, the results gained depend strongly on the input
variables [222], which impact their quality. More precise information
about the system behavior can be gained when using 2D models, which
enable  the  user  to  simulate  the  spatial  distribution  of  the  relevant
operating  parameters,  such  as  temperature,  fuel  and  oxygen  species,
potential and current [223]. In addition, the precision of the information
obtained can be increased when applying 3D modeling [224–227].

Schluckner  et  al.  [228]  showed  that  it  is  important  to  define  the
boundary conditions first, such as the testing environment and impact of
the setup on the cell performance, before starting to examine SOC per-
formance, since these conditions can influence the cell performance and
behavior. The results reported were supported by both numerical and
experimental  investigations.  The  most  important  parameters  were
identified as the flow configuration and position of electrical contact,
which have to be properly designed to avoid the formation of regions
with excessively high fuel or air starvation. Formation of such regions
can  lead  to  an  abrupt  decrease  in  performance  and  eventually  me-
chanically damaging the cell as well as lead to the formation of local hot
spots. Fig. 7a illustrates a comparison between the current density dis-
tribution through the electrolyte for counter-flow and cross-flow con-
figurations,  showing  that  cross-flow  leads  to  the  non-homogeneous
profiles,  which  can  cause  undesired  cell  degradation.  In  comparison,
current  density profile  in  the  counter-flow  is  more homogeneous  and
thus can be seen as more appropriate for a degradation-free operation.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101113

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 7. Model-driven and data-driven methods used to predict the SOC performance.

The  same  study  suggested  that  the  counter-flow  configuration  and
electrical contacts placed on the air electrode inlet side cause the most
uniform  temperature  and  current  density  distribution  along  the  fuel
electrode-supported SOFCs, making it the optimal setup combination for
the specific SOFC operation. Therefore, we also suggest examining the
impact of the cell setup as the first step before starting the SOC operation
in order to identify its critical points. Considering the specific operating
environments,  equilibrium  calculations  should  be  carried  out  first  to
predict the expected SOC behavior, especially if carbon-based fuels are
involved. If the user performs equilibrium calculations, however, they
are  assuming  that  the  kinetics  are  sufficiently  rapid,  excluding  the
impact of the kinetics on the reactions that occur. Moreover, these are
mainly  calculated  for  OCV  conditions  and  do  not  consider  impact  of
electrochemistry.  Sasaki  et  al.  [229,230]  carried  out  highly  detailed
equilibrium calculations in 2003, in order to determine the boundary
conditions for carbon formation as a function of the operating condi-
tions,  e.g.,  operating  temperature  and,  fuel  composition.  The  results
obtained  can be  used as  a  first  assumption of  the  applicability  in the
defined operating environment. Ten years after these published studies,
in 2013, Lee et al. [231] performed highly detailed equilibrium calcu-
lations to investigate the impact of both methane dissociation (Eq. (6))
and  the  Boudouard  reaction  (Eq.  (14))  on  carbon  formation.  They
extended the prediction for carbon formation by predicting not only the
formation of graphitic carbon, but also of carbon nano-fibers. Focusing
on the equilibrium calculations given in the three previously mentioned
studies  and  extending  them  by  considering  reactions  kinetics,  major
carbon precursors in porous SOFC fuel electrodes were precisely iden-
tified in [226]. For S/C=0.5, CO was identified to be critical as a fuel at
operating temperatures lower than 700 ∘C, and CH4, at operating tem-
peratures higher than 500 ∘C. The temperature range at which carbon
nano-fibers could occur was shown to be smaller than the range at which
graphite  occurred.  Moreover,  when  a  CH4/CO  mixture  is  used,  this
range is significantly extended, graphitic carbon can occur starting all up
to approximately 850 ∘C, whereas carbon nano-fibers can occur between
500 and 1,000 ∘C. Afterwards, in 2017, Sasaki and his research group
[232] extended the equilibrium calculations to investigate the impact of
the  operating  pressure  on  the  equilibrium  state  with  different  fuel
compositions. They reported that carbon depositions can be effectively
avoided under high pressure in the steam-reforming processes, whereby
partial  oxidation  was  more  suitable  for  coal  gas  to  prevent  carbon
formation.

However,  although  performing  thermodynamic  equilibrium  calcu-

lations  enables  users  to  identify  boundaries  of  the  critical  operating
environments, the kinetics must be considered to obtain more detailed
information about the expected system behavior. For instance, in [233],
the  authors  examined  the  behavior  of  reversibly  operated  SOCs  with
both steam and syngas, reaching the conclusion that their work is mostly
dominated by the gas diffusion and less by reaction kinetics. Moreover,
one  relevant  suggestion  they  provided  is  that  the  fuel  composition
should  not  be  changed  at  the  mode-switching  point,  since  it  is
time-consuming to reach stable gas diffusion and co-redox reactions at
this point. A performance prediction for reversibly operated SOCs was
also presented in [234,235]. Knowing the spatial distribution of single
gaseous species along the cell, as well as the temperature and potential
distribution, supports performance prediction and its optimization, as
shown in [224]. Based on the knowledge gained, the fuel composition
can be adjusted to achieve, e.g., more uniform temperature distribution
or higher power. The availability of such information enables the user to
determine the possible occurrence of different degradation mechanisms,
as reported in [225]. The authors showed that the highest amount of
carbon  is  expected  to  occur  at  the  inlet,  while  the  increasing  current
significantly  reduces  amount  of  the  carbon  formed,  when  operating
large industrial-sized SOFCs with carbon-based reformates. The risk that
carbon will be formed when operating cells under high currents is also
shown in [236]. Moreover, knowing the surface coverage and distribu-
tion of all involved species along the cell surface can provide us further
information about distribution of occurring reactions and more impor-
tantly, propensity of the cells towards specific degradation mechanisms,
e.g., Ni re-oxidation. Fuel electrode coverage with oxygen radicals and
the  magnitude of  the adsorbed  species  are  shown in 7  b. It  is  clearly
visible  that  the  coverage  at  the  inlet  is  low,  while  it  is  significantly
intensified at the outlet. This refers to the possibility of the enhanced Ni
re-oxidation on the fuel electrode outlet side. Wu et al. [237] employed a
least  squares  support  vector  machine  (LS-SVM)  classifier  to  design  a
diagnosis  model  to  predict  different  types  of  SOFC  faults,  such  as
Cl2-poisoning of the fuel electrode and air electrode humidification by
using humidified air. In addition, the estimation of the remaining useful
lifetime  as  a  function  of  the  faults  that  occurred  was  enabled  by
employing two hidden semi-Markov models (HSMMs) and resulted in an
accuracy of ±20%.

3.1.1. Data-driven prediction

Another way to predict the cell performance is to employ data-driven
prediction  methods.  As  could  be  seen  in  the  previous  section,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101114

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 8. Model-driven prediction based on 3D modeling of SOFC performance as a function of flow conditions and SOFC surface coverage with oxygen.

performance prediction based on the physical models is extremely time-
consuming. This often requires the user to have very precise knowledge
about the SOC microstructure, its porosity, electrode thickness, structure
of the individual layers, and other factors. To simplify the prediction of
the SOC performance and reduce the necessary prediction time, artificial
intelligence and the application of artificial neural networks (ANN) have

recently  received  more  of  attention.  Training  brain-inspired  neural
networks  enables  the  representation  and  prediction  of  real-world
behavior, as proven by several Sillicon Valley giants for different pur-
poses. The applicability of ANNs to predict and control the performance
of SOFC in residential micro-cogeneration installations was confirmed
by Milewski et al. [238]. The ANNs have also been used to predict SOFC

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101115

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

performance as a function of the microstructure, thus offering the pos-
sibility  for  microstructural  optimization  [239–241].  Moreover,  the
successful prediction of the SOFC performance, [242], SOE performance
[243],  or  even  the  prediction  of  specific  losses  that  can  occur  when
varying the operating temperature, fuel composition and the operating
current [244] during the operation, verifies the applicability of ANNs for
purposes  of  electrochemical  performance  prediction.  Wu  et  al.  [245]
employed Elman neural network to predict faults that can occur in the
operating  SOFC  system,  such  as  heat  exchanger  breakage  and  the
instable stack voltage, this enabled a multi-dynamic system response.
Dolenc  et  al.  [246]  employed  a  hybrid  approach  on  a  6  kW  stack  to
predict the remaining lifetime in non-stationary operating conditions.
Collecting  the  performance  data  in-operando,  they  could  predict  the
future performance progress and estimate the stack area specific resis-
tance. In another work, Dolenc et al. [247] presented an SoH approach
based  on  the  data-driven  degradation  model  for  SOFC  performance
prediction, which makes adjustment to new conditions possible. Zhang
et  al.  [248]  presented  the  following  steps  as  relevant  for  data-driven
approaches:  data  acquisition,  data  processing,  feature  selection  and
distribution,  and  finally,  fault  prognostics.  To  achieve  this  aim,  it  is
important  to  identify  the  healthy  stage  during  the  operation  and  to
determine different degradation stages that occur. The last aspect is the
critical  stage,  but  before  the  critical  stage  occurs,  it  is  important  to
identify  degradation  at  an  early  stage  within  the  prognostic  window.
The illustration in Fig. 8 shows that different prediction approaches need
to be combined using both the available measured data and the model
parameters. Combining different prediction approaches enables the user
to increase the reliability of the data obtained and, based on these to
prepare an appropriate experimental design. All of the steps shown in
this illustration are important to ensure the safe long-term operation of
SOC systems.

3.2. Accelerated stress testing

One huge challenge is to achieve long lifetimes for SOC-based sys-
tems  in  order  to  make  them  suitable  for  system  level  applications.
Nevertheless,  it  is  also  challenging, expensive  and  time-consuming  to
demonstrate the required long lifetimes to identify all the possible fail-
ure  modes  and  degradation  mechanisms.  As  an  alternative  approach,
degradation  mechanisms  can  be  provoked  and  accelerated  by  using
specifically designed operating conditions. In this way, the lifetime can
be significantly shortened, the testing can be performed quickly, and the
obtained data - when properly interpreted and analyzed - should deliver
the desired information about the expected lifetime. This means that the
information that is usually gained over a period of months or years can
be obtained in only a few hours, days, or weeks. To achieve this goal,
researchers  are  developing  strategies  for  accelerating  aging  or

accelerating  stress  testing  for  SOC  technology.  Employing  the  experi-
mental  AST  data  and  appropriate  stochastic  models,  it  is  possible  to
estimate  the  expected  lifetime  as  a  function  of  different  operating
parameters.

In  1990,  Nelson  [249]  published  a  book  entitled  ”Accelerating
Testing”, which summarized the knowledge and available studies about
different products at that stage and discussed general principles of ac-
celeration and stress loading, statistical considerations, models for life
tests  and  the  graphical  data  analysis.  The  author  claimed  that  it  is
important to plan the tests appropriately. All of the collected data should
be analyzed and presented, as well as compared to each other, correctly.
Moreover, the comparisons of the impacts of different accelerating pa-
rameters  and  stressors,  respectively,  should  be  compared  with  each
other. Varying stress is also considered as an important step, since the
different types of stress loading can be applied in various ways. These
include (i) the most common constant stress, (ii) step stress, in which the
stress level successively increases, (iii) cyclic stress with a cyclic stress
loading, which can e.g., be presented as a sine curve and (iv) random
stress with randomly changing stress levels.

In 2006, Escobar et al. [250] reviewed the general accelerated test
models that could be used for different products. As a possible method of
acceleration they reported the increasing use of the following parame-
ters: the use rate of the product, intensity of the exposure to radiation,
aging  rate  of  the  product  and  stress  level  (e.g.,  amplitude  in  voltage,
pressure,  temperature  cycling).  Among  the  accelerated  testing  forms,
they also differentiated among response types and listed the following:
accelerated binary tests (ABT), accelerated life tests (ALT) and acceler-
ated destructive degradation tests (ADDT). When considering tempera-
ture  as  an  accelerating  stressor,  they  suggested  using  the  following
Arrhenius based equation:
[
)]

(

AF(T) = exp

EA
kB

1
T0

(cid:0)

1
Ts

(21)

In the above-mentioned equation, EA represents the thermal degradation
activation energy, kB  the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature at the
nominal conditions T0  and under the impact of the specific stressor Ts
[250,251].

Moreover, when considering temperature cycling as an accelerating
stressor, the authors suggested using the following equation as a way to
determine the impact of the degradation type on the overall lifetime:

AF(Δtemp) =

N(ΔtempU)
N(Δtemp)

=

)β1

(

Δtemp
ΔtempU

(22)

with  Δtemp  describing  as  the  temperature  range,  N  as  the  random
number  of  cycles  to  failure,  and  β1  as  property  of  the  test  setup  and
materials used. Nelson [249] suggested defining β1  as two (2) for some
metals. If we examine the literature addressing specific degradation in
high-temperature  applications,  Kang  described  the  sintering,  grain
growth  and  densification  of  Ni-particles,  aspects  relevant  in  SOC
manufacturing, in his book [252] published in 2005. In 2006, Sehestad
et  al.  [253]  published  a  work  that  considered  the  effects  of  time,  at-
mosphere, temperature, nickel-carrier interactions and dopants on the
sintering of nickel catalysts.

Accelerated  stress  testing  for  SOFC.  Summarizing  the  two  above
mentioned studies, Ploner et al. [251] suggested considering the impact
of steam on the sintering processes as follows:
)n

(

AF(steam) =

p(H2O)s
p(H2O)0

(23)

Fig.  9. Different  SoH  stages  relevant  for  data-driven  SOC  performance  pre-
diction. Reprinted from Ref. [248] with permission from Elsevier.

in which p(H2O)0  is the steam partial pressure at nominal conditions,
p(H2O)s  is the steam partial pressure at stressor conditions and n is the
acceleration exponent.

Ploner et al. [251] generalized the information collected for general
accelerating  mechanisms  in  order  to  obtain  information  about  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101116

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

expected degradation in SOFCs. They discussed the possibility of using
semi-empirical fitting models to achieve this purpose, in which degra-
dation D can be accelerated by appyling an accelerating factor AF as a
function of a specific stressor s. Thus, a universal degradation function
employing  the  above  mentioned  accelerating  functions  of  specific
stressors can be provided as follows.

D(s) = D(s0)⋅AF(s)

(24)

In this function, AF(s0) = 1, AF(s) is assumed to be a positive function of
a stressor s, whereby D is a function (e.g., Weibul exponential) rather
than a constant. This describes a distribution of degradation. In [251],
the authors investigated the impact of the operating temperature and the
steam  partial  pressure  on  the  SOFC  performance  deterioration.  They
noted  that  increasing  the  temperature  accelerated  the  Ni-coarsening
process and identified the steam partial pressures higher than 0.15 as
critical regarding morphological fuel electrode changes. The combined
impact of both accelerating stressors is presented in Fig. 9, which are
useful for predicting the accelerating impact.

The importance of the accelerating testing has already been proven
for  proton  electrolyte  membrane  (PEM)  cells,  as  shown  in  numerous
studies [254–257]. Nevertheless, although accelerating testing can yield
important  information  about  the  expected  cell  lifetime  and  behavior,
and especially regarding the design, manufacture and operation of the
SOCs, only a few experimental studies have been carried out specifically
to investigate accelerated degradation in either SOFC or SOE. To date,
the long-term data for SOFC operation (i.e., longer than 20,000 h) are
mainly available at Forschungszentrum Zentrum Jülich. In their recent
study, Blum et al. [258] compared results for the SOFC stacks operated
at 20,000 h and 40,000 h. Two different stack types were compared with
each  other;  the  first  one  as  a  four-layer  stack  containing  cells  with  a
10x10 cm2 surface area and an active area of 80 cm2, and the second one
as an 18-layer 20x20 cm2  cell (active area of 360 cm2). Thus, extended
knowledge  about  the  SOFC  long-term  behavior,  its  degradation  and
possible  accelerated  stacks  testing  could  be  gained.  The  authors
observed that, when increasing the operating temperature from 700∘C to
800∘C,  the  degradation  rate  was  increased  from  1%/1,000  h  up  to
1.5%/1,000 h, which was mainly caused by chromium poisoning. The
performance and morphology degradation described are illustrated in
Fig.  10.  Moreover,  they  showed  that  the  degradation  rate  does  not
change when increasing fuel utilization from 40% up to 70–80%. They
also  reported  that  different  degradation  mechanisms  could  be

Fig. 10. Comparison of the impact of two different accelerating stressors on (T
and  p(H2O))  under  nominal  operating  conditions.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  [251]
with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 11. Changes in electrochemical performance and microstructure of SOFC
as a function of the operating temperature for stacks (reprinted from Ref. [258]
with  permission  from  Elsevier)  and  for  single-cells  as  a  function  of  the  air
volume flow (reprinted from Ref. [149] with permission from Elsevier).

influenced  by  changing  specific  operating  conditions,  which  may  not
appear as relevant for the real operation. Thus, the authors suggested
first investigating each degradation process individually under acceler-
ated conditions.

Based on this conclusion, in [149] the same cell type with an active
surface  of  80  cm2  was  used,  and  the  operating  environment  was
designed in order to accelerate the following degradation phenomena
separately:  carbon  deposition,  fuel  electrode  degradation  initiated  by
high fuel utilization and air electrode degradation caused by high oxy-
gen utilization. S/C=0.5, fuel utilization higher than 90% and air uti-
lization  higher  than  70%  were  identified  as  significantly  accelerating
degradation  during  the  SOFC  operation.  Almost  the  same  conclusion
regarding the carbon deposition degradation was reached in [112] for
electrolyte-supported  SOFCs.  Bianco  et  al.  [260]  investigated  the
degradation of stack interconnects as a function of the operating time
and the operating current density. The main conclusion drawn is that
degradation on the interconnect air side stabilizes after 5,000 h.

An interesting fact is presented in [261], in which the authors pre-
sented a link between an initial fuel electrode resistance and degrada-
tion: Low starting ASR values of the fuel electrode could be associated
with faster degradation. This can be easily explained as follows: A low
ASR  is  associated  with  high  TPB  and  Ni-particles  distribution,  which
results in higher activity in the cells used [262,263]. The fuel electrode
deactivation mechanisms that occur due to Ni coarsening and particle
growth are more pronounced for such electrodes with a higher number
of smaller Ni-particles, as stated in [264]. Another interesting approach
was presented by Polverino et al. [259], who proposed using a multi-
scale modelling framework to link SOFC degradation with accelerated
stress test protocols. This model is provided to predict (i) Ni agglomer-
ation  and  (ii)  SOFC  performance  as  a  function  of  the  key  mesoscale

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101117

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Critical operating
conditions

T ↗

Source

[258]

Table 4 (continued )

Accelerating
parameter

pressure between
1 bar and 5 bar
over 5,000 h

Observed result

Critical operating
conditions

Source

degradation, only by
fuel electrode pressure.
Degradation rates at
T=800∘C, i=0.5 A/cm2:
5.16 mV/1000 h at 1
bar; 2.0 mV/1000 h at
2 bar; 1.22 mV/1000 h
at 3 bar; 0.93 mV/1000
h at 4 bar; 0.8 mV/
1000 h at 5 bar

Table 4
Accelerated stress testing for SOFC.

Accelerating
parameter

Operating

temperature

Temperature

disregarding
steam/hydrogen
atmosphere

Temperature at high

steam partial
pressure

Steam at low

temperatures

S/C

Fuel utilization

Air utilization

Operating time of

20,000 h at 800∘C
and 0.5 A/cm2

Operating

temperature and
current density
over 5,000 h

Observed result

Increasing temperature
from 700∘C up to 800∘C
increases degradation
rate from 1%/1,000 h
up to 1.5%/1,000 h,
mainly caused by Cr-
poisoning

Increasing temperature
accelerates Ni-
coarsening

Temperature increase
from 700∘C to 800∘C
accelerated coarsening
of Ni-particles by a
factor of four at
p(H2O)=0.5

Degradation rate lower
for the inlet steam
pressure of p(H2O)=
0.04 and p(H2O)=0.15
than for p(H2O)=0.25
and p(H2O)=0.4

Very low S/C ratio
significantly accelerates
carbon-formation,
blocking gas channels
and covering the
catalytic active sites

High fuel utilization
accelerates Ni-
reoxidation and Ni-
agglomeration

High air utilization
accelerates air
electrode
decomposition and
interlayer delamination

Ni-agglomeration and
increase of Ni-particles
at: (i) fuel electrode
functional layer by
3.7%, (ii) fuel electrode
support by 0.8%, (iii)
decrease in TPB length
by 24%, (iv) decrease in
the fuel electrode
interlayer conductivity
by 70%, (v) decrease in
the fuel electrode
support conductivity by
18%, (vi) increase in
ohmic and activation
losses by 25%

Increasing operating
temperature in a range
600–800∘C and current
density in a range 0-0.5
mA/cm2  accelerates
voltage degradation as
follows: 1.04 mV/1000
h at 600∘C, 1.63 mV/
1000 h at 650∘C, 2.41
mV/1000 h at 700∘C,
3.45 mV/1000 h at
750∘C and 5.16 mV/
1000 h at 800∘C

T > 900∘C

Increasing
temperature

[251]

[251]

Steam partial
pressure p(H2O)>
0.15

[251]

S/C<0.1

[112,
149]

FU>90%

[149]

AU>70%

[149]

not discussed

[259]

[259]

i>1.0 A/cm2  at
600∘C; i>1.9 A/cm2
at 650∘C; i>3.0 A/
cm2  at 700∘C; i>4.2
A/cm2  at 750∘C;
i>4.8 A/cm2  at
800∘C;

Fuel electrode and
air electrode

No impact of air
electrode pressure on

lower fuel electrode
pressure

[259]

parameters such as electrode conductivity, fuel electrode TPB length and
mean hydraulic pore radius. An SOFC performance model was also used
in  which  already  well-known  equations  and  principles  from  other
studies  were  applied.  The  creation  of  such  a  model  was,  however,
necessary, to examine the impact of Ni-agglomeration on performance
degradation. The results observed are discussed in Table 4. Fitting the
results observed to an appropriate curve, the authors tried to find the
right  transfer  function  to  correlate  the  accelerating  stressor  and  the
degradation rate.

Accelerating stressors for the SOFC operation, their impact on the
observable  SOFC  performance  and  especially  the  critical  operating
conditions are summarized and discussed in Table 4.

Accelerated stress testing for SOE. Although the number of available
studies that focus on accelerated degradation in SOFC is low, the number
of available studies related to the SOE operation is even more restricted.
Nechache et al. [265] examined the impact of Si-containing impurities
on  YSZ  stability,  increasing  the  operating  current  density  up  to  1.7
A/cm2. They came to the conclusion that, when increasing the operating
current density to the values higher than 0.6 A/cm2, the YSZ electrolyte
began to be electronic conductive, which is an undesired feature. This
occurs as a result of the formation of numerous micropores within the
electrolyte.  Moreover,  cracks  appeared  and  delamination  in  the
YDC/YSZ  layer  occurred.  Such  strong  YSZ  degradation  was  observed
only  after  350  operating  hours.  The  impact  of  increasing  operating
current  density  on  accelerating  degradation  was  also  determined  in
[136].  Increasing  the  current  density  from  600  mA/cm2  up  to  1,200
mA/cm2  resulted in more pronounced morphological changes in the air
electrode  over  a  period  of  only  80  h.  Those  included  intensified  Sr
segregation that was identified while operating at 600 mA/cm2, but also
additional Sr deposition within the GDC layers and delamination of the
GDC/LSCF interface. Besides the operating current density, a number of
different  parameters  can  accelerate  degradation  when  using  the  elec-
trolysis mode, such as high steam partial pressure, load cycling, high
voltages, steam starvation and even reversible operation, as reported by
K ̈onigshofer  at  al.  [137]  in  a  study  performed  on  5  single-cells.  The
authors provided accelerated stress test protocols for the SOE operation
as  a  function  of  the  previously  mentioned  parameters  and  supported
them by morphological post-mortem analyses. They also showed that
different  accelerating  parameters  result  in  different  degrees  of
degradation.

The knowledge gained on a single-cell level was further applied on
the stack level in [266]. The results observed show that lower temper-
atures  and  higher  voltages  as  well  as  high  steam  conversion  rates
accelerated  degradation.  In  contrast  to  these  results,  operation  under
high steam partial pressure resulted in a stable degradation rate. The
impact  of  high  steam  partial  pressure  on  the  performance  and
morphology of both single-cell and stack is shown in Fig. 11. The data
found regarding the AST for SOE, the observed results and the critical
conditions are summarized and discussed in detail in Table 5.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101118

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 12. Changes in electrochemical performance and microstructure of SOE under high steam amount (H2O/H2=95/5) and 835∘C at 500 mA/cm2  for single-cells
and 800 mA/cm2  for stack. Single-cells and stack have same microstructure. Reprinted from Ref. [137,266] with permission from Elsevier.

4. State-of-the-health diagnostics for running SOC

The  commercialization  and  long-term  application  of  SOC-based
systems in the future energy system will be possible, if their reliability
and lifetime can be controlled and prolonged properly. These aspects are
feasible, if important information about the system state of the health
can  be  determined  when  undesired  changes  first  occur  that  could  be
fatal for the system operation. By performing reliable online state-of-the-
health (SoH) estimations, likely end of life as well as maintenance ac-
tions can be designed optimally, hence preventing equipment damage
and loss of operability. Much research has already been carried out to
address this issue and much research is still ongoing.

This section provides an overview of different available diagnostic
tools that enable the identification of degradation at an early stage, thus
preventing  irreversible  degradation.  The  most  commonly  used  tools,
parameters that can be identified using these tools and information they
provide are shortly summarized in Table 6. The most relevant current/
voltage-based conventional and non-conventional SoH tools that are (i)
applicable in both laboratory and real-operating environment, (ii) time-
and  cost-efficient  and  (iii)  can  easily  be  implemented  in  systems,
namely,  polarization  curve,  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy,
its  advanced  methodology  distribution  of  relaxation  times  and  total

harmonic  distortion  analysis,  are  described  and  discussed  in  detail
below.  Much  attention  is  especially  given  to  understanding  the  elec-
trochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), since this provides a basis
for all further SoH tools. Its advanced distribution of relaxation times
(DRT)  methodology  is  also  explained  in  detail,  since  this  enables  the
identification of specific frequencies to separate the ongoing processes
within SOCs. A comprehensive study on the available DRT was carried
out; these are summarized in Fig. 14 making a novel contribution to the
scientific  community.  This  significantly  helps  researchers  to  easily
analyze the SOC processes.

Before  a  detailed  description  of  the  above-mentioned  SoH  tools  is
provided, it is important to mention that the criterion of reliability must
be  met  both  during  the  electrochemical  measurement  procedure  and
data  processing.  In  this  context,  e.g.,  the  criterion  of  the  stationary
system behavior must be met, which requires a specific testing speed to
be used. Moreover, the operating conditions should not be changed at
any time, e.g., during the running measurement. For more information
on this topic, we refer the reader to the work of Klotz et al. [286], which
presents a guideline for making reliable electrochemical measurements.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101119

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Table 6
Summary of available in-operando diagnostic tools applicable for both operating
modes and their application.

Critical operating
conditions

i > 0.6 A/cm2

Source

[265]

Diagnostic tool

Parameter

Temperature monitoring via

thermocouples,
thermography, light imaging

Temperature,
temperature
distribution

i > 600 mA/cm2

[136]

Gas analysis, gas

chromatography

Gas
components

Information
provided

Reactions
distribution
along the cell,
heat losses,
endothermal
vs. exothermal
reactions
Concentration
of specific gas
components,
species
distribution,
estimation of
chemical
reactions,
equilibrium
state
Species
concentration,
species
distribution
Carbon
deposition, Ni-
reoxidation,
degradation
Voltage and
current
distribution
Power, overall
losses
Process
mechanisms,
polarization
losses
Process
mechanisms

Source

[267–270]

[48,114,
271]

[65,80]

[63,
272–274]

[75,267,
275]

[276–278]

[279,280]

[281–283]

System non-
linearity,
degradation
processes

[112,149,
284,285]

H2O/H2  ≥ 90/10,
V = Vmax  (∼1.35 V),
T = Topt  (835∘C)
t > 200 h

[137]

[137]

H2O/H2  ⩾ 80/20,
V = Vmax  (∼1.35 V)

[137]

[137]

[137]

[137]

T = Topt (835∘C), i1.0
= i @ Vmax, i0.5  =
i1.0⋅ 0.5
Interval ≤ 1 h, t >
200 h

H2O/H2  = 80/20, V
> Vmax  (∼1.35 V), T
< Topt  (835∘C), i ⩾
-800 mA/cm2
t>200 h

H2O/H2  = 50/50, V
= Vmax  (∼1.35 V), T
= Topt  (835∘C)

t ≤1 h, t>200 h

[137]

Mass spectrometry

Mass spectra
of gases

Spectrochronopotentionmetry,

Raman vibrational
spectrometry

Wavenumber
and Signal
intensity

Voltage and current monitoring

system

Polarization curve

Electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy analyzer

Equivalent circuit model

analysis

Total harmonic distortion

analysis

DC voltage,
DC current

Voltage,
current
AC voltage,
AC current,
impedance

Current,
voltage,
equivalent
circuit
elements
Higher
harmonics,
signal
distortion

Table 5
Accelerated stress testing for SOE.

Accelerating
parameter

Si-containing

impurities and
operating
current density

Increasing

operating
current density

High steam partial

pressure

Load cycling
(dynamic
operation)

High voltages

Reversible

operation

Observed result

For i>0.6 mA/cm2  YSZ
becomes electronic
conductive; appearance of
numerous micropores
within YSZ, cracks and
delamination at the YDC/
YSZ interface
Increasing i from 600 mA/
cm2  up to 1,200 mA/cm2
intensified Sr-segregation
and resulted in additional
degradation mechanisms:
Sr deposition withing the
GDC interlayer and
damaging of the GDC/
LSCF interface
Increase of cell voltage,
inhibited diffusion of H2O,
H2
Redistribution Ni, traces of
Ni-agglomeration and Ni-
reoxidation, Species
deposition at air electrode
structure
Slightly unstable cell
voltage, inhibited diffusion
of H2O, H2
O2, charge transfer and
ionic transfer

Redistribution of Ni, local
Ni-agglomeration, surface-
segregation of Sr
Moderately unstable cell
voltage, slight increase of
ohmic resistance and high
frequency
Big Ni-grains, traces of Ni-
agglomeration, foam-like
layer on surface of LSM
Improvement of cell
voltage, more stable
operation at lower
intervals, slight increase of
impedance of steam
electrode related processes
Local occurrences of Ni-
agglomeration/-
reoxidation

4.1. Conventional characterization tools based on linear system analysis

The examination of electrochemical systems usually starts with an
application  of  conventional  monitoring  tools,  such  as  voltage  moni-
toring. Voltage monitoring provides information about cell performance
at a specific operating point. In order to obtain information about the
SOC  behavior  at  different  operating  points,  polarization  curve  mea-
surement is usually employed. The polarization curve measurement is
the most widely used method for the electrochemical characterization of
fuel and electrolysis cells. This measurement can be carried out either (i)
step  by  step  by  selecting  individual  points  or  (ii)  by  continuously
changing the specified value for the current or voltage. The choice of test
speed  is  mostly  a  question  of  a  compromise  and  depends  on  the  re-
quirements to obtain relevant results. Two different methods are used to
obtain current density profiles, as reported in [287]. Employing the first
one, the current density is increased in specific steps from OCV to the
maximum current density at 0.7 V. A stable measurement is carried out
at each current density step with a typical holding time of approximately
10  minutes,  after  which  the  thermochemical  equilibrium  is  reached.

When applying the second method, a fast hold time acquisition method
is used. The aim of using this method is to avoid sensible temperature
variation,  which  requires  a  rapid  increase  in  the  current  density,  not
higher than 10 s. The guidelines for a correct measurement procedure of
polarization  curves  is  described  in  technical  reports,  as  follows
[288–292].

The  shape  of  the  characteristic  polarization  curves  enables  initial
conclusions to be drawn about the loss mechanisms involved. However,
further  information  is  required  to  determine  the  exact  distribution  of
losses, their origin, or even specific failure modes at their initial stage,
which can be gained when employing more complex measuring prin-
ciples  such  as  linear  and  non-linear  electrochemical  impedance
spectroscopy.

4.2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is an established non-
destructive methodology used to analyze processes and mechanisms that
occur  in  electrochemical  systems  [293].  It  is  also  called  impedance
spectroscopy or AC impedance. For the purpose of EIS measurements, a
sinusoidal current or voltage perturbation is superimposed on the sys-
tem  running  under  DC  conditions,  and  the  corresponding  system
response  is measured.  The measurements  are usually  carried out in a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101120

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

range of 1 MHz to 100 mHz. Depending on the processes that are ex-
pected to occur, the frequency range can be adjusted. For instance, if
very  slow  processes  will  be  examined,  the  low  frequency  range  is
reduced down to 1 mHz. The high frequency range, however, depends
on the system inductance, which can significantly decrease the upper
frequency limit. Eventually, impedance is calculated as a vector ratio of
the voltage and current for the specified frequency range (see Eq. 25).

Z(jω) =

u(t)
i(t)

=

U
I

exp(j(φ (cid:0) ψ))

(25)

Depending on the system boundaries, the system can be operated in
(i) a pseudo potentionstatic mode in which the voltage is controlled and
the current is measured or in (ii) a pseudo galvanostatic mode, in which
the current is controlled and the voltage is measured. For the SOC sys-
tems, the galvanostatic mode is commonly employed. When operating
the system in the potentiostatic mode, the voltage applied corresponds
to u = uDC + uAC, whereby the current response measured can be pre-
sented as a Fourier series as follows [18]:

i(t) = i0 + i1sin(ωt + ψ 1) + i2sin(2ωt + ψ 2) + ... + insin(nωt + ψ n)

(26)

In the opposite case, when operating the system in a galvanostatic mode,
the current applied is equal to i = iDC + iAC. The corresponding system
voltage response can be obtained as follows [18]:

u(t) = u0 + u1sin(ωt + ξ1) + u2sin(2ωt + ξ2) + ... + unsin(nωt + ξn)

(27)

4.2.1. Basic principles of the EIS measurement

In order to carry out the impedance measurements correctly and to
ensure their quality, several requirements must be fulfilled, including:
steady-state,  causality,  time-invariance,  and  linearity  [294].  Before
taking  the  measurements, the criteria of stability  and  steady-state for
both electrodes must be confirmed, which is achieved for the system in a
thermochemical equilibrium state. If the measured signal response is a
sinusoidal  waveform  signal  and  directly  corresponds  to  the  applied
input  signal,  the  system  is  causal.  A  system  function  of  the  electro-
chemical systems under investigation is only indirectly dependent on the
time-domain,  meaning  that  the  system  is  assigned  as  time-invariant.
Eventually, the linearity criterion must be satisfied. In order to main-
tain system linearity, the signal amplitude must be low enough to attain
the pseudo-linear system response [295,296]. However, amplitudes that
are  too  small  result  in  poor  signal-noise  ratio,  indicating  that  a  suffi-
ciently  high  amplitude  value  should  be  chosen  to  reduce  the  signal
noise.  The  criterion  of  system  linearity  cannot  be  violated  as  the
amplitude increases, because the well-known linear system theory needs
to be applied in either the time or frequency domain [17]. If the linearity
criterion  is  disturbed  and  nonlinearity  appears,  a  nonlinear  analysis
must be applied.

As a perturbation signal both current and voltage can be employed.
Different current amplitudes have already been applied for this purpose,
e.g., 20 mA [297], 10–40 mA [296], 60 mA [298–301] and even 100 mA
[302].  Recently,  the  measurements  were  performed  with  the
AC-amplitude varied as a function of the DC-load, e.g., 4% of the DC load
without  violating  the  system  linearity  [8,112].  Different  AC  voltage
amplitudes have also been suggested in the available literature: 10 mV
[303,304], 12 mV [305], 14 mV [304] and, 50 mV [306]. Besides the
conventional principle of setting a constant amplitude while taking one
measurement,  the  random  binary  signal  (RBS)  has  recently  been
approved as a successful and time-efficient means of taking impedance
measurements  [307,308].  This  principle  is  based  on  the  amplitude
variation  at  random  time  instances  and  its  adjustment  for  different
frequencies.

A  comprehensive  description  of  the  basic  impedance  principles,
measurements, instrumentation, analysis, fitting procedures, modeling
and  much  more  can  be  found  in  recent  books  published  by  Orazem
[309], Barsoukov and MacDonald [295], Lvovich [310] and Lasia [311].

4.2.2. Equivalent circuit model (ECM) analysis

Interpretation of the measured impedance data can be simplified by
utilizing an equivalent circuit model (ECM) to fit the measured data. In
an ECM, different elements are connected with each other to illustrate
the SOC behavior. The elements used illustrate physical and chemical
processes  that  occur,  such  as  electrochemical  reactions,  electron  and
mass transfer and electrolyte resistance [17]. These elements used can
be classified into two groups: (i) the lumped element model resistance
(R),  capacitance (C)  and  inductance  (L)  and  (ii)  frequency-dependent
elements such as the constant-phase element (CPE), Warburg element
(W), Gerisher element (G) and bounded frequency-dependent elements
[17]. Ideal capacitances have rather rarely been observed to illustrate
behavior  for  solid  oxide  cell-based  electrochemical  systems.  This  is
clearly seen in the measured EIS semi-circles that are depressed and thus
deviate  from ideal  90∘.  The constant-phase  element  is  an  appropriate
element to be used here, which presents a non-perfect capacitance built
of resistance and capacitance elements and the arc observed is presented
at  an  angle  of  (n-1)⋅90∘.  Ricciardi  et  al.  [312],  who  investigated  the
SOFC air electrodes, reported that this element can be correlated with
the irregular electrode surface, and its roughness as well as distribution
of activation energy can be related to reduction processes. Nevertheless,
Lvovich [310] showed that, depending on the n value, the CPE element
can depict a number of properties and processes in SOCs, e.g., electrode
porosity  and  thickness,  surface  coating  and  its  conductivity,  slow
adsorption  processes,  crystal  phases  and  grain  boundaries  of  poly-
crystalline electrodes, and even inhomogeneity in the current and po-
tential  distribution  along  the  electrode.  If  diffusion  processes  are
dominant, the Warburg element is used for their description instead of
the  CPE  element  [280].  The  Warburg  element  is  thus  related  to  the
resistance to the current flow of electroactive species [310], and it is
especially  employed  for  large  planar  electrodes.  When  these  electro-
active  species  undergo  chemical  reactions  in  the  bulk,  a  Gerischer
element is used. This is mainly related to homogeneous reactions and, at
very  low  frequencies,  it  reaches  a  constant  value,  which  is  inversely
proportional to a kinetic rate constant [310]. The Gerischer element is
also  often  correlated  with  the  air  electrode  oxygen  surface  exchange
kinetics  and  bulk  diffusion  of  O2(cid:0)
[313].  A  detailed  description  and
mathematical explanations for different elements are provided by Lvo-
vich [310], Barsoukov and Macdonald [295], and Stoynov and Vladi-
kova [281].

To date, numerous equivalent circuit models have been developed in
order to evaluate the SOC performance and gain better insights into the
processes that occur. The commonly used EC models are based on the
complex nonlinear least squares (CNLS) principle. The EC presented in
[314] contains five serially connected elements: (i) R0  ohmic losses, (ii)
RQ-elements  for  gas  diffusion  and  activation  polarization  in  the  fuel
electrode functional layers, (iii) G-Gerischer elements to describe the air
electrode activation polarization, (iv) the Warburg element W to illus-
trate  the  fuel  electrode  gas  diffusion  polarization,  and  (v)  the  RQ
element, which has a significant impact when p(O2) is lower than 0.05
atm on the air electrode. This model is shown in Fig. 12 a. An equivalent
circuit that is exactly the same was presented in another work by the
same research group [315]. However, in that study, the last RQ-unit was
associated  with  the  processes  that  occur  under  reformate  operation.
Sumi at al. [316] employed a different EC consisting of mainly R, C and
Q elements as presented in Fig. 12 b. L-R depicts the large noise obtained
at high frequencies for the lead wires, and the remaining R-Q elements
present  processes  that  take  place  in  microtubular  SOFCs.  The  same
model  that  was  used  by  Sumi  et  al.  [316]  was  used  by  Nielsen  and
Mogensen [178] to investigate degradation in LSM:YSZ air electrodes
induced by steam.

In  addition  to  the  fuel  cell  operation,  the  authors  also  analyzed
processes  that  occur  in  the  electrolysis  mode  with  the  EC  model  as
shown in Fig. 12 c. Yang et al. [299] fitted two equivalent circuits using
the CNLS method and the Ravdav software, both of which were based on

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101121

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 13. CNLS equivalent circuits used for SOCs used from different mentioned references with permission from Elsevier.

previously performed studies and a distribution of relaxation times re-
sults. In the second EC variant, mentioned as B, an additional element
consisting  of  the  resistance  R6  in  series  with  inductance  L6  describes
only the low frequency loop that was observable in specific cases at low
frequencies (f<0.5 Hz). The same EC as presented in [314] (Fig. 12 a)
was  successfully  implemented  to  examine  the  behavior  of  stacks

operated in a reversible mode [267].

Moreover,  the  cell  impedance  for  reversibly  operated  SOCs  was
illustrated  by  linearizing  the  fundamental  equations  and  approaching
the losses by creating a Taylor series [8]. In that simulation, the cell was
considered as both only one segment and as a unit consisting of several
segments:  therefore,  two  different  approaches  were  used  to  simulate

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101122

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

impedance  losses.  The  first  one  is  presented  as  a  1D-model  for
one-segment cell, as shown in Fig. 12 d, and the second one is suitable
for  the  2D-model,  in  which  one  cell  consists  of  several  segments,  as
presented in Fig. 12 e. Aside from the aforementioned complex equiv-
alent circuits, simpler circuits that use solely R, L, C and/or Q elements
have  also  been  employed  to  reproduce  the  SOC  behavior.  When
increasing  the  complexity  of  the  EC,  thus  increasing  the  number  and
diversity of the elements, better overlapping will be achieved. However,
this is not the goal, because the number of the elements used should be
kept  as  low  as  possible,  and  the  usage  of  the  elements  should  be
meaningful. This means that the processes that occur must be explain-
able  with  the  elements  used.  In  this  sense,  we  suggest  to  initially
compare the cells or stacks used with those available in the literature
and to try to use the already proved ECMs. In the further steps, if these
seem  to  be  inappropriate  for  the  system  under  investigation,  the  ele-
ments should be replaced and the new, more appropriate ECM should be
created.

However, before employing the ECM chosen for the process analysis,
the measured and fitted data must be compared in order to verify and
validate the circuit elements used. If such a step is neglected, the further
suitability of the ECM data for the detailed analysis cannot be assessed.
In [296], an interesting approach is proposed to validate the EC used.
Three different ECMs, (i) RL-RC-RC, (ii) RL-RC-RQ and (iii) RL-RQ-RQ,
were  used  to  find  the  most  appropriate  one  for  the  system  under
investigation. After fitting, the values of the EC individual elements were
calculated  and  further  used  to  calculate  the  polarization  curves.  To
calculate the polarization curves from the data available, different ap-
proaches  were  utilized  for  this  purpose,  such  as  Euler’s  implicit  nu-
merical
integration  and
trapezoidal  function.  After  selecting  the  most  suitable  calculation
methodology, the polarization curves were calculated using the ohmic
values from the relevant elements of all three different ECs and even-
tually  compared  with  the  measured  data.  Following  this  strategy,  an
excellent choice of the correct EC can be made.

integration,  Euler’s  explicit  numerical

4.2.3.

Impedance analysis of SOC systems

An  analysis  of  the  solid  oxide  cell-based  systems  is  currently  un-
imaginable without using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. EIS
is used to characterize SOCs at different levels, starting with the mate-
rials, over individual electrodes, electrolytes and single-cells and up to
the stack level. In specific cases, the losses that occur cannot clearly be
assigned  to  the  individual  electrodes,  which,  in  turn,  requires  mea-
surements involving the reference electrode. However, measuring with
the  reference  electrode  is  a  very  challenging  and  thus  non-trivial
approach,  since  its  position  on  the  electrolyte  can  significantly  affect
the  accuracy  of  the  electrochemical  measurements.  Adler  et  al.  [317,
318] examined impact of the reference electrode on the potential dis-
tribution within a solid electrolyte and near the electrode, both exper-
imentally and numerically. They came to the conclusion that, in order to
avoid undesired potential gradients along the electrolyte, the distance
between the reference electrode and each active electrode should be at
least three electrolyte thicknesses. Moreover, measuring on symmetric
cells seem to be more easily done than measuring on the single-cells.
When  employing  single-cells,  the  electrolyte  thickness  should  be
significantly increased. The same distance of at least three electrolyte
thicknesses was also confirmed in [319,320]. In contrast to the results of
those studies, another study [321] claimed that the necessary minimum
distance should account at least 50 electrolyte thicknesses in order to
avoid the potential difference along the electrolyte and, thus, the impact
on the measurements. A discussion on the possible cell configuration for
performance evaluation in SOFCs is reported by Jian [322]. In a general
sense, when starting to characterize SOCs by means of electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy, it is firstly important to perform a reference
measurement in order to observe the initial performance and understand
the SOC behavior under degradation-free conditions. Secondly, a spe-
cific  time  interval  for  repeating  the  measurements  should  be  set  to

monitor changes that occur as a function of the operating time.

the

into

taking

Impedance analysis of SOC operation in the SOFC mode. Zhu and Kee
[323]  simulated  impedance  spectra  for  the  case  of  internal  methane
reforming,
fuel  mixture  of
consideration
CH4/H2O=90/10 and varying the current density between 0.2 A/cm2
and 3 A/cm2. Initially, two semi-circles were observed, both of which
had similar heights and lengths. Increasing the current density up to 1
A/cm2,  the  losses  decreased,  and  it  seemed  as  though  the  two
semi-circles  merged  to  form  one  semi-circle.  However,  when  further
increasing the operating current density, the losses started to increase,
and the first semi-circle was larger than the second one, an event that
can  be  correlated  with  the  rising  concentration  losses.  Barford  et  al.
[301] studied losses that occur in fuel electrode-supported SOFCs as a
function  of  the  operating  time  and  the  operating  temperature.  The
impedance  spectra  were  measured  before  and  after  the  change  was
carried  out,  thus  calculating  differences  that  occur  in  the  impedance
values. These differences were mainly in the derivate with respect to the
ln(f) of  the  real  impedance  part  and  were  related  to  the  specific  fre-
quencies. Such an analysis provided information that enabled the three
peaks to  be assigned to each  electrode. Regarding the LSM/YSZ  elec-
trode, peaks of 10 Hz, ∼ 300 Hz and ∼ 10 kHz were identified, and the
analysis  results  agreed  closely  with  the  results  shown  in  [324].
Regarding  the  Ni/YSZ  electrode,  the  0.1-10  Hz  range  was  associated
with a gas-conversion arc: the 10 Hz-1 kHz, to a gas-diffusion arc: and
1–10 kHz, to a gas-solid or solid-solid arc. This association corresponds
with the results presented in [325–327]. The same principle of param-
eter  variation  used  to  obtain  more  information  about  the  impedance
alternations was  applied in  [296].  Three  different  fuel  mixtures  were
used  on  the  fuel  electrode:  (i)  H2/H2O,  (ii)  H2/H2O/CO,  and  (iii)
H2/H2O/CO/CO2/CH4. When varying between the fuel components, the
most  relevant  changes  occurred  in  the  second  arc,  between  approxi-
mately 50 Hz and 100 mHz, enabling these changes to be correlated with
the fuel electrode processes. Mogensen and other researchers from the
same research team investigated both fuel electrode degradation [328,
329] and air electrode degradation [178] by means of electrochemical
impedance  spectroscopy.  In  [178],  the  impact  of  moisture  on  the  air
electrode degradation was identified as affecting the YSZ interface and
causing  LSM  decomposition.  Such  morphological  changes  could  be
linked  to  the  high  frequency  arc  and  increasing  capacitance.  Gas
cleaning procedures also have important impacts on the SOFC perfor-
mance, e.g., H2  cleaning reduced performance losses even by a factor of
2–3, which was observed by EIS measurement [328]. Moreover, in the
same study, the EIS measurements enabled researchers to gain signifi-
cant knowledge about the impact of p(H2O) on the Ni/YSZ degradation
and  identify  the  most  relevant  parameter  as  the  characteristic  time.
When increasing the p(H2O) from 0.2 atm up to 0.4 atm, the degradation
time was reduced from 134 h down to 17 h. Jensen et al. [330] also
varied operating parameters such as temperature and the partial pres-
sure of the reactants to monitor the changes that occurred and separate
the  fuel  electrode  and  air  electrode  processes  that  overlapped  in  the
Nyquist plot.

Impedance  analysis  of  SOC  operation  in  the  SOE  mode.  Impedance
monitoring has also often been used to control the performance degra-
dation as a function of the operating time. Yang et al. [299] examined
SOE behavior under thermoneutral voltage of 1.29 V as a function of the
operating time of over 1,000 h and the operating temperature that was
varied between 700 ∘C, 750 ∘C and 800 ∘C. Regardless of the operating
temperature, the impedance and thus the overall losses increased as the
time  increased.  During  the  initial  300  h,  strong  degradation  was
observed. After 300 operating hours, the cells operated at 750 ∘C pro-
vided the same performance as the cells operated at 800 ∘C. This was,
however, even 74% higher than the cell performance observed at 700 ∘C.
The results described are presented in Fig. 13. The EIS results observed
clearly indicate enhanced degradation as the time increased, which the
authors correlated with the Ni/YSZ electrode in all the three cases.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101123

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 14. EIS and the corresponding DRT for SOC. Reprinted from [299] with permission from Elsevier.

Taking into consideration alternations on the air electrode, the LSM
electrode delamination and formation of nanoparticles can be identified
as an increase in both ohmic and polarization resistance. This was pre-
sented  by  Chen  and  Jiang  in [187],  in which  they operated  the  elec-
trodes for 48 h of at 500 mA/cm2 and employed an equivalent circuit for
a subsequent analysis. The main conclusion drawn was that the HF arc is
solely correlated to the electrode/electrolyte interface and O2(cid:0)
migra-
tion from the electrolyte towards the electrode. The increase in both the
ohmic  and  polarization  resistance  was  also  correlated  with  the  silica
segregation on the Ni/YSZ-surface by Hauch et al. [331]. The same ef-
fect  of  increasing  ohmic  and  polarization  resistance  was  observed  in
[136] for the case of strong Sr-segregation within both the LSCF elec-
trode and GDC interlayer, which caused interlayer delamination and the
formation of a Sr-layer on the boundary with the electrolyte. This was
caused by the operation under a high current density of 1.2 A/cm2  for
80 h. Decreasing the operating current density down to 600 mA/cm2,
degradation was reduced and resulted in the formation of the Sr-layer
between  the  electrolyte  and  the  GDC-layer,  which  displayed  the
increasing  polarization  resistance,  whereby  the  ohmic  resistance
remained constant. Knibbe et al. [186] also confirmed that higher cur-
rent  densities  (>1  A/cm2)  result  in  intensified  degradation  and  an
increased number of degradation mechanisms. This was illustrated by
the increasing ohmic resistance presented as the increasing polarization
drop across the oxygen electrode. The latter can be attributed to the O2
formation in  YSZ grain  boundaries near  the oxygen electrode. Never-
theless,  the  polarization  resistance  did  not  show  any  systematic
behavior.

Considering  the  stack  level,  several  studies  are  available  in  the
literature.  When  operating  the  10-cell  SOC  stack  consisting  of
electrolyte-supported  cells,  as  shown  in  [332],  the  electrolysis  mode
operation resulted in increasing losses - both ohmic and polarization -
when increasing the H2O/H2  ratio from 80/20, over 90/10 and up to
95/5.  As  the  operating  current  increased,  the  difference  between  the
Nyquist plots reduced significantly for all the three H2O/H2-ratios. For
the  selected  gas  mixture  of  H2O/H2=90/10,  the  impedance  spectra
remained unchanged over 40 h. This was indicative of the stable oper-
ation without visible degradation. For the same stack operated in a fuel
cell  mode,  the  reformate  mixture  was  used  as  a  fuel,  and  several  pa-
rameters were varied. This meant that when decreasing the fuel flow
under a current density of 200 mA/cm2, increasing polarization losses
and  a  significant  increase  in  the  second  arc  were  observed.  This  was
indicative of the increasing concentration losses. Varying the operating
temperature only shifted the spectrum along the x-axis, which is linked

to  the  temperature dependent  electrolyte  resistance.  Similar  behavior
was  observed  as  a  function  of  the  operating  temperature.  When  per-
formed on each single cell within the stack, an impedance analysis can
provide useful information about the performance of single cells within
the stack, as reported by Yan et al. [333]. This enables researchers to
identify  discrepancies  between  single  cells  and  to  make  conclusions
about their state of the health.

4.2.4. Discussion and concluding remarks

Considering the studies available and comparing them to each other,
the conclusion can be made that impedance simulations have primarily
been designed for ideal systems. Nevertheless, the experimental setup
plays a significant role when investigating system processes by means of
EIS.  In  order  to  obtain  the  most  representative  results,  we  suggest  to
carry out initial measurements for the system used and to vary relevant
operating parameters, such as temperature, partial pressure of gaseous
species and operating current. Analyzing variations related to the spe-
cific  electrodes,  process  mechanisms  can  be  identified  and  moreover
correlated to the electrodes. In addition, the electrochemical impedance
spectra  provide  many  overlapped  processes  and  easily  differentiating
between  single  electrodes  and  individual  processes  is  a  challenging
approach.

Traditionally, impedance analysis is carried out employing electrical
equivalent circuits; these make the fitting of the measured impedance
possible.  Specific  groups  of  elements  are  assembled  to  illustrate  the
behavior of complex electrochemical processes, representing processes
in different frequency ranges. Nevertheless, although a fitting an ECM
based  on  the  mathematical  model  can  always  provide  solutions,  the
meaning and relation to physical processes are not always completely
clear. Finding a correlation between the model parameters and SOFC
properties is a challenging task. It is also highly challenging to extract all
the  complex  processes  that  occur  on  the  microscopic  level  and  their
coefficients  from  the  EIS  spectra,  in  which  different  physical  and
chemical processes overlap, and to correlate them with the EC elements
used. A number of different ECMs are presented in the available litera-
ture, which shows that different ECMs provide the same fitted spectra.
Thus, employing the ECM principle presumes that number of processes
should be known and a priori defined, since increasing complexity of the
ECM  can  lead  to  either  under-  or  over-fitting.  In  order  to  be  able  to
clearly differ between the single electrode processes without a necessary
prior knowledge, distribution of relaxation times is gaining increasing
attention as a sophisticated analysis tool. Its basic principles and results
observed for SOFCs and SOEs are presented in the following section.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101124

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 15. Overview of the process mechanisms as a function of DRT frequency values summarized by the available literature: FE: fuel electrode, AE: air electrode, AE/
FE: both electrodes, FE/E: fuel electrode/electrolyte, red: temperature impact on the cell level. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

4.3. Distribution of relaxation times (DRT)

Distribution  of  relaxation  times  is  a  sophisticated  complementary
tool  that  enables  researchers  to  extract  the  most  dominant  time  con-
stants from the measured EIS data and to correlate them with the specific
mechanisms. Employing the DRT principle, it is assumed that at each
measured frequency specific process can be identified, which is usually
represented by a number of RC, or more recently, RQ elements which are
connected in series. The optimization algorithm is applied to find the
lowest number of elements that is appropriate to depict the processes
that  occurs  in  a  running  SOC  system.  As  reported  by  Nechahe  et  al.

[334],  DRT  analysis  is  of  particular  interest,  because  it  excludes  the
users’ subjectivity, as in the case of the ECM. Thus, it can be used as a
preliminary  step  in  identifying  an  appropriate  ECM.  When  making  a
detailed comparison between the ECM and DRT, in [313], the authors
claim that two different approaches are applicable with regard to the
impedance data deconvolution. The first one focuses on employing the
simple  ECM  containing  a  number  of  RC  elements  as  a  basis  for  DRT,
without any previous knowledge regarding the physical behavior of the
system under investigation. The second approach proposes the opposite
tactic,  which  means  that  DRT  combined  with  the  experimentally
observed  impedance  spectra  can  be  used  to  establish  the  appropriate

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101125

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

ECM for describing complex electrochemical processes. In conclusion,
the DRT approach provides insight into specific physical quantities that
are  not  directly  observable  from  the  experimental  measurements.
Compared to the traditional tools, it can provide more detailed insights
into process mechanisms and depict the complexity of the systems under
investigation.  For  this  reason,  it  seems  that  DRT  is  becoming  a  new
standard in impedance data analysis.

4.3.1. Basic principles of the DRT methodology

Jürgen Weese described the basic principle of the DRT approach, up
on which the tools used to analyze the electromical systems are based, in
1992 and provided this as a FTIKREG program [335,336]. The approach
presented  by  Weese  employs  Fredholm  integral  equations  of  the  first
kind (see Eq. 28) based on the Tikhonov regularization.

∫ b

g(t) =

K(t, s)f (s) ds +

a

∑m

i=1

aibi(t)

(28)

In  this  function,  as  expected  in  many  electrochemical  applications,  a
function f  and m coefficients a1, ..., am  have to be determined from the
experimentally observed data, which are described with the function g.
This function involves the known parameters b1, ..., bm  and the Kernel
function K, which is known from theory. In addition, the data presented
in the function g are mainly noisy data, which should be smoothed for
the purpose of further application. Since the Fredholm integral equation
of the first kind intrinsically reflects an ill-posed problem, it means that a
non-unique solution is available or it strongly depends on the system
errors. The author provided the developed code for further usage [335],
which clearly underlines the fact that the calculation and demonstration
of the correct DRT spectra is not an easy task. A number of parameters
that have to be chosen carefully, without violating the physical system
criteria. Among others, the most relevant parameter is the regularization
parameter λ.

An  application  of  the  appropriate  regularization  method,  e.g.,
Tikhonov regularization [335,336], is necessary in order to provide a
correct  problem  solution.  Regularization  involves  a  process  of  both
solving an ill-posed problem and preventing overfitting by integrating
additional  information  into  the  problem  under  consideration  [337].
Selecting  the  appropriate  regularization  parameter  enables  the
researcher to smooth the noisy measurement data and also affects the
error of the results. In addition to the Tikhonov regularization used in
[335,336],  different  regularization  methods  can  be  employed  for  the
same purpose. The Ciucci research group is actively involved in exam-
ining different regularization and discretization approaches to address
the  issue  of  DRT  deconvolution  interpretation.  They  confirmed  that
different frameworks, such as Bayesian statistical frameworks [338] or
Lasso regularization [337] can be successfully implemented instead of
the Tikhonov regularization. A code developed in Matlab (DRTtools) by
the same research group to calculate DRT spectra using the impedance
data has been made available to researchers. Different parameters can
be selected for the purpose of performing detailed calculations [93,339].
Redirecting  the  focus  toward  the  Tikhonov  regularization,  an
approach to find the optimal regularization parameter has already been
presented  in  the  literature.  In  order  to  identify  the  best  appropriate
regularization parameter, [340] proposes taking repetitive impedance
measurements  and  subsequently  comparing  the  respective  DRT  data.
The  authors  recommend  generating  synthetic  datasets  to  reduce  the
efforts  needed  to  perform  experimental  investigations.  Proceeding
further, in [341], the authors reported that the level of corrupted data
needs  to  be  known  to  select  an  appropriate  regularization  method.
Single-parameter  regularization  seems  to  be  appropriate  for  slightly
corrupted data, whereby a multi-parameter regularization approach is
favorable for the higher degree of data corruption.

The  interest  inusing  DRT  methodology  to  analyze  electrochemical
processes has increased recently, and especially because this method-
ology  provides  detailed  insight  into  separated  processes  unlike  the

conventional interpretation of the Nyquist plots. The DRT tool can be
readily  used  in  different  disciplines,  such  as  medicine  [342,343],
biology [344,345], as well as in the technical field to analyze, e.g., solar
cells  [346,347],  batteries  [348,349],  supercapacitors  [350]  and  solid
oxide cells. More detailed information about the applicability of the DRT
methodology to analyze the processes in SOCs is described in sections
4.3.2 and 4.3.3.

SOCs  provide  highly  complex  microstructures.  In  addition,  due  to
their fuel flexibility and depending on the fuels used, the complexity of
the process identification increases as the number of fuel components
increases. For this purpose, many studies begin with the DRT analysis,
setting  the  focus  on  the  application  of  simple  fuels.  In  addition,  the
analyses are carried out on different levels, starting with the electrodes
and symmetrical cells, extending to single-cells and on to stacks. When
starting  examination  at  the  lowest  level,  researchers  can  gain  an  un-
derstanding of fundamental processes and apply this to more complex
systems.  In  Fig.  14,  we  summarized  DRT-spectra  for  SOFC  and  SOE
based  on  the  literature  available.  This  can  be  very  helpful  to  find
appropriate  processes  related  to  their  specific  applications.  We  sum-
marize the results from different DRT based studies performed for both
solid  oxide  fuel  and  electrolysis  cells  to  provide  an  overview  of  the
processes and to shape a strategy for a simplified process analysis.

4.3.2. DRT for SOFC

In  order  to  fully  understand  the  single  processes  in  SOFC,  the  in-
vestigations  begin  with  the  electrode  or  electrolyte  level,  proceed  to
symmetric  cells,  and  go  on  to  include  single  cells  and  stacks.  The in-
fluence  of  different  impurity  contents  in  the  polycrystalline  proton-
conduction  electrolyte  was  analyzed  in  [351].  The  authors  reported
how effectively the DRT analysis could be used to differentiate between
bulk and grain boundary resistance. They noted that the formation of a
silica-based phase between the grains resulted in a strong increase in the
DRT area observed for relaxation times lower than 1 s, indicating that
ion transfer was inhibited. Applying the DRT analysis to the character-
ization of LSCF-based symmetrical cells, other researchers showed that
DRT can be used to identify the underlying processes, such as interfacial
effects  and  diffusion  resistances  [352].  Moreover,  the  application  of
SFCM as a potential air electrode material for proton conducting SOFC
was examined in [353] by carrying our the DRT analysis. In the latter
study,  four  specific  peaks  were  observed.  The  low  frequency  peak
observed for frequencies below 1 Hz was associated with a concentra-
tion polarization induced by the gas diffusion. The peak located between
10  and  100  Hz  reflected  the  oxygen  reduction  and  oxygen  surface
diffusion toward TPB, whereby the peak observed between 100 Hz and
1 kHz could be associated with the oxygen incorporation into the lattice.
In  the  same  study,  the  authors  reported  that  high-frequency  peaks
observed between 1 kHz and 10 kHz can be correlated with different
overlapped processes, such as coupled charge transfer and ionic trans-
port through the air electrode as well as the electrical contact between
electrolyte and grain boundaries, respectively, and electrode. These re-
sults are supported by several other studies [354–357]. Soltanizade et al.
[358]  showed  that  DRT  can  be  successfully  employed  to  localize  the
impact of gas diffusion that inhibits oxygen reduction reaction. This was
not  possible  by  solely  applying  electrochemical  impedance  spectros-
copy. Clematis et al. [359] also highlighted the importance of DRT in
their  study  on  the  catalytic  activity  of  the  BSCF-  and  LSCF-based  air
electrodes.  An  analysis  of  the  EIS  data  included  in  the  DRT  analysis
provided insight into two kinetic regimes regarding the electrocatalytic
activity of surface oxygen exchange and bulk diffusion, which could not
be identified by applying a common EIS method.

Sumi  et  al.  [360]  performed  a  highly  detailed  DRT  analysis  of
micro-tubular  SOFCs  manufactured  as  Ni-GDC/YSZ/GDC/LSCF  to
extract  relevant  electrode  processes  and,  subsequently,  the  undesired
degradation mechanisms. They identified five relevant frequency ranges
that should be monitored to learn more about the fuel electrode and air
electrode processes. These are assigned to (i) the air electrode specific

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101126

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

processes for the frequencies of 5–20 Hz and 10–100 kHz, and to (ii) the
fuel electrode related processes for the following specific frequencies:
20 Hz-10 kHz 1–10 Hz and less than 1 Hz. In another work by the same
research  group  [316],  further relevant results  were reported.  The au-
thors  observed  that  the  peaks  placed  at  0.37-5  kHz  and  4.8-7.8  Hz
changed  due  to  the  fuel  electrode  sintering  processes  and/or  p(H2).
Peaks changes in the range between 10 Hz and 10 kHz were ascribed to
the influence of the air electrode sintering temperature [361]. On the
other hand, gas diffusion processes occurring in the fuel electrode sub-
strates could be identified at lower frequencies starting at 0.5 Hz and
extending to 15 Hz [315]. This depends significantly on the fuel used
and, e.g., for CO/CO2, fuel diffusion peaks are observed between 0.5-1
Hz, whereby the diffusion of H2/H2O fuel is ten times faster and thus
visible at frequencies of 5–10 Hz.

In [362], the authors summarized several sources [363–366] for the
fuel electrode-supported SOFCs and ascribed them to six different pro-
cesses as follows: (i) P1 (f<1 Hz) for fuel electrode diffusion for refor-
mate fuels and air electrode adsorption/desorption; (ii) P2 (f=1-10 Hz)
for gas conversion; (iii) two peaks P3 (f=10-100 Hz) and P4 (f=100-1,
000 Hz) for O2  and transport related processes in the fuel electrode; (iv)
P5 (f=1-10 kHz) for charge transfer in fuel electrode; and (v) P6 (f>10
kHz)  no  corresponding  processes  identified.  In  general,  the  specific
frequencies fall within a similar range as those summarized in Fig. 14.
Taking  into  account  the  process  analysis  of  fuel  electrode-supported
single  cells,  two  detailed  studies  based  on  the  variation  of  several
operating parameters were found: the first one was published in 2018
[300] and the second one was published in 2019 [362]. In the first study
[300], an FESC-SOFC with an active surface of 81 cm2  was employed,
and the following parameters were varied: partial pressure of nitrogen,
partial pressure of steam, fuel volume flow, air volume flow, and oper-
ating current density. In addition, the phenomena of carbon deposition
and  carbon  removal  were  analyzed  by  employing  the  DRT  tool.  The
impact of fuel dilution in nitrogen was mainly identified at low current
densities and for the frequency range 1–10 Hz, which corresponds to the
fuel diffusion in the fuel electrode. Taking into account the impact of
steam partial pressure in the fuel, the frequency range was extended to
the  higher  frequency  of  1  kHz,  which  was  also  reported  in  [362].
Moreover,  the  impact  of  fuel  and  air  starvation was  investigated;  the
authors showed that fuel starvation could be identified between 1–10
Hz, whereby frequencies lower than 0.5 Hz needed to be used to identify
the air starvation. The second study was carried out to analyze 12.56
cm2  FESC-SOFCs  when  varying  the  operating  temperature,  current
density, O2  partial pressure, H2O partial pressure, fuel composition and
flow rates. The impact of the operating temperature was identified at
frequencies higher than 1 kHz, whereby altering the operating current
resulted in changes in the entire frequency range. The reason for this is
clear,  since  increasing  the  current  causes  changes  at  both  electrodes,
influences the fuel compositions and triggers reduction processes at the
air electrode, as well as eventually impacts the operating temperature.
Taking  into  consideration  more  complex  fuels,  such  as  carbon
containing-fuels, the literature review provides additional information.
Caliandro et al. [362] correlated processes related to both internal and
external  reforming  at  frequencies  lower  than  1  Hz.  For  50  x  50  mm
Ni/8YSZ fuel electrode substrates Kromp et al. [305] claimed that all
reformate related processes could be identified with a new specific peak
observed at relaxation frequencies lower than 1 Hz. When adding 0.1
ppm  H2S  to  the  fuel  over  an  operating  time  of  100  h,  no  significant
changes  in  the  DRT  peaks  could  be  observed,  indicating  that
degradation-free  operation  was  possible  in  an  sulfur-containing  fuel
atmosphere [315]. Nevertheless, when increasing the amount of sulfur
from 0.5 ppm to 1 ppm and on 15 ppm, the authors clearly observed a
strong  increase  in the  polarization resistance and  performance degra-
dation. When the amount of sulfur in the H2/H2O/N2  fuel mixture used
was increased, other authors observed an increase in the amplitude of
the  peak  visible  at  100–400  Hz,  and  this  shifted  toward  lower

frequencies  [367].  Operating  large-sized  cells with  (i)  reformate  mix-
tures obtained from a methane-reforming unit containing H2, H2O, CO,
CO2,  CH4  and  N2  and  (ii)  humidified  methane  used  for  internal
reforming, four specific peaks were observed for the following specific
frequencies: (i) 2 kHZ, (ii) 300–700 HZ, (iii) 30–100 Hz, and (iv) 1–10
HZ  [368]. When  diluting the  reformate fuel  mixture in  nitrogen, two
low-frequency peaks decreased and shifted towards higher frequencies,
whereby  two  high  frequency  peaks  remained  unchanged.  This  result
may be due to enhanced diffusion processes. Next, during the internal
reforming,  the  CH4  fraction  was  increased,  thus  decreasing  the  H2O
fraction.  Only  the  high-frequency  peak  observed  between  1–10  kHz
remained unchanged. Three remaining peaks resulted in slight ampli-
tude  increase  and  were  shifted  towards  lower  frequencies.  However,
when increasing the operating current, this difference was reduced.

The DRT diagnosis methodology has also been applied to investigate
processes in stacks. Fang et al. [369,370] carried out a DRT analysis on a
two-layer, F10-design SOC stack consisting of Ni-YSZ/YSZ/LSCF elec-
trode-supported cells. For the stacks investigated, the authors reported
that the responses were similar for both operating modes, and a tem-
perature  dependence  was  identified  between  10  Hz  and  10  kHz.  In
comparison,  for  the  frequencies  lower  than  10  Hz,  no  temperature
dependence  could  be  recognized.  Based  on  the  results  of  the  in-
vestigations carried out, the main conclusions are that (i) impedance at
the air electrode is higher than at the fuel electrode and that (ii) both
electrodes  provide  higher  impedance  in  the  SOE  operating  mode.  In
[333], the authors showed that, within one stack containing of four cells,
different cells can provide different specific frequencies based on, e.g.,
different stability, temperature and gas distribution.

In  addition  to  O2(cid:0)

in

for

lattice

is  observed

the  electrolyte

-conducting  SOFCs,  DRT  has  also  been  used  to
investigate the behavior of proton-conducting SOFCs. Shi et al. [354]
reported observing three main peaks and two additional peaks related to
the both electrodes of pSOFCs in the frequency range between 1 Hz and
32 kHz. The proton diffusion is correlated to the high-frequencies be-
tween 630 Hz and 32 kHz, whereby the fuel electrode reactions can also
be  identified  between  630  Hz  and  4  kHz.  At  lower  frequencies,  O2(cid:0)
incorporation
the
middle-frequency range of 100–630 Hz. As expected, the O2  reduction
was observable at lower frequencies between 15 and 100 Hz, while low
frequencies of 1–15 Hz were ascribed to the impact of the partial pres-
sure of both H2  and O2  species. The intensity of all the peaks except the
high frequency peak (f>4 kHz) increases as the temperature decreases,
whereby the intensity of the high-frequency peak, decreases in contrast
and  completely  disappears  at  temperatures  lower  than  650 ∘C.  Wang
et al. [355] compared two different proton conducting electrode types,
namely,  Ni-BZCY  and  Ni-LCO,  employing  the  DRT  tool.  This  enabled
them  to  clearly  differentiate  between  the  rate-limiting  polarization
processes  of  the  two  different  electrode  types.  For  the  first  electrode
type, similar values to those observed in [354] were reported. For the
modified  Ni-LCO  electrodes,  the  author  observed  that  internal
short-circuit currents could be blocked, thus significantly improving the
open-circuit  voltage  and  the  overall  efficiency.  In  addition,  the
proton-transfer  number  could  be  increased.  This  could  clearly  be
recognized in the DRT spectra. Moreover, Chen et al. [371] applied DRT
to  examine  the  performance  of  a  novel  layered  Nd(Ba0.4Sr0.4Ca0.2)
Co1.6Fe0.4O5+δ  air electrode for proton-conducting SOFCs and identified
five relevant processes for both electrodes altogether.

Based on the studies that have already been carried out to examine
processes  in  both  oxygen  ion-  and  proton-conducting  SOFCs  and  in
which the DRT analysis has been applied, we summarized the processes
as  a  function  of  the  specific  frequency  ranges  and  illustrate  these  in
Fig. 14 for O2(cid:0)

-SOFC and in Fig. 14 b for p-SOFC.

4.3.3. DRT for SOE

To date, many studies have been carried out with DRT methodology
to analyze the processes that occur in SOFCs. However, few studies have

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101127

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

solely analyzed electrolysis operation. Several studies that were carried
out  during  SOE  operation  have  compared  the  relaxation  times  with
those observed for the SOFC, thus associating the processes with those
occurring in SOFCs. In general, specific SOE processes were identified
for similar frequency ranges at those observed for the SOFC processes
(seen diagrams in Fig. 14). For instance, gas diffusion in the fuel elec-
trode substrate was identified to be visible between 0.1-50 Hz [191,372,
373,373,374] for the SOE mode in comparison to 0.7-10 Hz in the SOFC
mode. Moreover, regarding to overlapped processes such as gas diffu-
sion,  charge  transfer  and  ionic  transport,  these  processes  are  visible
between  500  Hz  and  100  kHz  for  the  SOE  mode  [333,369,375]  and
between 700 Hz and 10 kHz for the SOFC mode.

The Ni-YSZ/YSZ/LSCF/CGO single cells with an active surface of 16
cm2  were operated in an electrolysis mode in [299]. Initially, they were
fueled with H2/H2O=50/50 at the fuel electrode and pure oxygen at the
air  electrode.  Five  specific  peaks  could  be  identified:  (i)  10–100  kHz
associated with the ion conduction in the composite electrode; (ii) 1–10
kHz  associated  with  the  resistance  related  to  the  charge  transfer  re-
actions at the TPB; (iii) 100-1,000 kHz linked with the oxygen evolution
within the oxygen electrode; (iv) two peaks between 1–100 Hz associ-
ated with the mass transport process by gas conversion polarization and
gas diffusion. To increase long-term durability, the steam fraction was
increased to 90% and the hydrogen amount was decreased to 10%. The
air electrode was also supplied with the pure oxygen. The DRT analysis
resulted  in  five  peaks,  and  the  degradation  effects  that  occurred  as  a
function  of  the  operating  time  were  most  dominant  for  the  peak
observed between 50–500 Hz at 800 ∘C and 750 ∘C, whereby additional
alternations between 1–10 Hz were observed at the operating temper-
ature of 700 ∘C. For the single cells of industrial size, i.e., 80 cm2, only
two  specific  peaks  at  approximately  20  Hz  and  between  200–300  Hz
were identified in the electrolysis mode [135]. These peaks changed as a
function of the H2/H2O-ratio and the operating current density. When
the H2 fraction was increased, the processes observed shifted toward the
higher  time  constants,  but  the  resistance  increased  in  parallel.  Such
behavior  was  associated  with  the  varying  fuel  diffusion  resistance
through the fuel electrode.

Regarding the stack level, a 10-cell stack was investigated in [332].
The  low-frequency  peak  observed  between  1–10  Hz  changed  as  a
function of current density, indicating that diffusion losses occurred as a
function of varying hydrogen content in the gas inlet. The peak observed
between 100–300 Hz could be associated with air electrode processes,
such as O2(cid:0)
-bulk diffusion at the air electrode and the chemical surface
exchange of O2. At lower current densities, only one peak was observed,
whereby  it  split  into  two  peaks  when  increasing  the  current  density
above 100 mA/cm2. Further peaks observed between 0.2-10 kHz could
be associated with fuel electrode processes, e.g., ionic transport in the
functional layer and the charge transfer reaction. When considering the
impact  of  the  operating  current,  the  investigation  of  10-cell  stacks in
[135] showed that an increase in the current resulted in a decrease in the
peaks observed, and mainly their amplitude. However, if increasing the
operating  current  leads  to  an  increase  in  amplitude,  this  is  a  clear
indication  that  fuel  or  steam  starvation  and  concentration  losses,
respectively, are occurring in the stack. Thus, the operating conditions
have to be adjusted to prevent undesired degradation mechanisms.

The  identification  of  specific  degradation  mechanisms  was  also
demonstrated  when  employing  the  DRT  tool.  In  [174],  the  authors
examined the behavior of the air electrode in an accelerated degradation
environment  and  correlated  microscopic  changes  observed  with  the
specific frequencies that appeared during the accelerated degradation
tests. They showed that Sr-enrichment on the LSCF grains, the micro-
scopic alternation of the LSCF/GDC boundary layer and LSCF decom-
position could be measured in the frequency range of 100–300 Hz. By
doubling the operating current density from 600 mA/cm2  up to 1,200
mA/cm2  the degradation was significantly intensified and identified as
LSCF decomposition and Sr-deposition both within the LSCF and GDC

layers,  which  prevented  O2(cid:0)
conduction  and  subsequent  oxygen  evo-
lution. These phenomena could be identified by examining the changes
in the peak observed at approximately 2 kHz.

The data related to the specific frequencies and process mechanisms
that  occur  during  SOE  operation  were  extracted  from  the  available
studies and are summarized in Fig. 14 c.

4.3.4. Concluding remarks

In conclusion, our review indicates that the DRT approach represents
a  highly  relevant  methodology  that  enables  researchers  to  identify
relevant processes in electrochemical systems that cannot be observed
using other conventional monitoring tools. However, DRT peaks are not
unambiguous,  and  the  sufficient  knowledge  about  the  system  under
investigation is necessary to interpret the results properly. For example,
when  changing  the  system  geometry,  the  size  of  the  cells  used,  fuels
used,  or  operating  temperature,  changes  are  expected  to  occur  and,
therefore, these need to be associated correctly with the ongoing pro-
cesses. The information gained when employing both the DRT and EIS is
of great importance, as it helps researchers to understand not only the
fundamental  processes  on  the  microscopic  level,  but  to  employ  these
methods  -  representing  the  basis  for  cost-effective  and  practical  SoH
techniques - to monitor performance on a system level and to guide the
control  system.  Overall,  this  enables  the  user  to  prolong  the  overall
system lifetime.

4.4. Unconventional diagnostic tools based on nonlinear system analysis

Under  specific  conditions,  the  system  linearity  can  be  disturbed,
moving the system towards nonlinear state. Two possible causes for the
nonlinear state can be identified: (i) large amplitude perturbation, and
(ii) specific processes that cause SOC deactivation and morphological
changes, resulting in a distortion of the system response. In this case, the
linear system analysis is no longer applicable, and a nonlinear system
analysis must be applied to the acquired data to extract contributions
from  both  the  linear  and  higher  harmonics.  Both  these  can  provide
valuable  information  about  the  nonlinear  processes  that  occur  in  the
electrochemical system [376]. This is of great importance for fully un-
derstanding the system behavior, since the information gained by using
linear  impedance  spectroscopy  is  insufficient  to  understand  all  the
mechanisms  in  specific  cases.  For  this  reason,  nonlinear  impedance
spectroscopy (NLEIS) or total harmonic distortion (THD) analysis must
sometimes be employed.

Although  NLEIS/THD  can  provide  relevant  information  about  the
system  behavior  that  is  not  contained  in  the  conventional  linear  EIS,
only a few studies have used this methodology to date. These made a
significant  contribution  towards  (i)  fully  understanding  the  process
mechanisms and electrode kinetics, and (ii) enabling the rapid identi-
fication of undesired, faulty system changes at a preliminary stage. The
oxygen  exchange  kinetics  and  relation between  the  oxygen  vacancies
and  oxygen  activity  cause  nonlinear  effects  at  the  oxygen  electrode,
phenomena that have been examined and explained in detail by Adler,
Wilson and co-workers [284,376–378]. Back in 2006, they first isolated
the  nonlinear  effects  of  O2  exchange  on  perovskite  oxide  with  NLEIS
[377],  revealing  that  the  rate  limiting  O2  exchange  steps  at  the  LSC
electrode on Gd-doped ceria involve the dissociative adsorption of ox-
ygen ions at a limited number of vacant positions. The same conclusion
was reached for LSC air electrodes on Sm-doped ceria; an analysis of the
third-order harmonic spectra revealed this relevant information, which
was not contained in  the first harmonic [376]. Such information was
gained by utilizing both models to predict higher harmonics and con-
ducting an experimental analysis. In an experimental study, ten different
amplitudes were applied at the same frequency in the range between 0.1
Hz and 10 kHz.

Taking into consideration single-cells of industrial size with an active
surface of 81 cm2, the first results that revealed early identification of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101128

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

different

identifying

failure  modes

the most relevant fault modes that occur in SOFCs, namely, fuel star-
vation, air starvation and carbon depositions, were published in [112,
149,379]. In [149], the THD tool was demonstrated to be highly suc-
cessful  when
in
fuel-electrode-supported SOFCs. At the air electrode, air starvation led
to LSCF decomposition, interlayer delamination and strong mechanical
damage. This phenomenon was observed for frequencies lower than 10
Hz, with a response signal distortion of 3–4% observed in the frequency
range of 0.5-10 Hz, and a higher distortion of approximately 8% at 0.1
Hz. At the fuel electrode, two failure modes were examined. Fuel star-
vation  resulted  in  Ni-reoxidation  and  Ni-agglomeration,  and  signal
distortion could be observed at frequencies lower than 50 Hz; 4% at 20
Hz, 3% between 1–10 Hz and 6% at 0.1 Hz.

Carbon depositions, which blocked the catalytic active surface and
gas channels were also visible at low frequencies. At 0.01 Hz, the signal
distortion accounted for several hundred percentages. However, unlike
the two previously mentioned degradation modes, the carbon deposition
phenomenon was also identified at higher frequencies of 2 kHz, 4 kHz
and 8 kHz, as illustrated in Fig. 16. This enables to perform measure-
ments solely at higher frequencies, significantly reducing the required
measurement  time.  Carbon  deposition  and  its  removal  from  the
electrolyte-supported cells with the same active surface were reported in
[112]. Signal distortions were observed for the carbon deposition phe-
nomenon at same high-frequency values and also at low frequencies. In
addition,  carbon  removal  could  be  identified  with  THD,  as  shown  in
Fig. 15 a.

Malafronte et al. [285] examined the impact of the stack fuel utili-
zation  on  the  THD  index  for  a  6  kW  SOFC  demonstration  system.
Increasing the fuel utilization resulted in an increase in THD distortion,
whereby the changes were most clearly visible in the frequency range
between 1 Hz and 0.01 Hz. The authors proposed to apply excitation
signal amplitude AC of 5% of the DC load to obtain better signal values.
This is illustrated in Fig. 15 b, showing that increasing the fuel utiliza-
tion from 0.85 up to 0.9 increases the observed THD-index. This increase
is higher if the AC amplitude is higher; for example, a slight increase of
<1% is visible for AC=1%. In comparison, when increasing the AC from
1% up to 10%, the THD-index increased from 15% to 20%. The effect of
fuel starvation in a six-cell SOFC stack was also investigated by Mougin
and coauthors in [380]. They came to the same conclusion as authors of
previous studies, showing that the THD index increases as the fuel uti-
lization  increases,  which  is  visible  at  frequencies  lower  than  1  Hz.
However, they proposed to use small AC amplitudes (<<10% of the DC
current) for this purpose.

Fig. 15 c refers to the results reported in [149], employing THD to
identify  carbon  deposition  at  its  early  stage.  The  x-axis  presents  the
operation duration, whereas the y-axis shows the frequency values. The
colors and their intensities are linked to the THD-index. Comparing the
two diagrams presented, we can conclude that the appropriate threshold
should  be  defined.  This  is  seen  as  a  boundary  between  a  ”degrada-
tion-free  state”  and  a  ”degradation  state”.  This  means  that,  if  the
threshold is set to 1%, we could consider that degradation occurs when
experiment begins. Nevertheless, when increasing the threshold up to
10%,  we  observe  that  the  first  signs  of  degradation  can  be  identified
after  approximately  six  operating  hours.  Thus,  in  order  to  define  an
appropriate  threshold,  initial  THD  measurements  must  be  made  for
different fuels, as shown in Fig. 15 a. This clearly shows that a threshold
is a function of the fuel used.

The studies discussed above demonstrated the potential for applying
non-conventional tools for the rapid identification of undesired failure
modes, both on large single-cell and a stack level. This is a crucial step
towards employing these technologies on the system scale, which could
involve not only SOC monitoring, but also monitoring of the remaining
system  components  and  their  influence  on  the  SOC  performance.
Nevertheless, validation and recalibration of the presented SoH tools for
the industrial environment would be necessary.

Fig. 16. Possibilities to present the observed THD data.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101129

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 17. The identification of carbon deposits employing THD methodology. Reprinted and changed from [379] with permission from Elsevier.

4.5. Species and temperature monitoring approaches

In addition to the techniques described above, other strategies are
available to identify the current state of the health of the cells. The most
relevant are gas analysis and temperature monitoring, which can also be
applied to industrial-sized cells and at a higher stack or system level.
Combining different monitoring tools offers the possibility to reach the
most  precise  conclusion  about  reactions  that  occur  [381,382].  The
combination  of,  e.g.,  voltage  monitoring,  electrochemical  impedance
spectroscopy,  gas  analysis  and  temperature  measurement  at  different
points  provides  highly  detailed  information  about  the  processes  that
occur and enable to identify different operating issues, [109,115,128,
235,383,384]. If specific impurities are available in the fuel at low ppm
concentrations, a precise gas analysis is the first choice for their iden-
tification. For instance, phosphine (PH3) present in ppm concentration
in coal gas was identified by applying a mass spectrometer in [65]. In
[65], it was only possible to detect PH3  in a dry hydrogen, while in the
presence  of  steam,  it  reacts  if  the  pressure  is  higher  than  few  torr  at
higher  temperatures.  Even  for  dry  fuels,  steam  is  generated  due  to
electrochemical reactions which enhance PH3  reactions. Phosphine re-
actions  in  SOFCs  do  not  generate  the  expected  equilibrium  products
such as P2, HPO, HPO2, or HPO3, but its presence causes irreversible
degradation.  In  [63],  electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS),
linear  sweep  voltammetry  (LSV),  which  actually  corresponds  to  the
polarization curve, and vibrational Raman spectroscopy were coupled to
examine  the  impact  of  chlorine  contamination  on  the  SOFC  perfor-
mance. The study showed highly aggressive degradation with approxi-
mately  15%/hour  when
chlorine  with  methane
combining
(CH3Cl/CH4=110 sccm/20 sccm=5.5), while the degradation grade was
low for CH3Cl/CH4=110 sccm/100 sccm=1.1 mixture. If sulfur needs to
be  detected,  gas  chromatography  seems  to  be  a  good  solution.  Khan
et  al.  [385]  employed  a  gas  chromatograph  outfitted  with  a  sulfur
chemiluminescence detector to measure extremely low sulfur concen-
trations in air. At the concentration of >2 ppb, precise measurements
were  possible,  while  at  lower  temperatures,  larger  measurement  un-
certainties  were  observable.  In  order  to  identify  ammonia  in  a  fuel

mixture,  the  application  of  Fourier-transform  infrared  spectroscopy
(FTIR)  is  preferred  [386,387].  Casteel  et  al.  [388]  proposed  to  use  a
solution  conductivity  measurement  system  and  a  transpiration  mea-
surement system to precisely measure chromia evaporation from SOFC
interconnect materials.

Optical  in-situ  methodology,  including  non-invasive  characteriza-
tion  tools,  shows  a  great  potential  for  obtaining  information  about
spatial  species  and  temperature  distribution  [269,273,389].  Walker,
Kirtly, Owrutsky et al. performed much research to examine the impact
of  different  species  on  SOFC  performance  and  to  identify  different
degradation  types  [390–392].  In  [274],  they  used  in  situ  vibrational
Raman  scattering  to  successfully  identify  the  NiO  growth  on  SOFC
Ni/YSZ  electrodes.  In  their  further  study  [393],  the  authors  tried  to
identify the impact of butanol on the SOFC performance. For this pur-
pose  they  employed  near-infrared  thermal  imaging  to  measure  tem-
perature  distribution  and  vibrational  Raman  spectroscopy  to  identify
carbon accumulation along and cross the surface. Moreover, the authors
enable to investigate the effectiveness of different gaseous components
on carbon removal from the Ni catalyst.

5. Degradation mitigation and lifetime extension

The use of appropriate measures can prolong the lifetime of the SOC
systems.  These,  however,  differ  according  to  the  diverse  degradation
modes, operating modes and SOC types employed; therefore, they must
be carefully designed as soon as the first signs of degradation are iden-
tified.  In general, we  differentiate  between two  key  solutions  used to
mitigate degradation and extend the SOC lifetime: the (i) material and
the (ii) operating environment. In this section we are mainly concerned
with  the  latter  one.  Nevertheless,  material  solutions  will  also  be  dis-
cussed here, but not in great detail, because this presents the only pos-
sibility  to  mitigate  irreversible  degradation  in  specific  degradation
modes.

Initially,  before  starting  the  SOC  operation,  thermochemical  equi-
librium  calculations  are  recommended  to  be  performed  as  the  initial
degradation  mitigation  step.  They  provide  information  about  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101130

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Table 7
Regeneration approaches provided in [383].

Parameters

Value

R1

R2

R2var

R3

R4

R4ov

R5var

H2
N2

H2
H2O
N2

H2
H2O
N2

i
U
H2
N2

CO2
H2
H2O
N2

CO2
N2
U

O2
CO2
N2

45
55

45
11
44

30 vs. 45
40 vs. 20
remainder

variable
variable
variable
remainder

variable
variable
variable
remainder

25
75
1.4

2 vs. 0.5
18.9 vs. 4.7
remainder

Unit

vol%
vol%

vol%
vol%
vol%

vol%
vol%
vol%

mA/cm2
V
vol%
vol%

vol%
vol%
vol%
vol%

vol%
vol%
V

vol%
vol%
vol%

expected degradation modes, such as carbon deposition or reoxidation
of  the  catalysts  used,  which  can  occur  as  a  function  of  the  designed
operating  environment  [394].  In  the  next  step,  if  degradation  occurs
during  the  operation,  specific  mitigation  strategies  can  be  applied  to
prevent further performance deterioration and morphological changes.
In the final step, if reversible degradation has already occurred, specif-
ically  designed  regeneration  strategies  can  be  utilized  to  bring  the
overall SOC state back to the initial state.

Taking into consideration different possible failure modes, many of
these,  such as  contamination due to impurities  (e.g., sulfur, chlorine)
can  be  inhibited  by  applying  the  appropriate  purification  and  fuel
preparation methods, which are beyond the scope of this paper and will
not  be  discussed  here.  The  three  main  failure  modes  that  can  occur
during both fuel cell and electrolysis operation are Ni reoxidation, car-
bon deposition and air electrode degradation. Therefore, possible solu-
tions for their mitigation and subsequent performance regeneration are
discussed below. Moreover, based on our comprehensive literature re-
view, we summarize the available suggestions that address degradation
mitigation and performance regeneration for the three selected degra-
dation modes and present them in Table 9.

5.1. Solutions for Ni reoxidation

In 2006, Wood et al. [140] proposed two possible solutions for sys-
tem redox instability that occur due to an unexpected shutdown: (i) an
improvement in the material redox limitations, and (ii) the safety im-
plications  of  using  the  fuel  gas,  and  especially  hydrogen  and  carbon
monoxide.  The  authors  also  divided  the  system  redox  solutions  into
active,  passive  and  dependent  concepts.  The  active  solution  concepts
involve the use of a partial oxidation reformer, the thermal cracking of
fuel  components,  a  delayed  purge  of  fuel  or  air,  cell  reversal,  water
electrolysis and activated carbon. Passive solutions involve the use of
hybrides, a steam purge, high temperature check valves and a reducing
gas  cylinder.  And  dependent  solutions  involve  the  use  of  fuel  gas

recirculation and fuel enclosure. However, the authors suggested that
considering  redox  instability,  passive  solutions  are  desired  and  the
number  of  redox  cycles  should  be  reduced.  The  second  solution  pro-
posed by Wood et al. [140] is the material solution, described as more
elegant  and  less  expensive  with  regard  to  overall  system  costs.
Regarding  the  material  solution,  the  authors  proposed  three  different
solutions: the use of (i) alternative materials, e.g., an alloy to replace
nickel  in the  cermet  fuel electrode  and possibly all-ceramic  fuel elec-
trodes,  (ii)  microstructural  modification  to  retain  the  great  electro-
chemical performance of the Ni/YSZ electrodes, but also to reduce the
damage potential, e.g., graded nickel content and/or increased porosity
in the fuel electrode functional layer (AFL), and (iii) kinetics, applying
the knowledge available to reduce the oxidation kinetic, e.g., improved
sealing, oxidation barrier and lower operating temperatures.

The  novel  material  solutions  are  proposed  to  overcome  the  insta-
bility  issues  facing  the  conventional  Ni/YSZ  electrodes.  Employing
perovskite-based  electrodes,  which  have  all-ceramic  mixed  ionic-
electronic conductors (MIEC), results in enhanced redox stability, but
also  improved  chemical  and  thermal  compatibility  with  other  cell
components. Adding  metal nanoparticles to the  porous electrodes  en-
ables researchers to significantly increase the active surface, which, in
turn, enables them to enhance electrochemical performance. Alternative
solutions are to combine MIEC and impregnated metallic nanoparticles,
which has seemed to gain more attention in recent years [395–397]. A
step toward the fully redox stable electrodes is achieved by replacing the
Ni catalyst with noble metals, such as Ru, Rh, Pd, or Pt; this not only
increases  redox  tolerance,  but  also  prevents  catalyst  agglomeration
[398–400].

Regarding the operating environment, the concentration of oxidizing
species, such as steam and oxygen, the H2O/H2-ratio and the amount of
oxygen ions that result from the operating current are crucial parame-
ters to prevent undesired reoxidation processes. The highly aggressive
effect of oxygen was reported in [401], and the authors showed that the
entire fuel electrode surface can be oxidized at 800∘C within only 150 s if
a high amount O2 or H2O is available in the gas mixture. Therefore, they
suggest avoiding H2O/H2>1 [383]. Baldinelli et al. [402] also provided
a ternary diagram presenting the NiO area; based on the gas composition
used, researchers can use the diagram to easily calculate whether NiO is
expected to occur or not.

5.2. Solutions for carbon depositions

Although  nickel  catalysts  display  great  catalytic  performance  and
conductivity,  they  are  prone  to  carbon  deposition,  which  can  have  a
detrimental  effect  on  the  SOC  performance,  as  discussed  in  detail  in
Section 2. For this reason, different solutions have been proposed in the
literature  to  mitigate  degradation  and  regenerate  deteriorated
performance.

The first solution is related to material development. Much research
has been devoted to the development of new carbon-tolerant electrodes.
Xu  et  al.  [403]  attempted  to  develop  high-catalytic-activity fuel  elec-
trode  material  with  a  high  carbon  tolerance  that  was  appropriate  for
intermediate temperatures. To achieve this goal, they developed a new
material  SFCoM,  which  they  designed  and  prepared  from  perovskite
with additional in-situ exsolved Co nanoparticles. This novel material
provided stable performance even after 200 h of operation under hu-
midified C3H8. Thus, it seems to be a promising candidate for electrode
materials with high carbon tolerance. Next, a double perovskite SMM
based  hybrid  catalyst  synthetized  with  SM  nanoparticles  seems  to  be
another promising carbon-tolerant material, as published by Peng et al.
[404].  However,  the  new  materials  have  to  be  optimized  to  achieve
higher performance. In [404], at the operating temperature of 800∘C,
the maximum power density of 245 mA/cm2 was achieved in humidified
CH4  for 250 h, and 183 mW/cm2  for operation in humidified C2H5OH
for 70 h. Another proposed possibility to reduce the direct cracking of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101131

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

hydrocarbons  at  Ni/YSZ  fuel  electrodes  is  to  mix  copper  and  nickel,
since  copper  prevents  the  Boudouard  reaction  from  occurring  [405,
406].  Furthermore,  Gavrielatos  et  al.  [407]  presented  Ni-Au  SOFC
carbon-tolerant electrodes even when feeding with steam reforming. As
the most common solution, which has already been implemented in real
case scenarios, the zirconia ionic conductor is replaced with ceria, which
significantly  reduces  the  cracking  reaction  and  increased  the  carbon
tolerance [408].

Despite all of the advantages offered by new generation materials,
their  development  requires  a  great  deal  of  additional  research  and
several proposed solutions even present much higher costs. Therefore,
the most efficient solution when considering the maximum achievable
performance, durability, reliability and the costs seems to be to combine
the strategies described in the previous sections, i.e., to make predictions
and,  based  on  these,  to  optimize  the  operating  environment,  then  to
conduct  online-monitoring  of  the  cell  behavior  and  its  state-of-the-
health.  This  enables to  identify  all  of  the  undesired  changes  early  on
and to take appropriate countermeasures. Initially, predicting the per-
formance  and  making  the  subsequent  adjustments  to  the  operating
conditions, and thus the fuel compositions, S/C-ratio and the operating
temperature, seems to be the appropriate first steps. As an example, in
[226], thermodynamic calculations were used to predict the impacts of
CO and CH4  on the graphite and carbon nanofibers formation across a
wide temperature range. If humidified methane is used as fuel, the S/C
must be higher than 1.5 to mitigate carbon formation at temperatures
higher  than  800 ∘C.  For  S/C<1.5  large  amounts  of  both  graphite  and
carbon nanofibers are expected to be formed. Carbon nanofibers begin
to  form  at  approximately  400 ∘C,  and  the  amount  reaches  a  peak  at
approximately 700 ∘C. Graphitic carbon can be formed at much lower
temperatures.  Its  amount  increases  as  the  operating  temperature  in-
creases,  reaching  a  peak  at  550 ∘C.  Afterwards,  this  amount  slightly
decreases. In order to prevent the formation of different types of carbon
throughout the operating range, the S/C-ratio should be set to values
higher than 1.5, or, even better, higher than 2. This is important when
unexpected  system  failures  occur, which  can,  e.g., decrease  the  oper-
ating temperature. Thus, the safe operation of the systems operated with
humidified  methane  can  be  assured.  On  the  other  hand,  when  using
carbon monoxide, more graphite will be formed if the operating tem-
perature  is  lower.  If  S/C>2,  carbon  formation  can  be  avoided.  The
higher  the  operating  temperature,  the  lower  the  S/C  needed  for  this
purpose.  Moreover,  if  S/C>0.8,  CNF  formation  can  be  inhibited
throughout the temperature range. Next, if the operating temperature is
higher than 800 ∘C, carbon is not expected to be formed, regardless of
the S/C ratio.

Moving from the performance prediction to in-operando measures,
several  studies  have  described  how  to  reverse  carbon  deposition  and
regain the initial SOC performance. Mermelstein et al. [409] suggested
increasing the operating current to generate an appropriate number of
oxygen ions to reduce carbon deposition on the fuel electrode. The same
conclusion was also reached in [410], where simulations showed that it
is important to exceed the critical operating current to prevent carbon
formation. Alzate-Restrepo et al. [411] performed experimental exam-
inations to induce carbon depositions, using low current densities of 0.1
mA/cm2, 10 mA/cm2  and 50 mA/cm2  and varying the operating time
from 6 to 72 h. They came to the conclusion that as soon the current
flowed through the cell, the amount of carbon formed was reduced by
100  times  as  compared  to  the  amount  of  carbon  formed  under  OCV
conditions.

Besides using higher operating currents, using a higher amount of
steam  can  also  be  advantageous  to  reduce  the  amount  of  the  carbon
formed, as shown in [412–414]. Increasing the amount of CO2 in the fuel
mixture is another way to reduce carbon formation [415].

Considering  the  in-operando  gasification  of  the  carbon  deposited,
Kirtley et al. [272] examined the impact of H2O, O2  and CO2  on carbon
removal and identified H2O as the most efficient species, followed by O2
and CO2. The authors also showed that, regardless of the gasification

agent used, Ni reoxidation occurred after carbon removal. Snoeck et al.
[416] examined the impact of H2O, H2  and CO2  on the carbon gasifi-
cation  both  numerically  and  experimentally.  They  reached  the  main
conclusion that carbon gasification depends primarily on whether car-
bon is formed from methane or carbon monoxide. The same conclusion
was also reached by Takenaka et al. [417–419], but they used only CO2
to remove the carbon formed. However, carbon gasification must not
only be ensured; the SOFC performance must be regenerated, and this
cannot be achieved by using pure CO2.

For  this  purpose,  the  effectiveness  of  different  gaseous  species  in
combination with current and voltages for carbon removal and perfor-
mance regeneration was examined by Suboti ́c et al. [115,122,383,420].
The  goal  was  to  regain  the  initial  cell  performance  and  morphology
state.  The  regeneration  approaches  used  are  summarized  in  Table  8,
while  their  cell-protecting  effects  on  performance  regeneration  are
shown  in  Table  8.  In  [122],  the  authors  reported  that  carbon  can  be
removed from the porous Ni/YSZ structure, and the initial performance
can be regained after using both H2/N2  and a H2/H2O/N2-mixture for
44 h under OCV conditions. For the purpose of this study, carbon was
generated  under  a  specific  operating  current,  avoiding  rapid  carbon
formation  under  OCV  conditions.  In  [420],  in  addition  to  carbon
deposition, Ni reoxidation and air electrode degradation - presented as
the LSCF decomposition - were introduced to investigate the effective-
ness of the carbon removal strategies when multiple degradation modes
are present. Air electrode decomposition did not allow the initial cell
performance to be regained, but regeneration was possible only up to a
specific  grade,  whereby  carbon  could  be  completely  removed  with
parallel Ni reoxidation, which probably occurred due to the presence of
oxygen species.

The authors went one step further in [115], utilizing CO2  to remove
carbon and regenerate cell performance, but simultaneously applying an
overvoltage of 1.4 V. This is the first study to report both the regenerated
electrochemical cell performance and its microstructure after employing
the CO2  gasification agent for carbon removal over a short time-period,
i.e.,  approximately  200  s.  Cell-protecting  carbon  removal  must  be
possible; otherwise irreversible damage to the cell structure can occur.
For example, when utilizing a H2/H2O/N2  regeneration mixture with
20% H2O, regeneration can be achieved. However, increasing the steam
amount up to 40%, Ni reoxidation will occur that can even cause irre-
versible cell damage, as shown in [383]. Han et al. [421] also underlined
the importance of cell-protecting fuel electrode regeneration and carbon
removal.  In  their  study,  oxygen  ions  generated  as  a  result  of  oxygen
reduction were used to remove carbon, whereas hydrogen was utilized
to prevent undesired Ni reoxidation. Reeping et al. [422] also empha-
sized  the  palliative  effect  of  H2  during  the  operation  with
carbon-containing  fuels.  The  authors  reported  that  small  amounts  of
hydrogen effectively prevent the degradation of the Ni catalyst and even
inhibit fuel cracking reactions. They also confirmed that, in addition to
this advantage, hydrogen can also effectively remove adsorbed chlorine
from
the
chlorine-contaminated, carbon-containing fuel can lead to the immedi-
ate  chlorine  poisoning  and  carbon  deposition  on  the  catalytic  active
sites.

Removing

hydrogen

the  Ni

surface.

from

Table 8
Effectiveness of different regeneration approaches provided in [383].

Regeneration
approach

and R2var

R1  and R2
R

3,at100

mA
cm2
R1  and R3,overvoltage
R4
R4ov
R3,ov,aesupply
R5var

Regeneration
time

∼ 44 h
5–40 h

∼ 12 h
1–10 min
∼ 200 s
40 s
30 s - 10 min

Reus-
ability

✓
✓

✓
×
✓
1–2 ×
×

Cell-protecting
effect

✓
✓

✓
×
✓
✓
×

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101132

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Table 9
Suggestion of appropriate prevention and regeneration strategies for different
degradation modes.

Degradation mode

Prevention/regeneration strategy

Source

Ni reoxidation

Employing all ceramic perovskite-based
electrodes
Replacement of Ni with Ru, Rh, Pd or Pt
Coating Ni with Y, Zr, La, Ce or their
oxides
Reduced substrate thickness and
increased electrolyte/substrate ratio
Ni-Co alloy instead of Ni
Prevented intentional air break-in at the
fuel electrode or if not possible strongly
restricted air amount
H2O/H2  < 1

[395–397]

[398–400]
[436]

[437]

[438]
[134]

[383]

Carbon

deposition

Carbon-tolerant perovskite fuel electrodes

[404,439,440]

Carbon-tolerant Ni-based materials
Adjust S/C ratio considering the operating
temperature and concentration of CO and
CH4  species
For biomass gasification syngas: (i) if
T<715∘C, steam is necessary, (ii) if
T<685∘C, H2>5% is necessary, (iii) if
T ∼ 600∘C and i=2.8-3.6, 365 mA/cm2  is
required as a threshold current density
For operation in dry conditions and
0–15 g/m3  benzene use calculated
threshold current densities diagram
i>0.1 mA/cm2

For different fuel mixtures (H2, CO, CO2,
H2O, CH4) and various operating
temperatures use proposed ternary
diagram
H2/H2O/N2  mixture

CO/CO2/N2  with/without overvoltage

Application of regeneration strategies
presented in Table 7 and Table 8

[441–444]

[226,227]

[409,445]

[445]

[411]

[114]

[112,122,383,

420]

[115,272,401,

416,417,420]
[112,115,383,
420]

Suggestions

Air electrode

degradation

New electrode materials and designs to
reduce air electrode overpotential

[13,14,423–431,
433–435]

In addition to the experimentally examined regeneration processes
presented in [115,122,383,420], the impact of all the species used on
the  fuel  electrode  surface  was  numerically  examined  in  [401],
employing  detailed  heterogeneous  reaction  mechanisms.  The  authors
showed that hydrogen/steam mixtures successfully reduced the amount
of adsorbed carbon under OCV conditions. When increasing the oper-
ating current, even faster gasification of both the adsorbed carbon and
carbon  monoxide  could  be  achieved  in  a  controlled  manner.  The  nu-
merical study also showed that CO2  is not appropriate as a gasification
agent,  since  its  use  results  in  an  increased  catalyst  coverage  with
elementary  carbon  and  carbon  monoxide.  In  this  case,  even  Ni  reox-
idation  is  possible.  When  mixing  CO2  with  O2,  significantly  higher
carbon  oxidation  rates  are  visible,  but  significantly  faster,  complete
reoxidation of the catalyst surface occurred.

The  impact  of  both  suitable  and  non-suitable  regeneration  ap-
proaches  on  fuel  electrode  morphology  and  cell  performance  is  illus-
trated in Fig. 17. In specific cases, e.g., when utilizing only CO2  for fuel
electrode regeneration, carbon gasification could be achieved, but the
performance deteriorated even further. Nevertheless, when combining
CO2  with overvoltage, the full regeneration of both fuel electrode sur-
face and performance was possible.

5.3. Solutions to mitigate degradation of oxygen electrode

The main reason for accelerated degradation and delamination of the
air electrode was identified as the increased pO2 , resulting in increased
air  electrode  overpotential.  This  is  mainly  related  to  the  electrolysis
mode, as described in 2.4. This issue can be considered as the key to
mitigate undesired electrode degradation. As suggested by Wang et al.
[13], degradation mitigation can be achieved by decreasing either the
activation overpotential or the concentration polarization. In this way, a
significant  lower  overpotential  on  the  air  electrode  can  be  achieved,
while simultaneously increasing the operating current.

Starting  with  adjusting  the  operating  conditions,  the  pO2  could  be
decreased  by  decreasing  the  operating  current.  However,  this  would
result  in  reduced  hydrogen  generation,  which  does  not  achieve  the
purpose of electrolysis. Therefore, the most appropriate solution seems
to be to improve the materials and develop new generation materials for
the  air  electrode  [14,423–425].  Song  et  al.  [423]  proposed  the  infil-
tration of RuO2  nanoparticles, increasing the operating current density
from  0.46  mA/cm2  up  to  0.74  mA/cm2  at  1.2  V  and  800∘C,  thereby
improving  performance  by  60%.  Moreover,  different  air  electrode
structures - perovskite and Ruddlesden-Propper - were compared with
each other. Shahrokhi et al. [426] reported the greater stability of the
Ruddlesden-Propper  in  both  the  fuel  cell  and  electrolysis  operating
mode. Moreover, different variations of the Ruddlesden-Propper struc-
ture [427–429] or perovskite structure, such as double perovskite oxide
[430] and layered perovskite [431] appeared as promising candidates
for improving the performance of the air electrodes and decreasing the
overpotential losses. An interested approach that has recently been re-
ported is the new honeycomb structure, which simplifies the OER ki-
netics and provides much more stable performance than conventional
LSC/YSZ  electrodes  [432].  Taking  into  consideration  LSM  electrodes,
which are less resistant toward higher pO2  than LSCF, Khan et al. [433]
proposed using an additional porous YSZ layer between the YSZ elec-
trolyte and the LSM electrolyte to release the high oxygen pressure and
reported  that  no  delamination  occurred  in  this  case.  For  proton  con-
ducting SOCs, the issue of air electrode delamination was also not re-
ported  due  to  the  lower  operating  temperature,  significantly  lower
activation losses and, finally, the different requirements these cells have
to fulfill [434,435].

6. Conclusions and perspectives

This  study  provided  an  intense  review  of  the  current  literature,
considering relevant issues that can occur when operating SOC under
real-world operating conditions as well as options to address them. This
review is useful for researchers, developers and system operators, since
it offers a complete overview of (i) different failure modes, (ii) process
mechanisms  that  occur  and  their  prediction,  as  well  as  (iii)  ways  to
perform  the  early  identification  of  various  failure  modes  and  (iv)
degradation mitigation and lifetime extension including regeneration.

The focus of this study is directed toward system-relevant operating
conditions,  namely,  practice-oriented  fuels  and  steam-,  CO2-  and  Co-
electrolysis.  Considering  their  impact  on  the  SOC  performance  and
morphology for the running system, three main degradation issues were
determined.  These  are:  (i)  impurities  in  the  feed  gas  and  air,  (ii)
carbonaceous  species  present  in  many  conventional  and  alternative
fuels, and (iii) the propensity of the Ni-based electrodes to suffer from
oxidation and agglomeration. Impurities (e.g., compounds of S, Cl, P, Si)
in the feed gas were identified as having a huge impact on both SOC
performance and the fuel electrode morphology. Even when present in
low concentrations of several ppb, they exert a detrimental impact on
the electrode surface, leading to its damage. The same is observed at the
air electrode in presence of Si, Cr, or S, which are diagnosed as the main
contaminants on the air side. Beside impurities, carbon-containing feed
gases can initiate carbon formation and its subsequent deposition on the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101133

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

Fig. 18. Effects of CO2  and CO2  in combination with overvoltage on carbon gasification and performance regeneration: (i) effectiveness of CO2  with overvoltage on
both carbon gasification and performance regeneration, reprinted from [115] with permission from the Electrochemcial Society, (ii) effectiveness of CO2  on carbon
gasification, reprinted from [115] with permission from the Electrochemcial Society, and (iii) simulation of adsorbed and oxygenated species over electrode surface
with CO2, reprinted from [401] with permission from Elsevier.

fuel electrode surface and within the porous gas channels. This happens
if  S/C  ratio  is  high.  In  the  available  literature,  a  value  of  S/C=2  is
accepted  as  a  boundary  value  between  the  carbon-free  and  carbon-
inducing  operating  environment.  However,  many  numerical  and
experimental  studies  show  that  this  value  can  vary  significantly  as  a
function  of  the  fuel  composition,  operating  temperature,  operating
current  density  and  fuel  utilization.  The  operating  environment  also
influences the structural impact of carbon formed, and the carbonaceous
fuel components (CO, CH4, CxHy) and their concentration play major
roles. The last issue that affects the real-system operation is Ni-oxidation
and  Ni-agglomeration.  Ni-oxidation  occurs  if  the  concentration  of
oxidizing species (H2O, O2, CO2) in the feed gas is too high as compared
to the fuel components (H2, CO and CH4). High fuel utilization (>90%)
and high operating current densities which are equal to the high amount
of O2(cid:0)
are causes of Ni-oxidation. The operating temperature of 300 ∘C is
seen as a threshold value. However, since SOC are operated at temper-
atures  >600 ∘C,  the  tendency  toward  Ni-oxidation  is  usually  high.
Moreover,  another  typical  degradation  mechanism  that  affects  Ni-
electrodes is Ni-agglomeration, which appears as a consequence of the
high operating temperature and harsh operating conditions and seems to
be inevitable.

This study also provided a reader with (i) a way to understand pro-
cess  mechanisms  that  occur  in  SOCs  and  (ii)  to  predict  unexpected
failures. Different approaches can be utilized for this purpose: (i) model-
driven, (ii) data-driven and (iii) accelerated stress testing. Based on the
comprehensive literature review results, we can assert that pure model-
based  performance  predictions are  still inaccurate,  since a  number  of
parameters have to be defined. These, however, cannot be determined
accurately. The accuracy of the SOC behavior prediction seems to in-
crease when numerical and experimental approaches are combined. A
promising  approach  that  can  be  taken  is  accelerating  stress  testing,
focusing  on  predicting  the  remaining  useful  lifetime.  By  taking  this
approach,  different  degradation  modes  are  specifically  induced  (e.g.,
increasing the concentration of specific contaminants in the fuel gas) in
running SOC systems. In addition, the effective degradation impact can
be determined by employing the appropriate AST models. In this study,
we carefully summarized the available AST results for both SOFC and
SOE  operating  modes,  giving  a  detailed  insight  into  accelerating
stressors and their impact on SOC behavior.

With  this  knowledge  about  different  failure  modes  and  ways  to
predict  them, we analyzed the options for state-of-the-health identifi-
cation. The extensive literature review revealed that we can differentiate
between  conventional  and  unconventional  strategies.  The  most
commonly used conventional tool is electrochemical impedance spec-
troscopy. This has already been applied in numerous studies; however, it
is often not easy to interpret the results obtained. With this in mind, the
distribution of relaxation times obtained by using this sophisticated tool
is gaining increasing attention and provides more precise information
about process mechanisms that occur during the operation. Using the
measurement data available in the literature that were obtained using
conventional SoH tools, we provided a frequency range for each process
mechanism that can occur in SOFC and SOE and illustrated these in a
form of diagram. This is an enormous advantage for the real system SOC
operation  as  well  as  scientific  research.  Moreover,  conventional  tools
seem to be more appropriate for analyzing processes in stationary and
fault-free systems. Regarding the fault status, when the system steady-
state and equilibrium are disturbed, unconventional methods seem to
be  more  suitable  for  performance  monitoring.  The  unconventional
diagnostic  tools  require  a  nonlinear  system  analysis,  and  the  most
frequently used method is the total harmonic distortion analysis. This
can be used to collect the necessary data more quickly than conventional
tools, thus reducing the measurement time by a factor >20. Neverthe-
less,  interpreting  the  obtained  data  is  still  challenging,  and  more
research  is  needed  in  future  to  reach  the  full  potential  of  the  THD
methodology that seems to be significant. In this review, we structured
the existing knowledge and reported how to reveal the most common
SOC failures.

In the final step needed to ensure safe and long-term operation, we
reviewed  the  possibilities  for  degradation  mitigation  and  lifetime
extension, focusing on regeneration strategies. Impurities contained in
the fuel gas and air (e.g., Si, S) should be extracted before entering the
SOC,  since  they  completely  change  the  electrode  morphology,  cause
permanent  damage  to  the  materials  employed,  and  no  regeneration
strategies are available here. The development of new-generation ma-
terials and coatings for conventional electrodes could be adequate so-
lutions to reduce undesired degradation, but this increases the costs. We
provided practical solutions for the most common electrode damage. In
order to prevent Ni-reoxidation, the H2O and CO2  concentration in the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101134

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

fuel gas should be minimized, while maintaining the concentration of
H2, CO and CH4. Moreover, the presence of pure O2, e.g., due to leak-
ages, should be avoided in the fuel gas. Fuel utilization should also be
maintained  below  90%.  Another  possibility  is  to  control  the  current
density, since high current densities are equal to high O2(cid:0)
concentra-
tions  and  oxidize  the  electrode  functional  layer.  In  order  to  inhibit
carbon depositions, the concentration of CxHy  in the fuel gas should be
minimized. It is advantageous to reduce the CH4 concentration at higher
temperatures  and  to  reduce  the  CO  concentration  at  lower  operating
temperature. Furthermore, higher fuel utilization and higher operating
current densities seem to help reduce carbon deposition. Degradation
mitigation of the air electrode seems to be possible when reducing the
amount  of  chromium  available,  which  is  most  easily  possible  when
utilizing dry air which prevents Cr evaporation from interconnects. Si
poisoning of the air electrode could be reduced by maintaining the glass
sealing used.

Overall,  these  review  results  provide  a  guideline  for  researchers,
developers and operators regarding safe and long-term cell, stack and
system operation.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Vanja Suboti ́c: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis,
Investigation,  Methodology,  Visualization,  Writing  –  original  draft,
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Project administration.
Christoph Hochenauer: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment

The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  the  funding  of  the  project
”Degradation  monitoring  and  performance  optimisation  of  SOECs”
(project  number  I3994)  by  the  Austrian  Science  Fund  (FWF).  Vanja
Suboti ́c  also  wants  to  thank to  Benjamin  K ̈onigshofer, Michael  H ̈ober
and Gernot Pongratz for useful discussions during the preparation of this
review.

References

[1] Blok K. Enhanced policies for the improvement of electricity efficiencies. Energy
Policy 2005;33(13):1635–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2004.02.006.
[2] Lior N. Advanced energy conversion to power. Energy Convers Manage 1997;38
(10):941–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196-8904(96)00125-2.International
Symposium on Advance Energy Conversion Systems and Related Technologies

[3] Lund H. Renewable energy strategies for sustainable development. Energy 2007;

32:912–9.

[4] Lior N. Thoughts about future power generation systems and the role of exergy
analysis in their development. Energy Convers Manage 2002;43(9):1187–98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196-8904(02)00007-9.

[5] Afgan NH, Carvalho MG. Multi-criteria assessment of new and renewable energy
power plants. Energy 2002;27(8):739–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-5442
(02)00019-1.

[6] Bosch. Hochtemperatur-brennstoffzellensysteme. 2021. https://www.bosch.

com/de/forschung/know-how/erfolgsgeschichten/hochtemperatur-brennstoffze
llensysteme/.

[7] Kendall K, Minh NQ, Singhal SC. Cell and Stack Designs. Amsterdam: Elsevier

Science; 2003, ISBN 978-1-85617-387-2. p. 197–228.

[8] Suboti ́c V, Thaller T, K ̈onigshofer B, Menzler NH, Bucher E, Egger A,

Hochenauer C. Performance assessment of industrial-sized solid oxide cells
operated in a reversible mode: detailed numerical and experimental study. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(53):29166–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.07.165.

[9] Guer TM. Comprehensive review of methane conversion in solid oxide fuel cells:
prospects for efficient electricity generation from natural gas. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2016;54:1–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2015.10.004.
[10] Lanzini A, Madi H, Chiodo V, Papurello D, Maisano S, Santarelli M, Van herle J.
Dealing with fuel contaminants in biogas-fed solid oxide fuel cell (sofc) and

molten carbonate fuel cell (mcfc) plants: degradation of catalytic and electro-
catalytic active surfaces and related gas purification methods. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2017;61:150–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2017.04.002.
[11] Boldrin P, Ruiz-Trejo E, Mermelstein J, Bermúdez Men ́endez JM, Ramirez

Reina T, Brandon NP. Strategies for carbon and sulfur tolerant solid oxide fuel cell
materials, incorporating lessons from heterogeneous catalysis. Chem Rev 2016;
116(22):13633–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00284.

[12] Mocoteguy P, Brisse A. A review and comprehensive analysis of degradation

mechanisms of solid oxide electrolysis cells. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38(36):
15887–902. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.09.045.

[13] Wang Y, Li W, Ma L, Li W, Liu X. Degradation of solid oxide electrolysis cells:
phenomena, mechanisms, and emerging mitigation strategiesa review. J Mater
Sci Technol 2020;55:35–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmst.2019.07.026.
[14] Chen K, Jiang SP. Review-materials degradation of solid oxide electrolysis cells.

J Electrochem Soc 2016;163(11):F3070–83. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0101611jes.

[15] Laguna-Bercero M. Recent advances in high temperature electrolysis using solid
oxide fuel cells: a review. J Power Sources 2012;203:4–16. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.12.019.

[16] Hauch A, Kngas R, Blennow P, Hansen AB, Hansen JB, Mathiesen BV,

Mogensen MB. Recent advances in solid oxide cell technology for electrolysis.
Science 2020;370(6513):eaba6118. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba6118.

[17] Huang Q.A., Hui R., Wang B., Zhang J. A review of AC impedance modeling and

validation in SOFC diagnosis. 2007a. 10.1016/j.electacta.2007.05.071.
[18] Fasmin F, Srinivasan R. Review-Nonlinear electrochemical impedance

spectroscopy. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164(7):H443–55. https://doi.org/
10.1149/2.0391707jes.

[19] Menzler NH, Sebold D, Guillon O. Post-test characterization of a solid oxide fuel
cell stack operated for more than 30,000 hours: the cell. J Power Sources 2018;
374:69–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2017.11.025.

[20] Blum L, deHaart LGJ, Malzbender J, Margaritis N, Menzler NH. Anode-Supported
solid oxide fuel cell achieves 70-000 hours of continuous operation. Energy
Technology 2016;4(8):939–42. https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201600114.
[21] Nguyen VN, Fang Q, Packbier U, Blum L. Long-term tests of a julich planar short
stack with reversible solid oxide cells in both fuel cell and electrolysis modes. Int
J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38(11):4281–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2013.01.192.

[22] Simner SP, Anderson MD, Coleman JE, Stevenson JW. Performance of a novel la
(sr)fe(co)o3-ag sofc cathode. J Power Sources 2006;161(1):115–22. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.04.103.

[23] Zhang X, O’Brien JE, O’Brien RC, Housley GK. Durability evaluation of reversible
solid oxide cells. J Power Sources 2013;242:566–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2013.05.134.

[24] Blum L, de Haart LG, Malzbender J, Margaritis N, Menzler NH. Anode-Supported
solid oxide fuel cell achieves 70-000 hours of continuous operation. Energy
Technol 2016;4(8):939–42. https://doi.org/10.1002/ENTE.201600114.

[25] Tietz F, Sebold D, Brisse A, Schefold J. Degradation phenomena in a solid oxide

electrolysis cell after 9000h of operation. J Power Sources 2013;223:129–35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.09.061.

[26] Schefold J, Brisse A, Tietz F. Nine thousand hours of operation of a solid oxide cell
in steam electrolysis mode. J Electrochem Soc 2011;159(2):A137–44. https://doi.
org/10.1149/2.076202jes.

[27] Schiller G, Ansar A, Lang M, Patz O. High temperature water electrolysis using
metal supported solid oxide electrolyser cells (SOEC). J Appl Electrochem 2009;
39(2):293–301. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10800-008-9672-6.

[28] Zhang X, O’Brien JE, O’Brien RC, Hartvigsen JJ, Tao G, Housley GK. Improved
durability of soec stacks for high temperature electrolysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2013;38(1):20–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.09.176.European
Fuel Cell 2011

[29] Marina OA, Coyle CA, Thomsen EC, Edwards DJ, Coffey GW, Pederson LR.

Degradation mechanisms of SOFC anodes in coal gas containing phosphorus.
Solid State Ionics 2010;181(8–10):430–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ssi.2010.01.018.

[30] Xu C, Zondlo JW, Gong M, Liu X. Effect of PH3 poisoning on a ni-YSZ anode-

supported solid oxide fuel cell under various operating conditions. J Power
Sources 2011;196(1):116–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.07.018.
[31] Xu C, Gong M, Zondlo JW, Liu X, Finklea HO. The effect of hcl in syngas on ni-ysz

anode-supported solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Sources 2010;195(8):2149–58.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.09.079.

[32] Haga K, Adachi S, Shiratori Y, Itoh K, Sasaki K. Poisoning of sofc anodes by

various fuel impurities. Solid State Ionics 2008;179(27):1427–31. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ssi.2008.02.062.Solid State Ionics 16: Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Solid State Ionics (SSI-16), Part II

[33] Cheng Z, Liu M. Characterization of sulfur poisoning of ni-ysz anodes for solid
oxide fuel cells using in situ raman microspectroscopy. Solid State Ionics 2007;
178(13):925–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2007.04.004.

[34] Wang CC, Becker T, Chen K, Zhao L, Wei B, Jiang SP. Effect of temperature on the

chromium deposition and poisoning of la0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3-δ cathodes of
solid oxide fuel cells. Electrochim Acta 2014;139:173–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.ELECTACTA.2014.07.028.

[35] Hu B, Krishnan S, Liang C, Heo SJ, Aphale AN, Ramprasad R, Singh P.

Experimental and thermodynamic evaluation of la1xsrxmno3+-δ and
la1xsrxco1yfeyo3δ cathodes in cr-containing humidified air. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2017;42(15):10208–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2017.01.040.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101135

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

[36] Gong M, Liu X, Trembly J, Johnson C. Sulfur-tolerant anode materials for solid

oxide fuel cell application. J Power Sources 2007;168(2):289–98. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.03.026.

[37] Neubauer R, Weinlaender C, Kienzl N, Bitschnau B, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C.
Adsorptive on-board desulfurization over multiple cycles for fuel-cell-based
auxiliary power units operated by different types of fuels. J Power Sources 2018;
385:45–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.02.083.

[38] Weinlaender C, Neubauer R, Hauth M, Hochenauer C. Adsorptive hydrogen
chloride and combined hydrogen chloride-hydrogen sulphide removal from
biogas for solid oxide fuel cell application. Adsorp Sci Technol 2018;36(5–6):
1215–32. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263617418772660.

[39] Alstrup I, Rostrup-Nielsen JR, Ren S. High temperature hydrogen sulfide

chemisorption on nickel catalysts. Appl Catal 1981;1(5):303–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0166-9834(81)80036-X.

[40] Bengaard H, Nørskov J, Sehested J, Clausen B, Nielsen L, Molenbroek A, Rostrup-
Nielsen J. Steam reforming and graphite formation on ni catalysts. J Catal 2002;
209(2):365–84. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcat.2002.3579.

[41] Rostrup-Nielsen JR. Some principles relating to the regeneration of sulfur-

poisoned nickel catalyst. J Catal 1971;21(2):171–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0021-9517(71)90135-7.

[42] Niakolas DK. Sulfur poisoning of ni-based anodes for solid oxide fuel cells in h/c-
based fuels. Appl Catal, A 2014;486:123–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcata.2014.08.015.

[43] Neubauer R, Kienzl N, Hochenauer C. Integration of an adsorptive desulfurization
unit into an sofc-based auxiliary power unit operated with diesel fuel. Chem Eng
Res Des 2019;141:47–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2018.10.024.
[44] Cheng Z, Wang J-H, Choi Y, Yang L, Lin MC, Liu M. From ni-ysz to sulfur-tolerant
anode materials for sofcs: electrochemical behavior, in situ characterization,
modeling, and future perspectives. Energy Environ Sci 2011;4:4380–409. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C1EE01758F.

[60] Buchinger G, Hinterreiter P, Raab T, Griesser S, Claassen R, Claassen DP, Sitte W,
Meissner D. Operating microtubular SOFCS with hydrogen chloride and hydrogen
sulfide containing fuels and synthetic wood gas. J Fuel Cell Sci Technol 2006;3
(3):280–3. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2205361.

[61] Fontana M, Staehle R. Advances in corrosion science and technology. 1972. doi:

10.

[62] Marina OA, Pederson LR, Thomsen EC, Coyle CA, Yoon KJ. Reversible poisoning
of nickel/zirconia solid oxide fuel cell anodes by hydrogen chloride in coal gas.
J Power Sources 2010;195(20):7033–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2010.05.006.

[63] Reeping KW, Walker RA. In operando vibrational raman studies of chlorine

contamination in solid oxide fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162(12):F1310–5.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0191512jes.

[64] Jeanmonod G, Diethelm S, Van herle J. Poisoning effects of chlorine on a solid
oxide cell operated in co-electrolysis. J Power Sources 2021;506:230247. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2021.230247.

[65] Finklea HO, Zhang W, Jony M, Demirgok B. Mass spectrometry of SOFC fuel
mixtures containing phosphine. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162(9):F1101–5.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1051509jes.

[66] Cayan FN, Zhi M, Pakalapati SR, Celik I, Wu N, Gemmen R. Effects of coal syngas
impurities on anodes of solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Sources 2008;185(2):
595–602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.06.058.

[67] Trembly JP, Gemmen RS, Bayless DJ. The effect of IGFC warm gas cleanup system
conditions on the gas-solid partitioning and form of trace species in coal syngas
and their interactions with SOFC anodes. J Power Sources 2007;163(2):986–96.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.10.020.

[68] Demircan O, Xu C, Zondlo J, Finklea HO. In situ van der pauw measurements of
the ni/YSZ anode during exposure to syngas with phosphine contaminant.
J Power Sources 2009;194(1):214–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2009.04.071.

[45] Chattanathan SA, Adhikari S, McVey M, Fasina O. Hydrogen production from

[69] Chen Y, Chen S, Hackett G, Finklea H, Zondlo J, Celik I, Song X, Gerdes K.

biogas reforming and the effect of h2s on ch4 conversion. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2014;39(35):19905–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.09.162.
[46] Brightman E, Ivey DG, Brett DJ, Brandon NP. The effect of current density on

H2S-poisoning of nickel-based solid oxide fuel cell anodes. J Power Sources 2011;
196(17):7182–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2010.09.089.

[47] Riegraf M, Yurkiv V, Costa R, Schiller G, Friedrich KA. Evaluation of the effect of

sulfur on the performance of nickel/gadolinium-Doped ceria based solid oxide
fuel cell anodes. ChemSusChem 2017;10(3):587–99. https://doi.org/10.1002/
CSSC.201601320.

[48] Pongratz G, Subotic V, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C, Skrzypkiewicz M,
Kupecki J, Anca-Couce A, Scharler R. Analysis of h2s-related short-term
degradation and regeneration of anode- and electrolyte supported solid oxide fuel
cells fueled with biomass steam gasifier product gas. Energy 2021;218:119556.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.119556.

Microstructure degradation of YSZ in ni/YSZ anodes of SOFC operated in
phosphine-containing fuels. Solid State Ionics 2013;234:25–32. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ssi.2012.12.019.

[70] Xu C, Zondlo JW, Finklea HO, Demircan O, Gong M, Liu XB. The effect of

phosphine in syngas on ni-YSZ anode-supported solid oxide fuel cells. J Power
Sources 2009;193(2):739–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.04.044.
[71] Demircan O, Zhang W, Xu C, Zondlo J, Finklea HO. The effect of overpotential on
performance degradation of the solid oxide fuel cell ni/YSZ anode during
exposure to syngas with phosphine contaminant. J Power Sources 2010;195(10):
3091–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.11.114.

[72] Liu W, Sun X, Pederson LR, Marina OA, Khaleel MA. Effect of nickel-phosphorus
interactions on structural integrity of anode-supported solid oxide fuel cells.
J Power Sources 2010;195(21):7140–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2010.06.015.

[49] Appari S, Janardhanan VM, Bauri R, Jayanti S. Deactivation and regeneration of

[73] Zhi M, Chen X, Finklea H, Celik I, Wu NQ. Electrochemical and microstructural

ni catalyst during steam reforming of model biogas: an experimental
investigation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39(1):297–304. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.10.056.

[50] Riegraf M, Schiller G, Costa R, Friedrich KA, Latz A, Yurkiv V. Elementary kinetic
numerical simulation of ni/YSZ SOFC anode performance considering sulfur
poisoning. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162(1):F65–75. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0471501jes.

[51] Hauch A, Hagen A, Hjelm J, Ramos T. Sulfur poisoning of SOFC anodes: effect of
overpotential on long-Term degradation. J Electrochem Soc 2014;161(6):
F734–43. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.080406jes.

[52] Hagen A, Johnson GB, Hjalmarsson P. Electrochemical evaluation of sulfur

poisoning in a methane-fuelled solid oxide fuel cell: effect of current density and
sulfur concentration. J Power Sources 2014;272:776–85. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2014.08.125.

[53] Riegraf M, Hoerlein MP, Costa R, Schiller G, Friedrich KA. Sulfur poisoning of
electrochemical reformate conversion on nickel/gadolinium-Doped ceria
electrodes. ACS Catal 2017;7(11):7760–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ACSCATAL.7B02177.

[54] Hauch A, Traulsen M, Küngas R, Skafte T. Co2 electrolysis - gas impurities and
electrode overpotential causing detrimental carbon deposition. J Power Sources
2021;506:230108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230108.

[55] Haga K, Adachi S, Shiratori Y, Itoh K, Sasaki K. Poisoning of SOFC anodes by

various fuel impurities. Solid State Ionics 2008;179(27–32):1427–31. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ssi.2008.02.062.

[56] Li TS, Xu C, Chen T, Miao H, Wang WG. Chlorine contaminants poisoning of solid
oxide fuel cells. J Solid State Electrochem 2011;15(6):1077–85. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10008-010-1166-x.

[57] Bao JE, Krishnan GN, Jayaweera P, Perez-Mariano J, Sanjurjo A. Effect of various
coal contaminants on the performance of solid oxide fuel cells: part i. accelerated
testing. J Power Sources 2009;193(2):607–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
JPOWSOUR.2009.04.034.

[58] Coute N, Ortego JD, Richardson JT, Twigg MV. Catalytic steam reforming of

chlorocarbons: trichloroethane, trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene. Appl
Catal, B 1998;19(3–4):175–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-3373(98)00075-
7.

[59] Madi H, Lanzini A, Papurello D, Diethelm S, Ludwig C, Santarelli M, Van herle J.
Solid oxide fuel cell anode degradation by the effect of hydrogen chloride in stack
and single cell environments. J Power Sources 2016;326:349–56. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2016.07.003.

analysis of nickel-yttria-stabilized zirconia electrode operated in phosphorus-
containing syngas. J Power Sources 2008;183(2):485–90. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.05.055.

[74] Haga K, Shiratori Y, Nojiri Y, Ito K, Sasaki K. Phosphorus poisoning of ni-Cermet
anodes in solid oxide fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2010;157(11):B1693. https://
doi.org/10.1149/1.3489265.

[75] Madi H, Lanzini A, Diethelm S, Papurello D, Van herle J, Lualdi M, Gutzon

Larsen J, Santarelli M. Solid oxide fuel cell anode degradation by the effect of
siloxanes. J Power Sources 2015;279:460–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2015.01.053.9th International Conference on Lead-Acid Batteries -
LABAT 2014

[76] Papurello D, Lanzini A. Sofc single cells fed by biogas: experimental tests with
trace contaminants. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2018;72:306–12. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.wasman.2017.11.030.

[77] Madi H, Diethelm S, Poitel S, Ludwig C, Van herle J. Damage of siloxanes on ni-

YSZ anode supported SOFC operated on hydrogen and bio-syngas. Fuel Cells
2015;15(5):718–27. https://doi.org/10.1002/FUCE.201400185.

[78] Tian J, Milcarek RJ. Investigating the degradation mechanism of the solid oxide

fuel cell nickel-yttria stabilized zirconia anode under siloxane contamination.
J Power Sources 2020;480:229122.

[79] Hauch A, Jensen SH, Bilde-Sorensen JB, Mogensen M. Silica segregation in the ni/

YSZ electrode. J Electrochem Soc 2007;154(7):A619. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.2733861.

[80] Hauch A, Ebbesen SD, Jensen SH, Mogensen M. Solid oxide electrolysis cells:
microstructure and degradation of the ni/yttria-Stabilized zirconia electrode.
J Electrochem Soc 2008;155(11):B1184. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2967331.

[81] Chatzichristodoulou C, Chen M, Hendriksen P, Jacobsen T, Mogensen M.

Understanding degradation of solid oxide electrolysis cells through modeling of
electrochemical potential profiles. Electrochim Acta 2016;189:265–82. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2015.12.067.

[82] Schefold J, Brisse A, Poepke H. 23,000H steam electrolysis with an electrolyte
supported solid oxide cell. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42(19):13415–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJHYDENE.2017.01.072.

[83] Perz M, Bucher E, Gspan C, Waldh ̈ausl J, Hofer F, Sitte W. Long-term degradation
of la0.6sr0.4co0.2fe0.8o3- it-sofc cathodes due to silicon poisoning. Solid State
Ionics 2016;288:22–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2016.01.005.Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on Solid State Ionics SSI-20

[84] Stanislowski M, Froitzheim J, Niewolak L, Quadakkers WJ, Hilpert K, Markus T,
Singheiser L. Reduction of chromium vaporization from SOFC interconnectors by

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101136

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

highly effective coatings. J Power Sources 2007;164(2):578–89. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2006.08.013.

[85] Bucher E, Yang M, Sitte W. In-situ investigation of the chromium induced

degradation of the oxygen exchange kinetics of the IT-SOFC cathode material
la0.6Sr0.4Coo3-δ. ECS Trans 2011;35(1):2019. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.3570192.

[86] Bucher E, Yang M, Sitte W. In situ investigations of the chromium-Induced

degradation of the oxygen surface exchange kinetics of IT-SOFC cathode
materials la0.6Sr0.4Coo3δ and la0.58sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3δ. J Electrochem Soc
2012;159(5):B592. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.027206JES.

[87] Bucher E, Gspan C, H ̈oschen T, Hofer F, Sitte W. Oxygen exchange kinetics of
la0.6Sr0.4Coo3-δ affected by changes of the surface composition due to
chromium and silicon poisoning. Solid State Ionics 2017;299:26–31. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.SSI.2016.09.024.

[88] Harrison C, Slater P, Steinberger-Wilckens R. A review of solid oxide fuel cell
cathode materials with respect to their resistance to the effects of chromium
poisoning. Solid State Ionics 2020;354:115410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ssi.2020.115410.

[89] Schr ̈odl N, Bucher E, Gspan C, Egger A, Ganser C, Teichert C, Hofer F, Sitte W.

Phase decomposition in the chromium- and silicon-poisoned IT-SOFC cathode
materials la0.6Sr0.4Coo3-δ and la2nio4δ. Solid State Ionics 2016;288:14–21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SSI.2016.01.006.

[90] Yang M, Bucher E, Sitte W. Effects of chromium poisoning on the long-term
oxygen exchange kinetics of the solid oxide fuel cell cathode materials
la0.6Sr0.4Coo3 and nd2nio4. J Power Sources 2011;196(17):7313–7. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2010.10.064.

[91] Horita T, Xiong Y, Kishimoto H, Yamaji K, Brito ME, Yokokawa H. Chromium
poisoning and degradation at (sr)mno3 and (lasr)feo3 cathodes for solid oxide
fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2010;157(5):B614. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.3322103.

[92] Jiang SP, Zhang S, Zhen YD. Deposition of cr species at (la,sr)(co,fe)o[sub 3]

cathodes of solid oxide fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2006;153(1):A127. https://
doi.org/10.1149/1.2136077.

[93] Wan TH, Saccoccio M, Chen C, Ciucci F. Influence of the discretization methods
on the distribution of relaxation times deconvolution: implementing radial basis
functions with DRTtools. Electrochim Acta 2015;184:483–99. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.electacta.2015.09.097.

[94] Chen K, Hyodo J, Dodd A, Ai N, Ishihara T, Jian L, Jiang SP. Chromium

deposition and poisoning of la0.8Sr0.2Mno3 oxygen electrodes of solid oxide
electrolysis cells. Faraday Discuss 2015;182(0):457–76. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C5FD00010F.

[95] Wei B, Chen K, Zhao L, Lü Z, Jiang SP. Chromium deposition and poisoning at
la0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3δ oxygen electrodes of solid oxide electrolysis cells. PCCP
2014;17(3):1601–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CP05110F.

[96] Chen K, Liu S-S, Guagliardo P, Kilburn MR, Koyama M, Jiang SP. A fundamental
study of boron deposition and poisoning of la 0.8 sr 0.2 MnO 3 cathode of solid
oxide fuel cells under accelerated conditions. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162(12):
F1282–91. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0141512jes.

[109] Hoeber M, Koenigshofer B, Wachter P, Nusev G, Boskoski P, Hochenauer C,
Subotic V. Holistic approach to design, test, and optimize stand-alone sofc-
reformer systems. Processes 2021;9(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/pr9020348.

[110] Lanzini A, Leone P, Guerra C, Smeacetto F, Brandon NP, Santarelli M. Durability
of anode supported solid oxides fuel cells (SOFC) under direct dry-reforming of
methane. Chem Eng J 2013;220:254–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
CEJ.2013.01.003.

[111] Stoeckl B, Suboti ́c V, Reichholf D, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C. Extensive

analysis of large planar SOFC: operation with humidified methane and carbon
monoxide to examine carbon deposition based degradation. Electrochim Acta
2017;256:325–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ELECTACTA.2017.09.026.
[112] Vanja S, Harter P, Kusnezoff M, Napporn TW, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C.

Identification of carbon deposition and its removal in solid oxide fuel cells by
applying a non-conventional diagnostic tool. Sustainable Energy Fuels 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1039/d0se01914c.

[113] Chen T, Wang WG, Miao H, Li T, Xu C. Evaluation of carbon deposition behavior

on the nickel/yttrium-stabilized zirconia anode-supported fuel cell fueled with
simulated syngas. J Power Sources 2011;196(5):2461–8. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2010.11.095.

[114] Subotic V, Baldinelli A, Barelli L, Scharler R, Pongratz G, Hochenauer C, Anca-
Couce A. Applicability of the sofc technology for coupling with biomass-gasifier
systems: short- and long-term experimental study on sofc performance and
degradation behaviour. Appl Energy 2019;256:113904. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2019.113904.

[115] Suboti ́c V, Schluckner C, St ̈ockl B, Lawlor V, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C.

Strategy for carbon gasification from porous ni-YSZ anodes of industrial-Sized
ASC-SOFCs and effects of carbon growth. J Electrochem Soc 2016;163(14):
F1515–22. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0521614jes.

[116] Stoeckl B, Suboti ́c V, Preininger M, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C. SOFC operation
with carbon oxides: experimental analysis of performance and degradation.
Electrochim Acta 2018;275:256–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ELECTACTA.2018.04.036.

[117] Bartholomew CH. Carbon deposition in steam reforming and methanation. Catal
Rev 1982;24(1):67–112. https://doi.org/10.1080/03602458208079650.

[118] Yurkiv V. Reformate-operated {SOFC} anode performance and degradation
considering solid carbon formation: a modeling and simulation study.
Electrochim Acta 2014;143:114–28.

[119] Kogler M, Koeck E-M, Perfler L, Bielz T, Støger-Pollach M, Hetaba W, Willinger M,
Huang X, Schuster M, Kloetzer B, Penner S. Methane decomposition and carbon
growth on Y2o3, Yttria-Stabilized Zirconia, and ZrO2. Chem Mater 2014;26(4):
1690–701. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm404062r.

[120] Koeck E-M, Kogler M, Goetsch T, Kloetzer B, Penner S. Structural and chemical

degradation mechanisms of pure YSZ and its components ZrO2 and Y2O3 in
carbon-rich fuel gases. PCCP 2016;18(21):14333–49. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c6cp02458k.

[121] Rafique A, Raza R, Ali A, Ahmad MA, Syvajarvi M. An efficient carbon resistant
composite ni0.6zn0.4o2 gdc anode for biogas fuelled solid oxide fuel cell. J Power
Sources 2019;438:227042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.227042.

[97] Chen K, Ai N, Zhao L, Jiang SP. Effect of volatile boron species on the

[122] Subotic V, Schluckner C, Mathe J, Rechberger J, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C.

electrocatalytic activity of cathodes of solid oxide fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc
2013;160(3):F301–8. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.019304jes.

[98] Chen K, Ai N, Zhao L, Jiang SP. Effect of volatile boron species on the

electrocatalytic activity of cathodes of solid oxide fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc
2013;160(2):F183–90. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.007303jes.

[99] Liu H, Luo W, Lin C, Du X, Yang H, Tang D, Zhang T. Reducing the reaction
between boron-containing sealing glass-ceramics and lanthanum-containing
cathode: effect of la2o3. J Eur Ceram Soc 2016;36(4):1103–7. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2015.11.026.

[100] Fang L, Liu H, Zhao D, Yang H, Tang D, Zhang T. Reducing the reaction between

Anode regeneration following carbon depositions in an industrial-sized anode
supported solid oxide fuel cell operating on synthetic diesel reformate. J Power
Sources 2015;295:55–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.06.133.

[123] Souza AE, MacIel LJ, Cavalcanti-Filho VO, Filho NM, Abreu CA. Kinetic-

operational mechanism to autothermal reforming of methane. Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Research. vol. 50; 2011. p. 2585–99. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ie100637b. https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines.

[124] Reed J.J. Digitizing ”The NBS tables of chemical thermodynamic properties:
Selected values for inorganic and c1 and c2 organic substances in SI Units”1.
2020. 10.6028/JRES.125.007.

boron-containing sealing glass-ceramics and lanthanum-containing cathode:
effect of bi2o3. J Eur Ceram Soc 2014;34(16):4463–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeurceramsoc.2014.07.006.

[125] Takahashi Y, Westrum EF. Glassy carbon low-temperature thermodynamic

properties. J Chem Thermodyn 1970;2(6):847–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0021-9614(70)90028-5.

[101] Chen K, Hyodo J, O’Donnell KM, Rickard W, Ishihara T, Jiang SP. Effect of

volatile boron species on the electrocatalytic activity of cathodes of solid oxide
fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2014;161(12):F1163–70. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0251412jes.

[102] Chen K, Hyodo J, Ai N, Ishihara T, Jiang SP. Boron deposition and poisoning of
la0.8sr0.2mno3 oxygen electrodes of solid oxide electrolysis cells under
accelerated operation conditions. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2016;41(3):1419–31.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.11.013.

[103] Rostrup-Nielsen JR. Activity of nickel catalysts for steam reforming of

hydrocarbons. J Catal 1973;31:173–99.

[104] Rostrup-Nielsen JR. Coking on nickel catalysts for steam reforming of

hydrocarbons. J Catal 1974;33(2):184–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9517
(74)90263-2.

[105] Rostrup-Nielsen J, Trimm DL. Mechanisms of carbon formation on nickel-

containing catalysts. J Catal 1977;48(1–3):155–65. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0021-9517(77)90087-2.

[106] Rostrup-Nielsen JR. Equilibria of decomposition reactions of carbon monoxide

and methane over nickel catalyst. J Catal 1972;27:343–56.

[107] Helveg S, Sehestad J, Rostrup-Nielsen J. Whisker carbon in perspective. Catal

Today 2011;178:42–6.

[108] Sehestad J. Four challanges for nickel steam-reforming catalysts. Catal Today

2006;111:103–10.

[126] Spencer HM, Flannagan GN. Empirical Heat Capacity Equations of Gases. Tech.

Rep.. 1942. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01262a519.

[127] Hauth M, Lerch W, K ̈onig K, Karl J. Impact of naphthalene on the performance of
SOFCs during operation with synthetic wood gas. J Power Sources 2011;196(17):
7144–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2010.09.007.

[128] Subotic V, Schluckner C, Hochenauer C. An experimental and numerical study of

performance of large planar esc-sofcs and experimental investigation of carbon
depositions. J Energy Inst 2016;89(1):121–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
joei.2015.01.004.

[129] Tao Y, Ebbesen SD, Mogensen MB. Carbon deposition in solid oxide cells during

co-Electrolysis of H 2 O and CO 2. J Electrochem Soc 2014;161(3):F337–43.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.079403jes.

[130] Skafte TL, Graves C, Blennow P, Hjelm J. Carbon deposition during CO2

electrolysis in ni-Based solid-Oxide-Cell electrodes. ECS Trans 2015;68(1):
3429–37. https://doi.org/10.1149/06801.3429ecst.

[131] Marsh H, Warburton AP. Catalysis of graphitisation. J Appl Chem 2007;20(4):

133–42. https://doi.org/10.1002/jctb.5010200409.

[132] Fitzer E, Kegel B. Reaktionen von kohlenstoffges ̈attigter vanadiumcarbidschmelze
mit ungeordnetem kohlenstoff (beitrag zur katalytischen graphitierung). Carbon
N Y 1968;6(4):433–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/0008-6223(68)90084-5.
[133] Chun CM, Mumford JD, Ramanarayanan TA. Carbon-Induced Corrosion of Nickel

Anode. Tech. Rep.. 2000. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1393958.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101137

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

[134] Ettler M, Timmermann H, Malzbender J, Weber A, Menzler N. Durability of ni

anodes during reoxidation cycles. J Power Sources 2010;195(17):5452–67.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.03.049.

[135] Suboti ́c V, K ̈onigshofer B, Juriˇci ́c

 ̈
A, Kusnezoff M, Schr ̈ottner H, Hochenauer C,

Boˇskoski P. Detailed insight into processes of reversible solid oxide cells and
stacks using DRT analysis. Energy Convers Manage 2020;226:113509. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113509.

[136] Suboti ́c V, Futamura S, Harrington GF, Matsuda J, Natsukoshi K, Sasaki K.

Towards understanding of oxygen electrode processes during solid oxide
electrolysis operation to improve simultaneous fuel and oxygen generation.
J Power Sources 2021;492:229600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2021.229600.

[137] Konigshofer B, Pongratz G, Nusev G, Boskoski P, Hober M, Juricic D, Kusnezoff M,

Trofimenko N, Schrottner H, Hochenauer C, Subotic V. Development of test
protocols for solid oxide electrolysis cells operated under accelerated degradation
conditions. J Power Sources 2021;497:229875. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2021.229875.

and mitigates the coarsening of ni phase in sofc. Electrochim Acta 2021;391:
138912. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2021.138912.

[159] Song B, Ruiz-Trejo E, Brandon N. Enhanced mechanical stability of ni-ysz scaffold
demonstrated by nanoindentation and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.
J Power Sources 2018;395:205–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2018.05.075.

[160] The D, Grieshammer S, Schroeder M, Martin M, Al Daroukh M, Tietz F, Schefold J,
Brisse A. Microstructural comparison of solid oxide electrolyser cells operated for
6100h and 9000h. J Power Sources 2015;275:901–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2014.10.188.

[161] Frey CE, Fang Q, Sebold D, Blum L, Menzler NH. A detailed post mortem analysis

of solid oxide electrolyzer cells after long-Term stack operation. J Electrochem
Soc 2018;165(5):F357–64. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0961805jes.

[162] Hoerlein MP, Riegraf M, Costa R, Schiller G, Friedrich KA. A parameter study of

solid oxide electrolysis cell degradation: microstructural changes of the fuel
electrode. Electrochim Acta 2018;276:162–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ELECTACTA.2018.04.170.

[138] Cassidy M, Lindsay G, Kendall K. The reduction of nickel zirconia cermet anodes

[163] Holzer L, Iwanschitz B, Hocker T, Münch B, Prestat M, Wiedenmann D, Vogt U,

and the effects on supported thin electrolytes. J Power Sources 1996;61(1):
189–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7753(96)02359-2.

[139] Pihlatie M, Kaiser A, Larsen PH, Mogensen M. Dimensional behavior of ni–YSZ
composites during redox cycling. J Electrochem Soc 2009;156(3):B322. https://
doi.org/10.1149/1.3046121.

[140] Wood A, Pastula M, Waldbillig D, Ivey DG. Initial testing of solutions to redox
problems with anode-supported SOFC. J Electrochem Soc 2006;153(10):A1929.
https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2240085.

[141] Sarantaridis D, Atkinson A. Redox cycling of Ni-based solid oxide fuel cell anodes:

a review. Fuel Cells 2007;7(3):246–58. https://doi.org/10.1002/
fuce.200600028.

Holtappels P, Sfeir J, Mai A, Graule T. Microstructure degradation of cermet
anodes for solid oxide fuel cells: quantification of nickel grain growth in dry and
in humid atmospheres. J Power Sources 2011;196(3):1279–94. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.08.017.

[164] Zheng Y, Wang J, Yu B, Zhang W, Chen J, Qiao J, Zhang J. A review of high
temperature co-electrolysis of h2o and co2 to produce sustainable fuels using
solid oxide electrolysis cells (soecs): advanced materials and technology. Chem
Soc Rev 2017;46:1427–63. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6CS00403B.

[165] Song Y, Zhou Z, Zhang X, Zhou Y, Gong H, Lv H, Liu Q, Wang G, Bao X. Pure co2
electrolysis over an ni/ysz cathode in a solid oxide electrolysis cell. J Mater Chem
A 2018;6:13661–7. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8TA02858C.

[142] Grahl-Madsen L., Larsen P., Bonanos N., Engell J., Linderoth S. Proceedings ofthe

[166] Jiang SP. Development of lanthanum strontium cobalt ferrite perovskite

5th europeansofcforum. ????, p. 82–89.

[143] Pihlatie M, Ramos T, Kaiser A. Testing and improving the redox stability of ni-
based solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Sources 2009;193(1):322–30. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.11.140.Scientific Advances in Fuel Cell Systems

[144] Stathis G, Simwonis D, Tietz F, Moropoulou A, Naoumides A. Oxidation and

resulting mechanical properties of Ni/8Y2O3-stabilized zirconia anode substrate
for solid-oxide fuel cells. J Mater Res 2002;17(5):951–8. https://doi.org/
10.1557/JMR.2002.0142.

[145] Waldbillig D, Wood A, Ivey DG. Thermal analysis of the cyclic reduction and

oxidation behaviour of sofc anodes. Solid State Ionics 2005;176(9):847–59.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2004.12.002.

[146] Zhang Y, Liu B, Tu B, Dong Y, Cheng M. Redox cycling of niysz anode investigated
by tpr technique. Solid State Ionics 2005;176(29):2193–9. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ssi.2005.06.016.

[147] Klemenso T, Chung C, Larsen PH, Mogensen M. The mechanism behind redox
instability of anodes in high-temperature SOFCs. J Electrochem Soc 2005;152
(11):A2186. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2048228.

[148] Ettler M, Blass G, Menzler NH. Characterisation of ni-YSZ-cermets with respect to
redox stability. Fuel Cells 2007;7(5):349–55. https://doi.org/10.1002/
fuce.200700007.

[149] Suboti ́c V, Menzler NH, Lawlor V, Fang Q, Pofahl S, Harter P, Schroettner H,

Hochenauer C. On the origin of degradation in fuel cells and its fast identification
by applying unconventional online-monitoring tools. Appl Energy 2020;277:
115603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115603.

[150] Sehested J, Gelten JA, Remediakis IN, Bengaard H, Norskov JK. Sintering of

nickel steam-reforming catalysts: effects of temperature and steam and hydrogen
pressures. J Catal 2004;223(2):432–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcat.2004.01.026.

[151] Faes A, Hessler-Wyser A, Zryd A, Herle JV. A review of redox cycling of solid

oxide fuel cells anode. Membranes 2012, Vol 2, Pages 585–664 2012;2(3):
585–664. https://doi.org/10.3390/MEMBRANES2030585.

[152] Sakai T, Arakawa K, Ogushi M, Ishihara T, Matsumoto H, Okuyama Y.

Atmosphere dependence of anode reaction of intermediate temperature steam
electrolysis using perovskite type proton conductor. J Solid State Electrochem
2015 19:6 2015;19(6):1793–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10008-015-2808-9.
[153] Hubert M, Laurencin J, Cloetens P, Morel B, Montinaro D, Lefebvre-Joud F.
Impact of nickel agglomeration on solid oxide cell operated in fuel cell and
electrolysis modes. J Power Sources 2018;397:240–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.JPOWSOUR.2018.06.097.

[154] Jorgensen PS, Bowen JR. Determination of three dimensional microstructure

parameters from a solid oxide ni/YSZ electrode after electrolysis operation. ECS
Trans 2011;35(1):1655. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3570152.

[155] Rinaldi G, Diethelm S, Oveisi E, Burdet P, Herle JV, Montinaro D, Fu Q, Brisse A.
Post-test analysis on a solid oxide cell stack operated for 10,700 hours in steam
electrolysis mode. Fuel Cells 2017;17(4):541–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/
FUCE.201600194.

[156] Fu Q, Li Z, Wei W, Liu F, Xu X, Liu Z. Performance degradation prediction of
direct internal reforming solid oxide fuel cell due to ni-particle coarsening in
composite anode. Energy Convers Manage 2021;233:113902. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2021.113902.

[157] Trini M, Hauch A, De Angelis S, Tong X, Hendriksen PV, Chen M. Comparison of
microstructural evolution of fuel electrodes in solid oxide fuel cells and
electrolysis cells. J Power Sources 2020;450:227599. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2019.227599.

[158] Zou Y, Lin T, Sun Y, Chen Z, Guan C, Li Y, Jiang SP, Ai N, Chen K. Anodic

polarization creates an electrocatalytically active ni anode/electrolyte interface

electrodes of solid oxide fuel cells - a review. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44(14):
7448–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.01.212.

[167] Chen X, Zhen Y, Li J, Jiang SP. Chromium deposition and poisoning in dry and
humidified air at (la0.8sr0.2)0.9mno3+δ cathodes of solid oxide fuel cells. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2010;35(6):2477–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2009.12.185.

[168] Niania M, Podor R, Britton TB, Li C, Cooper SJ, Svetkov N, Skinner S, Kilner J. In
situ study of strontium segregation in la0.6sr0.4co0.2fe0.8o3δ in ambient
atmospheres using high-temperature environmental scanning electron
microscopy. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:14120–35. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C8TA01341A.

[169] Liu Y, Chen K, Zhao L, Chi B, Pu J, Jiang SP, Jian L. Performance stability and
degradation mechanism of la0.6sr0.4co0.2fe0.8o3-δ cathodes under solid oxide
fuel cellsoperation conditions. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39(28):15868–76.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.03.077.

[170] Baumann FS, Fleig J, Konuma M, Starke U, Habermeier H-U, Maier J. Strong

performance improvement of la[sub 0.6]sr[sub0.4]co[sub 0.8]fe[sub 0.2]o[sub 3-
δ]SOFC cathodes by electrochemical activation. J Electrochem Soc 2005;152(10):
A2074. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2034529.

[171] Wang H, Yakal-Kremski KJ, Yeh T, Rupp GM, Limbeck A, Fleig J, Barnett SA.

Mechanisms of performance degradation of (la,sr)(co,fe)o3-δsolid oxide fuel cell
cathodes. J Electrochem Soc 2016;163(6):F581–5. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0031607jes.

[172] Wang H, Barnett SA. Degradation mechanisms of porous la0.6sr0.4co0.2fe0.8o3-
δsolid oxide fuel cell cathodes. J Electrochem Soc 2018;165(7):F564–70. https://
doi.org/10.1149/2.1211807jes.

[173] Wang Y, Jia C, Lyu Z, Han M, Wu J, Sun Z, Iguchi F, Yashiro K, Kawada T.

Performance and stability analysis of sofc containing thin and dense gadolinium-
doped ceria interlayer sintered at low temperature. J Materiomics 2021. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmat.2021.09.001.

[174] Suboti ́c V, Futamura S, Harrington GF, Matsuda J, Natsukoshi K, Sasaki K.

Towards understanding of oxygen electrode processes during solid oxide
electrolysis operation to improve simultaneous fuel and oxygen generation.
J Power Sources 2021;492:229600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2021.229600.

[175] Chen K, Li N, Ai N, Cheng Y, Rickard WD, Jiang SP. Polarization-induced interface
and sr segregation of in situ assembled la0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3-δ electrodes on
Y2O3-Zro2 electrolyte of solid oxide fuel cells. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8
(46):31729–37. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b11665.

[176] Yokokawa H, Tu H, Iwanschitz B, Mai A. Fundamental mechanisms limiting solid
oxide fuel cell durability. J Power Sources 2008;182(2):400–12. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.02.016.Selected papers from the International
Workshop on Degradation Issues in Fuel Cells

[177] Liu Y, Thyd ́en K, Chen M, Hagen A. Microstructure degradation of lsm-ysz

cathode in sofcs operated at various conditions. Solid State Ionics 2012;206:
97–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2011.10.020.

[178] Nielsen J, Mogensen M. Sofc lsm:ysz cathode degradation induced by moisture:
an impedance spectroscopy study. Solid State Ionics 2011;189(1):74–81. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2011.02.019.

[179] Zekri A, Schnetger B, Essafi MA, Plaggenborg T, Parisi J, Knipper M.

Microstructure degradation of LSM/YSZ cathodes for solid oxide fuel cells aged in
stack after long operation time. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164(13):F1385–91.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0581713jes.

[180] Graves C, Ebbesen SD, Mogensen M. Co-electrolysis of co2 and h2o in solid oxide
cells: performance and durability. Solid State Ionics 2011;192(1):398–403.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101138

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2010.06.014.Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Solid State Ionics

[181] Mawdsley JR, David Carter J, Jeremy Kropf A, Yildiz B, Maroni VA. Post-test

evaluation of oxygen electrodes from solid oxide electrolysis stacks. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2009;34(9):4198–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2008.07.061.

[182] Zhang Y, Chen K, Xia C, Jiang SP, Ni M. A model for the delamination kinetics of
la0.8sr0.2mno3 oxygen electrodes of solid oxide electrolysis cells. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2012;37(19):13914–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2012.07.062.HYFUSEN

[183] Lim H-T, Virkar AV. A study of solid oxide fuel cell stack failure by inducing

abnormal behavior in a single cell test. J Power Sources 2008;185(2):790–800.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.07.051.

[184] Virkar AV. Mechanism of oxygen electrode delamination in solid oxide

electrolyzer cells. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35(18):9527–43. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.06.058.HE (Hydrogen Systems and Materials For
Sustainability)

[185] Virkar AV, Nachlas J, Joshi AV, Diamond J. Internal precipitation of molecular
oxygen and electromechanical failure of zirconia solid electrolytes. J Am Ceram
Soc 1990;73(11):3382–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1151-2916.1990.tb06465.
x.

[186] Knibbe R, Traulsen ML, Hauch A, Ebbesen SD, Mogensen M. Solid oxide

electrolysis cells: degradation at high current densities. J Electrochem Soc 2010;
157(8):B1209. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3447752.

[187] Chen K, Jiang SP. Failure mechanism of (la,sr)mno3 oxygen electrodes of solid
oxide electrolysis cells. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2011;36(17):10541–9. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.05.103.International Conference on Hydrogen
Production (ICH2P)-2010

[188] Subotic V, Hochenauer C. Chapter 7 - high temperature electrochemical

production of hydrogen. In: Basile A, Napporn TW, editors. Current Trends and
Future Developments on (Bio-) Membranes; 2020. Elsevier; 2020, ISBN 978-0-12-
817110-3. p. 203–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817110-3.00007-2. htt
ps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128171103000072.

[189] Mahmoud A, Al Daroukh M, Lipinska-Chwalek M, Luysberg M, Tietz F,

Hermann RP. A m ̈ossbauer spectral study of degradation in
la0.58sr0.4Fe0.5Co0.5O3x after long-term operation in solid oxide electrolysis
cells. Solid State Ionics 2017;312:38–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
SSI.2017.10.003.

[190] Vero JCD, Develos-Bagarinao K, Kishimoto H, Ishiyama T, Yamaji K, Horita T,

Yokokawa H. Influence of la0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3-δmicrostructure on GDC
interlayer stability and cation diffusion across the LSCF/GDC/YSZ interfaces.
J Electrochem Soc 2016;163(13):F1463. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0021614JES.
[191] Pan Z, Liu Q, Ni M, Lyu R, Li P, Chan SH. Activation and failure mechanism of

la0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3Δ air electrode in solid oxide electrolyzer cells under
high-current electrolysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(11):5437–50. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.01.181.

[192] Laurencin J, Hubert M, Sanchez DF, Pylypko S, Morales M, Morata A, Morel B,

Montinaro D, Lefebvre-Joud F, Siebert E. Degradation mechanism of
la0.6sr0.4co0.2fe0.8o3-δ/gd0.1ce0.9o2- δcomposite electrode operated under
solid oxide electrolysis and fuel cell conditions. Electrochim Acta 2017;241:
459–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2017.05.011.

[202] Chen K, Liu SS, Ai N, Koyama M, Jiang SP. Why solid oxide cells can be reversibly
operated in solid oxide electrolysis cell and fuel cell modes? PCCP 2015;17(46):
31308–15. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5cp05065k.

[203] Minh NQ. Development of reversible solid oxide fuel cells (RSOFCs)and stacks.
ECS Trans 2011;35(1):2897–904. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3570289.
[204] Fan H, Keane M, Singh P, Han M. Electrochemical performance and stability of
lanthanum strontium cobalt ferrite oxygen electrode with gadolinia doped ceria
barrier layer for reversible solid oxide fuel cell. J Power Sources 2014;268:634–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2014.03.080.

[205] Graves C, Ebbesen SD, Jensen SH, Simonsen SB, Mogensen MB. Eliminating
degradation in solid oxide electrochemical cells by reversible operation. Nat
Mater 2015;14(2):239–44. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4165.

[206] Choi SM, Ahn J, Son JW, Lee JH, Kim BK, Yoon KJ, Ji HI. Comprehensive

understanding of cathodic and anodic polarization effects on stability of
nanoscale oxygen electrode for reversible solid oxide cells. ACS Applied Materials
and Interfaces 2018;10(46):39608–14. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.8b11874.

[207] Wu X, Jiang J, Zhao W, Li X, Li J. Two-dimensional temperature distribution
estimation for a cross-flow planar solid oxide fuel cell stack. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2020;45(3):2257–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.11.091.

[208] Lin C-K, Chen K-Y, Wu S-H, Shiu W-H, Liu C-K, Lee R-Y. Mechanical durability of
solid oxide fuel cell glass-ceramic sealant/steel interconnect joint under thermo-
mechanical cycling. Renew Energy 2019;138:1205–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.renene.2019.02.041.

[209] Li R, Liang X, Wang X, Zeng W, Yang J, Yan D, Pu J, Chi B, Li J. Improvement of
sealing performance for al2o3 fiber-reinforced compressive seals for intermediate
temperature solid oxide fuel cell. Ceram Int 2019;45(17, Part A):21953–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.07.209.

[210] Guan W, Du Z, Wang J, Jiang L, Yang J, Zhou XD. Mechanisms of performance
degradation induced by thermal cycling in solid oxide fuel cell stacks with flat-
tube anode-supported cells based on double-sided cathodes. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2020;45(38):19840–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IJHYDENE.2020.05.114.

[211] Khan MZ, Mehran MT, Song RH, Lee SB, Lim TH. Effects of applied current

density and thermal cycling on the degradation of a solid oxide fuel cell cathode.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(27):12346–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IJHYDENE.2018.04.175.

[212] Pan J, Yang J, Yan D, Pu J, Chi B, Li J. Effect of thermal cycling on durability of a
solid oxide fuel cell stack with external manifold structure. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2020;45(35):17927–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJHYDENE.2020.04.260.
[213] Yang JJ, Yan D, Huang W, Li J, Pu J, Chi B, Jian L. Improvement on durability and
thermal cycle performance for solid oxide fuel cell stack with external manifold
structure. Energy 2018;149:903–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ENERGY.2018.02.072.

[214] Lin C-K, Chen T-T, Chen A-S, Chyou Y-P, Chiang L-K. Finite element analysis of

thermal stress distribution in planar SOFC. ECS Trans 2007. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.2729310.

[215] Kaur G, Kulkarni AP, Giddey S. CO2 Reduction in a solid oxide electrolysis cell

with a ceramic composite cathode: effect of load and thermal cycling. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(48):21769–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IJHYDENE.2018.10.014.

[193] Chen K, Jiang SP. Surface segregation in solid oxide cell oxygen electrodes:

[216] Peng J, Huang J, long Wu X, wu Xu Y, Chen H, Li X. Solid oxide fuel cell (sofc)

phenomena, mitigation strategies and electrochemical properties. Electrochem
Energy Rev 2020;1:3. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41918-020-00078-z.
[194] Kim J, Ji H-I, Dasari HP, Shin D, Song H, Lee J-H, Kim B-K, Je H-J, Lee H-W,

Yoon KJ. Degradation mechanism of electrolyte and air electrode in solid oxide
electrolysis cells operating at high polarization. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38
(3):1225–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.10.113.2011 Zing
International Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Conference: from Nanomaterials to
Demonstrators

[195] Khan M, Xu X, Knibbe R, Zhu Z. Air electrodes and related degradation

mechanisms in solid oxide electrolysis and reversible solid oxide cells. Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev 2021;143:110918. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2021.110918.

[196] Morales-Zapata M, Larrea A, Laguna-Bercero M. Reversible operation

performance of microtubular solid oxide cells with a nickelate-based oxygen
electrode. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(8):5535–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2019.05.122.22nd World Hydrogen Energy Conference
[197] Laguna-Bercero MA, Monzn H, Larrea A, Orera VM. Improved stability of

reversible solid oxide cells with a nickelate-based oxygen electrode. J Mater Chem
A 2016;4:1446–53. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5TA08531D.

[198] Ai N, Chen M, He S, Chen K, Zhang T, Jiang SP. High performance nanostructured
bismuth oxide-cobaltite as a durable oxygen electrode for reversible solid oxide
cells. J Mater Chem A 2018;6:6510–20. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8TA00370J.

[199] Jun A, Kim J, Shin J, Kim G. Achieving high efficiency and eliminating

degradation in solid oxide electrochemical cells using high oxygen-Capacity
perovskite. Angewandte Chemie 2016;128(40):12700–3. https://doi.org/
10.1002/ANGE.201606972.

[200] Hughes GA, Yakal-Kremski K, Barnett SA. Life testing of lsm-ysz composite

electrodes under reversing-current operation. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2013;15:
17257–62. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3CP52973H.

[201] He Z, Zhang L, He S, Ai N, Chen K, Shao Y, Jiang SP. Cyclic polarization enhances
the operating stability of la0.57sr0.38co0.18fe0.72nb0.1o3-delta oxygen
electrode of reversible solid oxide cells. J Power Sources 2018;404:73–80.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.10.009.

performance evaluation, fault diagnosis and health control: a review. J Power
Sources 2021;505:230058. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230058.

[217] Medjaher K, Zerhouni N. Hybrid prognostic method applied to mechatronic

systems. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2013;69(1–4):823–34. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00170-013-5064-0.

[218] Badur J, Lemanski M, Kowalczyk T, Ziolkowski P, Kornet S. Zero-dimensional

robust model of an sofc with internal reforming for hybrid energy cycles. Energy
2018;158:128–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.05.203.

[219] Kupecki J, Papurello D, Lanzini A, Naumovich Y, Motylinski K, Blesznowski M,
Santarelli M. Numerical model of planar anode supported solid oxide fuel cell fed
with fuel containing H2S operated in direct internal reforming mode (DIR-SOFC).
Appl Energy 2018;230:1573–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2018.09.092.

[220] Botta G, Romeo M, Fernandes A, Trabucchi S, Aravind P. Dynamic modeling of
reversible solid oxide cell stack and control strategy development. Energy
Convers Manage 2019;185:636–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2019.01.082.

[221] Barelli L, Bidini G, Cinti G, Ottaviano A. Study of sofc-soe transition on a rsofc
stack. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42(41):26037–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2017.08.159.

[222] Kupecki J, Motylinski K, Milewski J. Dynamic analysis of direct internal

reforming in a sofc stack with electrolyte-supported cells using a quasi-1d model.
Appl Energy 2018;227:198–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2017.07.122.Transformative Innovations for a Sustainable Future Part
III

[223] Menon V, Janardhanan VM, Deutschmann O. A mathematical model to analyze
solid oxide electrolyzer cells (soecs) for hydrogen production. Chem Eng Sci 2014;
110:83–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2013.10.025.

[224] Schluckner C, Suboti ́c V, Lawlor V, Hochenauer C. Three-dimensional numerical
and experimental investigation of an industrial-sized SOFC fueled by diesel
reformat - Part i: creation of a base model for further carbon deposition modeling.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39(33):19102–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2014.09.108.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101139

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

[225] Schluckner C, Suboti ́c V, Lawlor V, Hochenauer C. Three-dimensional numerical
and experimental investigation of an industrial-sized SOFC fueled by diesel
reformat - Part II: detailed reforming chemistry and carbon deposition analysis.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2015;40(34):10943–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2015.06.024.

[226] Schluckner C, Suboti ́c V, Lawlor V, Hochenauer C. Carbon deposition simulation
in porous SOFC anodes: a detailed numerical analysis of major carbon precursors.
J Fuel Cell Sci Technol 2015;12(5). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4031862.

[227] Schluckner C, Suboti ́c V, Lawlor V, Hochenauer C. Numerical SOFC anode

catalyst occupation study: internal reforming of carbonaceous fuel mixtures.
J Electrochem Soc 2016;163(7):F761–70. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0061608jes.

[228] Schluckner C, Suboti ́c V, Preißl S, Hochenauer C. Numerical analysis of flow
configurations and electrical contact positions in SOFC single cells and their
impact on local effects. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44(3):1877–95. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.11.132.

[229] Sasaki K, Teraoka Y. Equilibria in fuel cell gases: i. equilibrium compositions and

reforming conditions. J Electrochem Soc 2003;150(7):878–84.

[230] Sasaki K, Teraoka Y. Equilibria in fuel cell gases: i. equilibrium compositions and

reforming conditions. J Electrochem Soc 2003;150(7):885–8.

[231] Lee WY, Hanna J, Ghoniem AF. On the predictions of carbon deposition on the
nickel anode of a sofc and its impact on open-circuit conditions. J Electrochem
Soc 2013;160(2):94–105.

[232] Muramoto A, Kikuchi Y, Tachikawa Y, Lyth SM, Shiratori Y, Taniguchi S,

Sasaki K. High-pressure c-h-o diagrams: fuel composition, carbon deposition, and
open circuit voltage of pressurized sofcs. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42(52):
30769–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.10.122.

[249] Nelson W. Accelerated testing statistical models, test plans, and data analyses.
Wiley-Interscience; 1990, ISBN 3175723993. https://doi.org/10.1201/
9781584889069-6.

[250] Escobar LA, Meeker WQ. A review of accelerated test models. Stat Science 2006;

21(4):552–77. https://doi.org/10.1214/088342306000000321.

[251] Ploner A, Hagen A, Hauch A. Classical statistical methodology for accelerated

testing of solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Sources 2018;395:379–85. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2018.05.034.

[252] Index. In: Kang S-J L, editor. Sintering; 2005. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann;
2005, ISBN 978-0-7506-6385-4. p. 261–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
075066385-4/50017-0. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii
/B9780750663854500170.

[253] Sehested J, Gelten JA, Helveg S. Sintering of nickel catalysts: effects of time,

atmosphere, temperature, nickel-carrier interactions, and dopants. Appl Catal, A
2006;309(2):237–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APCATA.2006.05.017.
[254] Zhang X, Yang Y, Zhang X, Liu H. Identification of performance degradations in

catalyst layer and gas diffusion layer in proton exchange membrane fuel cells.
J Power Sources 2020;449:227580. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2019.227580.

[255] Zhao J, Li X. A review of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell durability for
vehicular applications: degradation modes and experimental techniques. Energy
Convers Manage 2019;199:112022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2019.112022.

[256] Assmann P, Gago AS, Gazdzicki P, Friedrich KA, Wark M. Toward developing

accelerated stress tests for proton exchange membrane electrolyzers. Curr Opin
Electrochem 2020;21:225–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coelec.2020.02.024.

[233] Yang C, Shu C, Miao H, Wang Z, Wu Y, Wang J, Zhao J, Wang F, Ye W, Yuan J.

[257] Shahgaldi S, Ozden A, Li X, Hamdullahpur F. A scaled-up proton exchange

Dynamic modelling and performance analysis of reversible solid oxide fuel cell
with syngas. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44(12):6192–211. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.01.068.

membrane fuel cell with enhanced performance and durability. Appl Energy
2020;268:114956. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114956.
[258] Blum L, Fang Q, Gro-Barsnick SM, de Haart LB, Malzbender J, Menzler NH,

[234] Rispoli N, Vitale F, Califano F, Califano M, Polverino P, Rosen M, Sorrentino M.

Constrained optimal design of a reversible solid oxide cell-based multiple load
renewable microgrid. J Energy Storage 2020;31:101570. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.est.2020.101570.

[235] Subotic V, Thaller T, Koenigshofer B, Menzler NH, Bucher E, Egger A,

Hochenauer C. Performance assessment of industrial-sized solid oxide cells
operated in a reversible mode: detailed numerical and experimental study. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(53):29166–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.07.165.

[236] Girona K, Laurencin J, Fouletier J, Lefebvre-Joud F. Carbon deposition in ch4/co2

operated sofc: simulation and experimentation studies. J Power Sources 2012;
210:381–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.12.005.

[237] Wu X, Ye Q. Fault diagnosis and prognostic of solid oxide fuel cells. J Power

Sources 2016;321:47–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.04.080.

 ́
Swirski K. Modelling the SOFC behaviours by artificial neural

[238] Milewski J,

network. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2009;34(13):5546–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijhydene.2009.04.068.

[239] Yan Z, He A, Hara S, Shikazono N. Modeling of solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC)

electrodes from fabrication to operation: microstructure optimization via artificial
neural networks and multi-objective genetic algorithms. Energy Convers Manage
2019;198:111916. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2019.111916.

[240] Nassef AM, Fathy A, Sayed ET, Abdelkareem MA, Rezk H, Tanveer WH, Olabi AG.

Maximizing SOFC performance through optimal parameters identification by
modern optimization algorithms. Renew Energy 2019;138:458–64. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.01.072.

[241] Fathy A, Rezk H, Mohamed Ramadan HS. Recent moth-flame optimizer for

enhanced solid oxide fuel cell output power via optimal parameters extraction
process. Energy 2020;207:118326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2020.118326.

[242] Xu H, Ma J, Tan P, Chen B, Wu Z, Zhang Y, Wang H, Xuan J, Ni M. Towards online
optimisation of solid oxide fuel cell performance: combining deep learning with
multi-physics simulation. Energy AI 2020;1:100003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egyai.2020.100003.

[243] Zhang X, Song Y, Wang G, Bao X. Co-electrolysis of CO2 and H2O in high-

temperature solid oxide electrolysis cells: recent advance in cathodes. J Energy
Chem 2017;26(5):839–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem.2017.07.003.

[244] Subotic V, Eibl M, Hochenauer C. Artificial intelligence for time-efficient

prediction and optimization of solid oxide fuel cell performances. Energy Convers
Manage 2021;230:113764. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113764.

[245] long Wu X, Xu Y-W, Xue T, qi Zhao D, Jiang J, Deng Z, Fu X, Li X. Health state

prediction and analysis of sofc system based on the data-driven entire stage
experiment. Appl Energy 2019;248:126–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.04.053.

[246] Dolenc B, Boˇskoski P, Pohjoranta A, Noponen M, Juriˇci ́c DJ. Hybrid approach to
remaining useful life prediction of solid oxide fuel cell stack. ECS Trans 2017;78
(1):2251–64. https://doi.org/10.1149/07801.2251ecst.

[247] Dolenc B, Boskoski P, Stepancic M, Pohjoranta A, Juricic D. State of health

estimation and remaining useful life prediction of solid oxide fuel cell stack.
Energy Convers Manage 2017;148:993–1002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2017.06.041.

[248] Zhang X, He Z, Zhan Z, Han T. Performance degradation analysis and fault

prognostics of solid oxide fuel cells using the data-driven method. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2021;46(35):18511–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2021.01.126.

Quadakkers WJ. Long-term operation of solid oxide fuel cells and preliminary
findings on accelerated testing. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(15):8955–64.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.01.074.

[259] Polverino P, Gallo M, Pianese C. Development of mathematical transfer functions
correlating solid oxide fuel cell degradation to operating conditions for
accelerated stress test protocols design. J Power Sources 2021;491:229521.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.229521.

[260] Bianco M, Ouweltjes JP, Van herle J. Degradation analysis of commercial

interconnect materials for solid oxide fuel cells in stacks operated up to 18000
hours. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44(59):31406–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2019.09.218.

[261] Ploner A, Hagen A, Hauch A. Study of operating parameters for accelerated anode
degradation in SOFCs. Fuel Cells 2017;17(4):498–507. https://doi.org/10.1002/
fuce.201600193.

[262] Holzer L, Iwanschitz B, Hocker T, Münch B, Prestat M, Wiedenmann D, Vogt U,

Holtappels P, Sfeir J, Mai A, Graule T. Microstructure degradation of cermet
anodes for solid oxide fuel cells: quantification of nickel grain growth in dry and
in humid atmospheres. J Power Sources 2011;196(3):1279–94. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.08.017.

[263] Khan MS, Lee SB, Song RH, Lee JW, Lim TH, Park SJ. Fundamental mechanisms

involved in the degradation of nickel-yttria stabilized zirconia (ni-YSZ) anode
during solid oxide fuel cells operation: a review. Ceram Int 2016;42(1):35–48.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2015.09.006.

[264] Herring C. Effect of change of scale on sintering phenomena. J Appl Phys 1950;21

(4):301–3. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1699658.

[265] Nechache A, Boukamp BA, Cassir M, Ringued ́e A. Accelerated degradation of

yttria stabilized zirconia electrolyte during high-temperature water electrolysis.
J Solid State Electrochem 2019;23(3):871–81. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10008-
018-04184-3.

[266] Kon̎ igshofer B, Hob̎ er M, Nusev G, Boskoski P, Hochenauer C, Suboti ́c V.

Accelerated degradation for solid oxide electrolysers: analysis and prediction of
performance for varying operating environments. J Power Sources 2022;523:
230982. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2022.230982.

[267] Preininger M, Suboti ́c V, Stoeckl B, Schauperl R, Reichholf D, Megel S,

Kusnezoff M, Hochenauer C. Electrochemical characterization of a CFY-stack with
planar electrolyte-supported solid oxide cells in rsoc operation. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2018;43(27):12398–412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2018.04.230.

[268] Cumming DJ, Elder RH. Thermal imaging of solid oxide cells operating under

electrolysis conditions. J Power Sources 2015;280:387–92. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.01.109.

[269] Tachikawa Y, Sugimoto J, Takada M, Kawabata T, Lyth SM, Shiratori Y, Sasaki K.
In operando visualization of SOFC electrodes by thermography and visible light
imaging. ECS Electrochem Lett 2015;4(11):F61–4. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0031511eel.

[270] Daham PV, Gunawardana S, Thi T, Nguyen M, Walmsley JC, Venvik HJ. Initiation
of metal dusting corrosion in conversion of natural gas to syngas studied under
industrially relevant conditions. IEC Res 2014;53:1794–803. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ie4024947.

[271] Pongratz G, Suboti ́c V, Schroettner H, Stoeckl B, Hochenauer C, Anca-Couce A,
Scharler R. Investigation of solid oxide fuel cell operation with synthetic biomass
gasification product gases as a basis for enhancing its performance. Biomass
Conversion and Biorefinery 2020 11:1 2020;11(1):121–39. https://doi.org/
10.1007/S13399-020-00726-W.

[272] Kirtley J, Singh A, Halat D, Oswell T, Hill JM, Walker RA. In situ raman studies of

carbon removal from high temperature Ni-YSZ Cermet anodes by gas phase

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101140

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

reforming agents. J Phys Chem C 2013;117(49):25908–16. https://doi.org/
10.1021/JP408192E.

[273] Reeping KW, Halat DM, Kirtley JD, McIntyre MD, Walker RA. (Invited) in situ

optical and electrochemical studies of SOFC carbon tolerance. ECS Trans 2014;61
(1):57–63. https://doi.org/10.1149/06101.0057ecst.

[274] Kirtley JD, McIntyre MD, Halat DM, Walker RA. (Invited) insights into SOFC ni/

YSZ anode degradation using in-Situ spectrochronopotentiometrys. ECS Trans
2013;50(44):3–15. https://doi.org/10.1149/05044.0003ecst.

[275] Yang J, Li Z, Bian R, Su Z. Fault diagnosis of sofc system based on single cell

voltage analysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46(48):24531–45. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.04.114.Recent Trends in Hydrogen Production and
Utilization

[276] Lyu Z, Li H, Wang Y, Han M. Performance degradation of solid oxide fuel cells

analyzed by evolution of electrode processes under polarization. J Power Sources
2021;485:229237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.229237.

[277] Suboti ́c V, Napporn TW. 9 - Metal oxides for high-temperature electrolyzers. In:

Napporn TW, Holade Y, editors. Metal Oxide-Based Nanostructured
Electrocatalysts for Fuel Cells, Electrolyzers, and Metal-air Batteries; 2021.
Elsevier; 2021, ISBN 978-0-12-818496-7. p. 213–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-818496-7.00003-5. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/arti
cle/pii/B9780128184967000035.

[278] Suboti ́c V, Napporn TW. 10 - Nanostructured metal oxides for high-performance

solid oxide fuel cells (sofcs). In: Napporn TW, Holade Y, editors. Metal Oxide-
Based Nanostructured Electrocatalysts for Fuel Cells, Electrolyzers, and Metal-air
Batteries; 2021. Elsevier; 2021, ISBN 978-0-12-818496-7. p. 235–61. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818496-7.00009-6. https://www.sciencedirect.com/sci
ence/article/pii/B9780128184967000096.

[279] Huang Q-A, Hui R, Wang B, Zhang J. A review of ac impedance modeling and

validation in sofc diagnosis. Electrochim Acta 2007;52(28):8144–64. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2007.05.071.

[280] Nechache A, Cassir M, Ringuede A. Solid oxide electrolysis cell analysis by means
of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: a review. J Power Sources 2014;258:
164–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.01.110.

[281] Stoynov Z, Vladikova D. Differential impedance analysis. Academic Publishing

House M. Drinov; 2005.

[282] DiGiuseppe G, Hunter A, Zhu F. Combined equivalent circuits and distribution of

relaxation times analysis and interfacial effects of (la0.60sr0.40)
0.95co0.20fe0.80o3-x cathodes. Electrochim Acta 2020;350:136252. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2020.136252.

[283] Wang K, Hissel D, Pera M, Steiner N, Marra D, Sorrentino M, Pianese C,

Monteverde M, Cardone P, Saarinen J. A review on solid oxide fuel cell models.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2011;36(12):7212–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2011.03.051.

[284] Adler SB. Applications of nonlinear electrochemical impedance spectroscopy

(NLEIS). ECS Trans 2013;58(3):101–8. https://doi.org/10.1149/05803.0101ecst.
[285] Malafronte L, Morel B, Pohjoranta A. Online total harmonic distortion analysis for
solid oxide fuel cell stack monitoring in system applications. Fuel Cells 2018;18
(4):476–89. https://doi.org/10.1002/fuce.201700230.

[286] Klotz D, Weber A, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. Practical guidelines for reliable electrochemical

characterization of solid oxide fuel cells. Electrochim Acta 2017;227:110–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2016.12.148.

[287] Commission E. Testing the voltage and power as function of current density:
polarisation curve for a SOFC single cell. JRC Scient Tech Rep 2010.

 ̈
O

 ̈
OVfEAS. Brennstoffzelentechnologien Teil 7-2: Prüfverfahren -

[288] Institute

Prüfungen zum Nachweis des Einzelzellen- und Stackleistungsverhaltens von
Festoxid-Brennstoffzellen (SOFC). Tech. Rep.. 2015.

[289] G De Marco, Pilenga a, Honselaar M, Malkow T, Tsotridis G, Janssen a, Rietveld B,
Vinke I, Kiviaho J. SOFC Stacks Performance and Endurance Test Modules. Tech.
Rep.. 2010.

[290] Commission E. Testing the voltage and power as function of current density:

Polarisation curve for a SOFC single cell. Tech. Rep.. 2010.

[291] Commission E. SOFC Single Cell Performance and Endurance Test Modules. Tech.

Rep.. 2010.

[292] Thambiraj N, Waernhus I, Suciu C, Vik A, Hoffmann AC. Single-cell tests to

explore the reliability of sofc installations operating offshore. Energies 2020;13
(7):1–19. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13071624.

[293] MacDonald DD. Reflections on the history of electrochemical impedance

spectroscopy. Electrochimica Acta. vol. 51. Pergamon; 2006. p. 1376–88. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2005.02.107.

[294] Vladikova D. The technique of the differential impedance analysis part i: basics of

the impedance spectroscopy. Proc. Int. Workshop ”Adv Tech Energy Sources
Invest Testing” 2004;(May):1–28.

[295] Barsoukov E, Macdonald JR. Impedance spectroscopy theory, experiment, and

applicationsvol. 125. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.; 2013, ISBN 9786468600.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2007.02.003.

[296] Suboti ́c V, Schluckner C, Strasser J, Lawlor V, Mathe J, Rechberger J,

Schroettner H, Hochenauer C. In-situ electrochemical characterization methods
for industrial-sized planar solid oxide fuel cells part i: methodology, qualification
and detection of carbon deposition. Electrochim Acta 2016;207:224–36. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2016.05.025.

[297] Baldinelli A, Staffolani A, Bidini G, Barelli L, Nobili F. An extensive model for

renewable energy electrochemical storage with solid oxide cells based on a
comprehensive analysis of impedance deconvolution. J Energy Storage 2021;33:
102052. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2020.102052.

[298] Graves C, Ebbesen SD, Mogensen M. Co-electrolysis of CO 2 and H 2 O in solid

oxide cells : performance and durability. Solid State Ionic 2011;192:398–403.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2010.06.014.

[299] Yang Y, Tong X, Hauch A, Sun X, Yang Z, Peng S, Chen M. Study of solid oxide
electrolysis cells operated in potentiostatic mode: effect of operating temperature
on durability. Chem Eng J 2021;417:129260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2021.129260.

[300] Suboti ́c V, Stoeckl B, Lawlor V, Strasser J, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C. Towards
a practical tool for online monitoring of solid oxide fuel cell operation: an
experimental study and application of advanced data analysis approaches. Appl
Energy 2018;222(April):748–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2018.03.182.

[301] Barford R, Mogensen MB, Klemenso T, Hagen A, Liu Y-L, Hendriksen PV. Detailed
characterization of anode-Supported SOFCs by impedance spectroscopy.
J Electrochem Soc 2007;154(4):B371–8. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2433311.

[302] Liu B, Matsui T, Muroyama H, Tomida K, Kabata T, Eguchi K. Impedance analysis
of practical segmented-in-Series tubular solid oxide fuel cells. ECS Trans 2019;35
(1):637–46. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3570042.

[303] Lee TH, Park KY, Kim JT, Seo Y, Kim KB, Song SJ, Park B, Park JY. Degradation

analysis of anode-supported intermediate temperature-soslid oxide fuel cells
under various failure modes. J Power Sources 2015;276:120–32. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.11.077.

[304] Jørgensen MJ, Primdahl S, Mogensen M. Characterization of composite SOFC

cathodes using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Electrochim Acta 1999;
44(24):4195–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0013-4686(99)00134-6.
[305] Kromp A, Leonide A, Weber A, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. Electrochemical analysis of

reformate-Fuelled anode supported SOFC. J Electrochem Soc 2011;158(8):B980.
https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3597177.

[306] Vibhu V, Yildiz S, Vinke IC, Eichel R-A, Bassat J-M, de Haart LGJ. High

[307] Nusev G, Morel B, Mougin J, Juriˇci ́c

performance LSC infiltrated LSCF oxygen electrode for high temperature steam
electrolysis application. J Electrochem Soc 2019;166(2):F102–8. https://doi.org/
10.1149/2.0741902jes.

 ̈
A, Boˇskoski P. Condition monitoring of solid
oxide fuel cells by fast electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: a case example
of detecting deficiencies in fuel supply. J Power Sources 2021;489:229491.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.229491.

[308] Ljung L. System identification. Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics
Engineering; 2017. Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.; 2017. p. 1–19.
https://doi.org/10.1002/047134608X.W1046.pub2. http://doi.wiley.com/10.
1002/047134608X.W1046.pub2.

[309] Orazem ME, Tribillet B. Impedance spectroscopy. Penningotn, NJ 08534-2839:

Wiley A John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Publication; 2015, ISBN 9780470041406.

[310] Lvovich VF. Impedance spectroscopy applications to electrochemical and

dielectric phenomena. Wiley A John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Publication; 2012,
ISBN 9780470627785.

[311] Lasia A. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and its applications. Springer,
New York, NY; 2014. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-8933-7. eBook ISBN
978-1-4614-8933-7.

[312] Ricciardi S, Ruiz-Morales J, Nunez P. Origin and quantitative analysis of the

constant phase element of a platinum sofc cathode using the state-space model.
Solid State Ionics 2009;180(17):1083–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ssi.2009.05.017.

[313] Dierickx S, Weber A, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. How the distribution of relaxation times

enhances complex equivalent circuit models for fuel cells. Electrochim Acta 2020;
355:136764. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2020.136764.

[314] Leonide A, Hansmann S, Weber A, Ivers-Tiffee E. Performance simulation of

current/voltage-characteristics for SOFC single cell by means of detailed
impedance analysis. Journal of Power Sources. vol. 196. Elsevier; 2011.
p. 7343–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.10.052.

[315] Kromp A, Dierickx S, Leonide A, Weber A, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. Electrochemical analysis

of sulfur-Poisoning in anode supported SOFCs fuelled with a model reformate.
J Electrochem Soc 2012;159(5):B597–601. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.015206jes.

[316] Sumi H, Yamaguchi T, Hamamoto K, Suzuki T, Fujishiro Y, Matsui T, Eguchi K. Ac
impedance characteristics for anode-supported microtubular solid oxide fuel cells.
Electrochim Acta 2012;67:159–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2012.02.021.

[317] Adler SB. Reference electrode placement in thin solid electrolytes. J Electrochem

Soc 2002;149(5):E166. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1467368.

[318] Adler S, Henderson B, Wilson M, Taylor D, Richards R. Reference electrode
placement and seals in electrochemical oxygen generators. Solid State Ionics
2000;134(1):35–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2738(00)00711-6.
Festschrift dedicated to Prof. Brian Steele

[319] Winkler J, Hendriksen PV, Bonanos N, Mogensen M. Geometric requirements of
solid electrolyte cells with a reference electrode. J Electrochem Soc 1998;145(4):
1184–92. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1838436.

[320] Dependence of observed overvoltages on the positioning of the reference

electrode on the solid electrolyte. Solid State Ionics 1994;67(3):215–24. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0167-2738(94)90008-6.

[321] Mogensen M. Experimental requirements in determination of SOFC electrode

kinetics. ECS Proc Vol 2003;2003-07(1):1126–31. https://doi.org/10.1149/
200307.1126pv.

[322] Jiang SP. Cell configurations for performance evaluation in planar solid oxide fuel

cells. J Appl Electrochem 2004;34(10):1045–55. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:
JACH.0000042671.56349.da.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101141

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

[323] Zhu H, Kee RJ. Modeling electrochemical impedance spectra in SOFC button cells
with internal methane reforming. J Electrochem Soc 2006;153(9):A1765. https://
doi.org/10.1149/1.2220065.

[324] Jørgensen MJ, Mogensen M. Impedance of solid oxide fuel cell LSM/YSZ

composite cathodes. J Electrochem Soc 2001;148(5):A433. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.1360203.

[325] Primdahl S, Mogensen M. Oxidation of hydrogen on ni/yttria stabilized zirconia
cermet anodes. J Electrochem Soc 1997;144(10):3409–19. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.1838026.

[326] Primdahl S, Mogensen M. Gas conversion impedance: A Test geometry effect in
characterization of solid oxide fuel cell anodes. J Electrochem Soc 1998;145(7):
2431–8. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1838654.

[327] Primdahl S, Mogensen M. Gas diffusion impedance in characterization of solid

oxide fuel cell anodes. J Electrochem Soc 1999;146(8):2827–33. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.1392015.

[328] Hauch A, Mogensen M. Ni/YSZ electrode degradation studied by impedance

spectroscopy. effects of gas cleaning and current density. Solid State Ionics 2010;
181(15–16):745–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2010.04.001.

[329] Hauch A, Mogensen M, Hagen A. Ni/YSZ electrode degradation studied by

impedance spectroscopy - Effect of p(H2O) 2011;192(1):547–51. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ssi.2010.01.004.

[330] Jensen SH, Hauch A, Hendriksen PV, Mogensen M, Bonanos N, Jacobsen T.

A method to separate process contributions in impedance spectra by variation of
test conditions. J Electrochem Soc 2007;154(12):B1325. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.2790791.

[331] Hauch A, Jensen SH, Bilde-Sorensen JB, Mogensen M. Silica segregation in the Ni-

YSZ Electrode. J Electrochem Soc 2007;154(7):A619. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.2733861.

[332] K ̈onigshofer B, Boˇskoski P, Nusev G, Koroschetz M, Hochfellner M, Schwaiger M,
 ̈
A, Hochenauer C, Suboti ́c V. Performance assessment and evaluation of
Juriˇci ́c
SOC stacks designed for application in a reversible operated 150 kw rsoc power
plant. Appl Energy 2021;283:116372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2020.116372.

[333] Yan Y, Fang Q, Blum L, Lehnert W. Performance and degradation of an SOEC

stack with different cell components. Electrochim Acta 2017;258:1254–61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2017.11.180.

[334] Nechache A, Cassir M, Ringued ́e A. Solid oxide electrolysis cell analysis by means
of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: a review. J Power Sources 2014;258:
164–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2014.01.110.

[335] Weese J. FTIKREG: A program for the solution of Fredholm integral equations of

the first kind. Comput Phys Commun 1992;69:p99.

[336] Weese J. A reliable and fast method for the solution of fredhol integral equations
of the first kind based on tikhonov regularization. Comput Phys Commun 1992;69
(1):99–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-4655(92)90132-I.

[347] Wang Q, Moser J-E, Graetzel M. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopic

analysis of dye-sensitized solar cells. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2005;
109(31):14945–53. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp052768h.PMID: 16852893
[348] Zhang S, Xu K, Jow T. Eis study on the formation of solid electrolyte interface in
li-ion battery. Electrochim Acta 2006;51(8):1636–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2005.02.137.Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy

[349] Chen C, Liu J, Amine K. Symmetric cell approach and impedance spectroscopy of
high power lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2001;96(2):321–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0378-7753(00)00666-2.

[350] Kotz R, Hahn M, Gallay R. Temperature behavior and impedance fundamentals of
supercapacitors. J Power Sources 2006;154(2):550–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2005.10.048.Selected papers from the Ninth Ulm Electrochemical Days
[351] Kuzmin AV, Plekhanov SS, Lesnichyova AS. Influence of impurities on the bulk
and grain-boundary conductivity of cazro3-based proton-conducting electrolyte:
adistribution of relaxation time study. Electrochim Acta 2020;348:136327.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2020.136327.

[352] DiGiuseppe G, Hunter A, Zhu F. Combined equivalent circuits and distribution of

relaxation times analysis and interfacial effects of (la0.60sr0.40)
0.95co020fe0.80o3-x cathodes. Electrochim Acta 2020;350:136252. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2020.136252.

[353] Zhao Y, Zhang K, Wei Z, Li Z, Wang Y, Zhu Z, Liu T. Performance and distribution
of relaxation times analysis of ruddlesden-Popper oxide sr3fe1.3Co0.2Mo0.5O7-δ
as a potential cathode for protonic solid oxide fuel cells. Electrochim Acta 2020;
352:136444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2020.136444.
[354] Shi N, Su F, Huan D, Xie Y, Lin J, Tan W, Peng R, Xia C, Chen C, Lu Y.

Performance and DRT analysis of P-SOFCs fabricated using new phase inversion
combined tape casting technology. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta04967f.

[355] Wang X, Ma Z, Zhang T, Kang J, Ou X, Feng P, Wang S, Zhou F, Ling Y. Charge-

Transfer modeling and polarization DRT analysis of proton ceramics fuel cells
based on mixed conductive electrolyte with the modified anode electrolyte
interface. Applied Materials and Interfaces 2018. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.8b10429.

[356] Cai W, Guo Y, Zhang T, Guo T, Chen H, Lin B, Ou X, Ling Y. Characterization and
polarization DRT analysis of a stable and highly active proton-conducting
cathode. Ceram Int 2018;44(12):14297–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ceramint.2018.05.035.

[357] Hauch A, Hagen A, Hjelm J, Ramos T. Sulfur poisoning of SOFC anodes: effect of
overpotential on long-Term degradation. J Electrochem Soc 2014;161(6):
F734–43. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.080406jes.

[358] Soltanizade A, Babaei A, Ataie A, Seyed-Vakili SV. Temperature dependency of
activity of nano-catalysts on la0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3δ cathode of solid oxide fuel
cells. J Appl Electrochem 2019;49(11):1113–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10800-019-01355-6.

[337] Saccoccio M, Wan TH, Chen C, Ciucci F. Optimal regularization in distribution of

[359] Clematis D, Barbucci A, Presto S, Viviani M, Carpanese MP. Electrocatalytic

relaxation times applied to electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: ridge and
lasso regression methods - a theoretical and experimental study. Electrochim Acta
2014;147:470–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2014.09.058.

activity of perovskite-based cathodes for solid oxide fuel cells. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2019;44(12):6212–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.01.128.

[360] Sumi H, Shimada H, Yamaguchi Y, Yamaguchi T, Fujishiro Y. Degradation

[338] Effat MB, Ciucci F. Bayesian and hierarchical bayesian based regularization for
deconvolving the distribution of relaxation times from electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy data. Electrochim Acta 2017;247:1117–29. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.electacta.2017.07.050.

evaluation by distribution of relaxation times analysis for microtubular solid
oxide fuel cells. Electrochim Acta 2020;339:135913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2020.135913.

[361] Sumi H, Yamaguchi T, Hamamoto K, Suzuki T, Fujishiro Y. High performance of

[339] Ciucci F, Chen C. Analysis of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data using
the distribution of relaxation times: A Bayesian and hierarchical bayesian
approach. Electrochim Acta 2015;167:439–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2015.03.123.

[340] Schlüter N, Ernst S, Schr ̈oder U. Finding the optimal regularization parameter in
distribution of relaxation times analysis. ChemElectroChem 2019;6(24):6027–37.
https://doi.org/10.1002/celc.201901863.

[341] ˇZic M, Pereverzyev S, Suboti ́c V, Pereverzyev S. Adaptive multi-parameter

regularization approach to construct the distribution function of relaxation times.
GEM - In J Geomath0 2020;11(1):1–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13137-019-
0138-2.

[342] Gomez R, Bashir R, Sarikaya A, Ladisch M, Sturgis J, Robinson J, Geng T,

Bhunia A, Apple H, Wereley S. Microfluidic biochip for impedance spectroscopy
of biological species. Biomed Microdevices 2001;3:201–9. https://doi.org/
10.1023/A:1011403112850.

[343] Franks W, Schenker I, Schmutz P, Hierlemann A. Impedance characterization and
modeling of electrodes for biomedical applications. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2005;
52(7):1295–302.

[344] Kyle UG, Bosaeus I, De Lorenzo AD, Deurenberg P, Elia M, Gomez JM,

Heitmann BL, Kent-Smith L, Melchior J-C, Pirlich M, Scharfetter H, Schols AM,
Pichard C. Bioelectrical impedance analysis-part i: review of principles and
methods. Clinical Nutrition 2004;23(5):1226–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
clnu.2004.06.004.

[345] Use of bioimpedance spectroscopy to determine extracellular fluid, intracellular
fluid, total body water, and fat-free mass. In: Use of Bioimpedance Spectroscopy
to Determine Extracellular Fluid, Intracellular Fluid, Total Body Water, and Fat-
Free Mass. Springer, Boston, MA, year =; ????,.

[346] Fabregat-Santiago F, Bisquert J, Garcia-Belmonte G, Boschloo G, Hagfeldt A.

Influence of electrolyte in transport and recombination in dye-sensitized solar
cells studied by impedance spectroscopy. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 2005;87(1):
117–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2004.07.017.International Conference
on Physics, Chemistry and Engineering

la0.6sr0.4co0.2fe0.8o3-ce0.9gd0.1o1.95 nanoparticulate cathode for
intermediate temperature microtubular solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Sources
2013;226:354–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.11.015.

[362] Caliandro P, Nakajo A, Diethelm S, Van herle J. Model-assisted identification of
solid oxide cell elementary processes by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
measurements. J Power Sources 2019;436:226838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2019.226838.

[363] Montinaro D, Contino AR, Dellai A, Rolland M. Determination of the impedance

contributions in anode supported solid oxide fuel cells with (la,sr)(co,fe)O3-δ
cathode. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39(36):21638–46. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.09.081.

[364] Kornely M, Menzler NH, Weber A, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. Degradation of a high

performance SOFC cathode by cr-Poisoning at OCV-Conditions. Fuel Cells 2013;
13(4):506–10. https://doi.org/10.1002/fuce.201200182.

[365] Wuillemin Z, Antonetti Y, Beetschen C, Millioud O, Ceschini S, Madi H, Van

herle J. Local activation and degradation of electrochemical processes in a SOFC.
ECS Trans 2013;57(1):561–70. https://doi.org/10.1149/05701.0561ecst.
[366] Weber A, Szasz J, Dierickx S, Endler-Schuck C, Ivers-Tiffee E. Accelerated lifetime
tests for SOFCs. ECS Trans 2015;68(1):1953–60. https://doi.org/10.1149/
06801.1953ecst.

[367] Weber A, Dierickx S, Kromp A, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. Sulfur poisoning of anode-

supported SOFCs under reformate operation. Fuel Cells 2013;13(4):487–93.
https://doi.org/10.1002/fuce.201200180.

[368] H ̈ober M, K ̈onigshofer B, Wachter P, Nusev G, Boskoski P, Hochenauer C,

Suboti V. SOFC-Reformer Systems. Processes MDPI 2021:1–28.

[369] Fang Q, Blum L, Menzler NH. Performance and degradation of solid oxide

electrolysis cells in stack. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162(8):F907–12. https://doi.
org/10.1149/2.0941508jes.

[370] Fang Q, Blum L, Menzler NH, Stolten D. Solid oxide electrolyzer stack with

20,000 h of operation. ECS Trans 2017;78(1):2885–93. https://doi.org/10.1149/
07801.2885ecst.

[371] Chen J, Li J, Jia L, Moussa I, Chi B, Pu J, Li J. A novel layered perovskite nd

(ba0.4Sr0.4Ca0.2)co1.6Fe0.4O5+Δ as cathode for proton-conducting solid oxide

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101142

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

fuel cells. J Power Sources 2019;428:13–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2019.04.104.

[372] Nechache A, Mansuy A, Petitjean M, Mougin J, Mauvy F, Boukamp BA, Cassir M,

Ringued ́e A. Diagnosis of a cathode-supported solid oxide electrolysis cell by
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Electrochim Acta 2016;210:596–605.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2016.05.014.

[373] Yan J, Chen H, Dogdibegovic E, Stevenson JW, Cheng M, Zhou XD. High-

efficiency intermediate temperature solid oxide electrolyzer cells for the
conversion of carbon dioxide to fuels. J Power Sources 2014;252:79–84. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.11.047.

[374] Huang Z, Qi H, Zhao Z, Shang L, Tu B, Cheng M. Efficient CO2 electroreduction on

a solid oxide electrolysis cell with la0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3Δ-Gd0.2Ce0.8O2-Δ
infiltrated electrode. J Power Sources 2019;434(June):226730. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.226730.

[375] Hjalmarsson P, Sun X, Liu YL, Chen M. Influence of the oxygen electrode and

inter-diffusion barrier on the degradation of solid oxide electrolysis cells. J Power
Sources 2013;223:349–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.08.063.

[376] Wilson JR, Schwartz DT, Adler SB. Nonlinear electrochemical impedance

spectroscopy for solid oxide fuel cell cathode materials. Electrochimica Acta. vol.
51. Pergamon; 2006. p. 1389–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2005.02.109.

[377] Wilson JR, Sase M, Kawada T, Adler SB. Measurement of oxygen exchange

kinetics on thin-film la 0.6Sr0.4Coo3-δ using nonlinear electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy. Electrochem Solid-State Lett 2007;10(5):81–6. https://
doi.org/10.1149/1.2710178.

[378] Kreller CR, Adler S. Insight into rate limiting mechanisms of porous la 1-x sr x
CoO 3-δelectrodes through nonlinear electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(NLEIS). ECS Trans 2019;25(2):2743–52. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3205835.
[379] Subotic V, Pofahl S, Lawlor V, Menzler NH, Thaller T, Hochenauer C. Online

monitoring tools for soh diagnostic and prognostic of remaining lifetime of
reversible solid oxide cell (rsoc) systems. Energy Procedia 2019;158:2329–34.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2019.01.271.Innovative Solutions for Energy
Transitions

[380] Mougin J, Morel B, Ploner A, Caliandro P, Van Herle J, Boˇskoski P, Dolenc B,
Gallo M, Polverino P, Pohjoranta A, Nieminen A, Pofahl S, Ouweltjes JP,
Diethelm S, Leonardi A, Galiano F, Tanzi C. Monitoring and diagnostics of SOFC
stacks and systems. ECS Trans 2019;91(1):731–43. https://doi.org/10.1149/
09101.0731ecst.

[381] Tu B, Wen H, Yin Y, Zhang F, Su X, Cui D, Cheng M. Thermodynamic analysis and
experimental study of electrode reactions and open circuit voltages for methane-
fuelled sofc. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(58):34069–79. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.09.088.

[382] Welander MM, Zachariasen MS, Hunt CD, Sofie SW, Walker RA. Operando studies

of redox resilience in ALT enhanced NiO-YSZ SOFC anodes. J Electrochem Soc
2018;165(3):F152–7. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0531803jes.
[383] Subotic V, Schluckner C, Stoeckl B, Preininger M, Lawlor V, Pofahl S,

Schroettner H, Hochenauer C. Towards practicable methods for carbon removal
from ni-ysz anodes and restoring the performance of commercial-sized asc-sofcs
after carbon deposition induced degradation. Energy Convers Manage 2018;178:
343–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2018.10.022.

[384] Preininger M, Stoeckl B, Subotic V, Hochenauer C. Characterization and

performance study of commercially available solid oxide cell stacks for an
autonomous system. Energy Convers Manage 2020;203:112215. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2019.112215.

[393] Kirtley JD, Pomfret MB, Steinhurst DA, Owrutsky JC, Walker RA. In operando
optical studies of SOFCs operating with butanol. ECS Trans 2015;68(1):
1091–102. https://doi.org/10.1149/06801.1091ecst.

[394] Sasaki K. The impact of fuels on solid oxide fuel cell anode lifetime: the

relationship between fuel composition, fuel impurities, and anode lifetime and
reliability. Elsevier Ltd; 2017, ISBN 9780128097243. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-08-101102-7.00003-9.

[395] Yoo KB, Choi GM. Lst-gdc composite anode on lagao3-based solid oxide fuel cell.

Solid State Ionics 2011;192(1):515–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ssi.2010.06.048.Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Solid State
Ionics

[396] Yoo KB, Choi GM. Performance of la-doped strontium titanate (lst) anode on
lagao3-based sofc. Solid State Ionics 2009;180(11):867–71. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ssi.2009.02.013.Electroceramics XI - Ionic, Electronic and Mixed
Conductors, Fuel Cells Symposium

[397] Shen X, Sasaki K. Highly redox-resistant solid oxide fuel cell anode materials
based on la-doped srtio3 by catalyst impregnation strategy. J Power Sources
2016;320:180–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.04.111.
[398] Futamura S, Muramoto A, Tachikawa Y, Matsuda J, Lyth SM, Shiratori Y,
Taniguchi S, Sasaki K. Sofc anodes impregnated with noble metal catalyst
nanoparticles for high fuel utilization. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44(16):
8502–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.01.223.

[399] Sugimoto J, Futamura S, Kawabata T, Lyth S, Shiratori Y, Taniguchi S, Sasaki K.
Ru-based sofc anodes: preparation, performance, and durability. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2017;42(10):6950–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.01.028.
[400] Futamura S, Tachikawa Y, Matsuda J, Lyth SM, Shiratori Y, Taniguchi S, Sasaki K.

Alternative ni-impregnated mixed ionic-electronic conducting anode for SOFC
operation at high fuel utilization. J Electrochem Soc 2017;164(10):F3055–63.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0071710jes.

[401] Schluckner C, Subotic V, Lawlor V, Hochenauer C. Cfd-simulation of effective

carbon gasification strategies from high temperature sofc ni-ysz cermet anodes.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42(7):4434–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2016.11.162.

[402] Baldinelli A, Cinti G, Desideri U, Fantozzi F. Biomass integrated gasifier-fuel cells:
experimental investigation on wood syngas tars impact on niysz-anode solid oxide
fuel cells. Energy Convers Manage 2016;128:361–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2016.09.048.

[403] Xu C, Sun W, Ren R, Yang X, Ma M, Qiao J, Wang Z, Zhen S, Sun K. A highly active
and carbon-tolerant anode decorated with in situ grown cobalt nano-catalyst for
intermediate-temperature solid oxide fuel cells. Appl Catal, B 2021;282:119553.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2020.119553.

[404] Peng X, Tian Y, Liu Y, Wang W, Jing chen, Li J, Chi B, Pu J, Li J. A double

perovskite decorated carbon-tolerant redox electrode for symmetrical sofc. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(28):14461–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.03.151.

[405] Bernardo C, Alstrup I, Rostrup-Nielsen J. Carbon deposition and methane steam
reforming on silica-supported nicu catalysts. J Catal 1985;96(2):517–34. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0021-9517(85)90320-3.

[406] Kim H, Lu C, Worrell WL, Vohs JM, Gorte RJ. Cu-ni cermet anodes for direct

oxidation of methane in solid-oxide fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2002;149(3):
A247. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1445170.

[407] Gavrielatos I, Drakopoulos V, Neophytides SG. Carbon tolerant ni-au sofc

electrodes operating under internal steam reforming conditions. J Catal 2008;259
(1):75–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcat.2008.07.011.

[385] Khan M, Whelan M, Rhew R. Analysis of low concentration reduced sulfur

[408] Gorte R, Vohs J. Novel sofc anodes for the direct electrochemical oxidation of

compounds (rscs) in air: storage issues and measurement by gas chromatography
with sulfur chemiluminescence detection. Talanta 2012;88:581–6. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.talanta.2011.11.038.

[386] Stoeckl B, Preininger M, Suboti ́c V, Schroettner H, Sommersacher P, Seidl M,
Megel S, Hochenauer C. Ammonia as promising fuel for solid oxide fuel cells:
experimental analysis and performance evaluation. ECS Trans 2019;91(1):
1601–10. https://doi.org/10.1149/09101.1601ecst.

[387] Stoeckl B, Preininger M, Suboti ́c V, Gaber C, Seidl M, Sommersacher P,

Schroettner H, Hochenauer C. High utilization of humidified ammonia and
methane in solid oxide fuel cells: an experimental study of performance and
stability. J Electrochem Soc 2019;166(12):F774–83. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0781912jes.

[388] Casteel M, Willson P, Goren T, O’Brien P, Lewis D. Novel method for measuring
chromia evaporation from SOFC interconnect materials. ECS Trans 2019;25(2):
1411–6. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3205672.

[389] Manerova J, Call AV, Sinclair DC, Elder RH. Methodology for analysis of solid

oxide cells via raman spectroscopy. ECS Trans 2015;68(1):2083–92. https://doi.
org/10.1149/06801.2083ecst.

[390] Kirtley JD, Steinhurst DA, Owrutsky JC, Pomfret MB, Walker RA. In situ optical

studies of methane and simulated biogas oxidation on high temperature solid
oxide fuel cell anodes. PCCP 2013;16(1):227–36. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C3CP53278J.

[391] Pomfret MB, Walker RA, Owrutsky JC. High-Temperature chemistry in solid

oxide fuel cells: in situ optical studies. J Phys Chem Lett 2012;3(20):3053–64.
https://doi.org/10.1021/JZ3012047.

[392] Kirtley JD, Pomfret MB, Steinhurst DA, Owrutsky JC, Walker RA. Toward a

working mechanism of fuel oxidation in SOFCs: in situ optical studies of
simulated biogas and methane. J Phys Chem C 2015;119(23):12781–91. https://
doi.org/10.1021/JP511304X.

hydrocarbons. J Catal 2003;216(1):477–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-
9517(02)00121-5.40th Anniversary Commemorative Issue

[409] Mermelstein J, Millan M, Brandon N. The impact of steam and current density on
carbon formation from biomass gasification tar on ni/ysz, and ni/cgo solid oxide
fuel cell anodes. J Power Sources 2010;195(6):1657–66. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.09.046.

[410] Singh D, Herndez-Pacheco E, Hutton PN, Patel N, Mann MD. Carbon deposition in

an sofc fueled by tar-laden biomass gas: a thermodynamic analysis. J Power
Sources 2005;142(1):194–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2004.10.024.

[411] Alzate-Restrepo V, Hill JM. Effect of anodic polarization on carbon deposition on
ni/ysz anodes exposed to methane. Appl Catal, A 2008;342(1):49–55. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apcata.2007.12.039.

[412] Timmermann H, Sawady W, Campbell D, Weber A, Reimert R, Ivers-Tiffee E. Coke
formation and degradation in SOFC operation with a model reformate from liquid
hydrocarbons. J Electrochem Soc 2008;155(4):B356. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.2838909.

[413] Horita T, Yamaji K, Kato T, Kishimoto H, Xiong Y, Sakai N, Brito ME,

Yokokawa H. Imaging of ch4 decomposition around the ni/ysz interfaces under
anodic polarization. J Power Sources 2005;145(2):133–8. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2004.12.075.Selected papers presented at the Fuel Cells
Science and Technology Meeting

[414] Bae G, Bae J, Kim-Lohsoontorn P, Jeong J. Performance of sofc coupled with n-
c4h10 autothermal reformer: carbon deposition and development of anode
structure. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35(22):12346–58. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.08.125.Bio-Ethanol and Other Renewable Sources and
Reforming Process for Sustainable Hydrogen Production

[415] Mallon C, Kendall K. Sensitivity of nickel cermet anodes to reduction conditions.

J Power Sources 2005;145(2):154–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2005.02.043.Selected papers presented at the Fuel Cells Science and
Technology Meeting

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101143

V. Suboti ́c and C. Hochenauer

[416] Snoeck JW, Froment GF, Fowles M. Steam/CO2 reforming of methane. carbon
filament formation by the boudouard reaction and gasification by CO2, by H2,
and by steam: kinetic study. Ind Eng Chem Res 2002;41(17):4252–65. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ie010666h.

[417] Takenaka S, Kato E, Tomikubo Y, Otsuka K. Structural change of ni species during
the methane decomposition and the subsequent gasification of deposited carbon
with CO2 over supported ni catalysts. J Catal 2003;219(1):176–85. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0021-9517(03)00152-0.

[418] Takenaka S, Shimizu T, Otsuka K. Complete removal of carbon monoxide in

hydrogen-rich gas stream through methanation over supported metal catalysts.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2004;29(10):1065–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2003.10.009.

[419] Takenaka S, Tomikubo Y, Kato E, Otsuka K. Sequential production of H2 and CO

over supported ni catalysts. Fuel 2004;83(1):47–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0016-2361(03)00211-4.

[420] Subotic V, Schluckner C, Schroettner H, Hochenauer C. Analysis of possibilities

for carbon removal from porous anode of solid oxide fuel cells after different
failure modes. J Power Sources 2016;302:378–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2015.10.071.

[421] Han Z, Yang Z, Han M. Cell-protecting regeneration from anode carbon deposition
using in situ produced oxygen and steam: a combined experimental and
theoretical study. J Mater Sci Technol 2018;34(12):2375–83. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmst.2018.04.011.

[422] Reeping KW, Bohn JM, Walker RA. Palliative effects of h2 on sofcs operating with

carbon containing fuels. J Power Sources 2017;372:188–95. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.10.071.

[423] Song Y, Zhang X, Zhou Y, Jiang Q, Guan F, Lv H, Wang G, Bao X. Promoting

oxygen evolution reaction by ruo2 nanoparticles in solid oxide co2 electrolyzer.
Energy Storage Materials 2018;13:207–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ensm.2018.01.013.

[424] Chen K, Ai N, Jiang SP. Performance and structural stability of gd0.2ce0.8o1.9

infiltrated la0.8sr0.2mno3 nano-structured oxygen electrodes of solid oxide
electrolysis cells. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39(20):10349–58. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.05.013.

[425] Chen K, Ai N, Jiang SP. Reasons for the high stability of nano-structured (la,sr)
mno3 infiltrated y2o3-zro2 composite oxygen electrodes of solid oxide
electrolysis cells. Electrochem commun 2012;19:119–22. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.elecom.2012.03.033.

[426] Shahrokhi S, Babaei A, Zamani C. Reversible operation of la08sr02mno3 oxygen

electrode infiltrated with ruddlesden-popper and perovskite lanthanum nickel
cobaltite. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(52):23091–100. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.10.186.

[427] Li W, Guan B, Zhang X, Yan J, Zhou Y, Liu X. New mechanistic insight into the

oxygen reduction reaction on ruddlesden-Popper cathodes for intermediate-
temperature solid oxide fuel cells. PCCP 2016;18(12):8502–11. https://doi.org/
10.1039/c6cp00056h.

[428] Li W, Guan B, Yan J, Zhang N, Zhang X, Liu X. Enhanced surface exchange activity
and electrode performance of (la2-2xsr2x)(ni1-xmnx)O4+δ cathode for
intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells. J Power Sources 2016;318:
178–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.04.022.

[429] Guan B, Li W, Zhang X, Liu X. Surface oxygen exchange properties of sr doped
la2nio4+ as SOFC cathode: thin-Film electrical conductivity relaxation
investigation. ECS Trans 2015;68(1):801–8. https://doi.org/10.1149/
06801.0801ecst.

[430] Tian Y, Li J, Liu Y, Yang J, Liu B, Jia L, Jiang J, Chi B, Pu J, Li J. Preparation and
properties of prba0.5Sr0.5Co1.5Fe0.5O5+Δ as novel oxygen electrode for
reversible solid oxide electrochemical cell. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(28):
12603–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.03.187.

[431] Zheng Y, Yang H, Pan Z, Zhang C. A ca and fe co-Doped layered perovskite as
stable air electrode in solid oxide electrolyzer cells under high-Current
electrolysis. Electrochim Acta 2017;251:581–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2017.08.172.

[432] Wu T, Zhang W, Li Y, Zheng Y, Yu B, Chen J, Sun X. Micro-/nanohoneycomb solid
oxide electrolysis cell anodes with ultralarge current tolerance. Adv Energy Mater
2018;8(33):1802203. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201802203.

[433] Khan MS, Xu X, Zhao J, Knibbe R, Zhu Z. A porous yttria-stabilized zirconia layer

to eliminate the delamination of air electrode in solid oxide electrolysis cells.
J Power Sources 2017;359:104–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2017.05.049.

[434] Wu W, Ding H, Zhang Y, Ding Y, Katiyar P, Majumdar PK, He T, Ding D. 3D Self-
Architectured steam electrode enabled efficient and durable hydrogen production
in a proton-Conducting solid oxide electrolysis cell at temperatures lower than
600 ∘c. Adv Sci 2018;5(11):1800360. https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.201800360.

[435] Li W, Guan B, Ma L, Hu S, Zhang N, Liu X. High performing triple-conductive

pr2nio4+: δ anode for proton-conducting steam solid oxide electrolysis cell.
J Mater Chem A 2018;6(37):18057–66. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8ta04018d.
[436] Jackson R, Leonard J, Pettit F, Meier G. The effect of minor elements on the

growth and electrical properties of nio on ni. Solid State Ionics 2008;179(37):
2111–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2008.07.011.

[437] Ettler M, Menzler N, Buchkremer H, Stoever D. Characterization of the re-

Oxidation behaviour of anode-Supported SOFCs: advances in solid oxide fuel cells
IV: ceramic engineering and science proceedings. Wiley Interscience, Ceramin
engineering and science processdings; 19722008.

[438] Matsumoto K, Tachikawa Y, Matsuda J, Taniguchi S, Sasaki K. Redox durability of
ni-co alloy cermet anodes for SOFCs. ECS Trans 2021;103(1):1549–56. https://
doi.org/10.1149/10301.1549ecst.

[439] Niu B, Jin F, Liu J, Zhang Y, Jiang P, Feng T, Xu B, He T. Highly carbon and sulfur-
tolerant sr2timoo6δ double perovskite anode for solid oxide fuel cells. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2019;44(36):20404–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2019.06.023.

[440] Bukhari SM, Giorgi JB. Chemically stable and coke resistant sm1xcexfeo3δ

perovskites for low temperature solid oxide fuel cell anode applications. J Power
Sources 2012;198:51–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.09.088.
[441] Niakolas DK, Neofytides C, Neophytides SG, Tsiplakides D, Papazisi K-M,

Balomenou S. Carbon tolerant electrodes for SOFC and reversible SOFC (RSOFC)
cells operating on carbon containing fuels. ECS Trans 2015;68(1):3439–47.
https://doi.org/10.1149/06801.3439ecst.

[442] Yao X, Asghar MI, Zhao Y, Li Y, Lund PD. Coking resistant nila0.8sr0.2feo3

composite anode improves the stability of syngas-fueled sofc. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2021;46(15):9809–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.06.091.
The 4th Conference on Surface,Coatings Nanostructured Materials, 11–13
October 2019, Xian, China

[443] Wang W, Zhu C, Xie K, Gan L. High performance, coking-resistant and sulfur-

tolerant anode for solid oxide fuel cell. J Power Sources 2018;406:1–6. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.10.040.

[444] Yao X, Fan L, Gan T, Hou N, Li P, Zhao Y, Li Y. Coking-resistant nbox-ni-

ce0.8sm0.2o1.9 anode material for methanol-fueled solid oxide fuel cells. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2018;43(28):12748–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2018.03.186.China-Europe Forum for Advanced Fuel Cell and New
Energy

[445] Mermelstein J, Millan M, Brandon N. The interaction of biomass gasification

syngas components with tar in a solid oxide fuel cell and operational conditions to
mitigate carbon deposition on nickel-gadolinium doped ceria anodes. J Power
Sources 2011;196(11):5027–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2011.02.011.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10101144
