Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Current state of industrial heating and opportunities for decarbonization 

Maxwell Pisciotta a,*, H´el`ene Pilorg´e a, John Feldmann b, Rory Jacobson b, c, Justine Davids d, 
Shelvey Swett d, Zachary Sasso d, Jennifer Wilcox a 
a Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, 220 S. 33rd Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States 
b World Resources Institute, Washington, DC, United States 
c Yale School of the Environment, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, United States 
d Department of Chemical Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 100 Institute Rd, Worcester, MA 01609, United States   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Industrial decarbonization 
Carbon capture 
Oxycombustion 
Industrial kiln technology 
Industrial electrification 

◦
The IPCC recommends keeping the global average temperature increase well below 2 
C, by 
2100 to avoid the worst effects of climate change. This requires achieving carbon neutrality shortly after 2050. In 
the United States, industrial emissions represent 22% of greenhouse gas emissions and are particularly hard to 
decarbonize, because (1) the processes emit CO2  as a byproduct of chemical reactions and (2) these industries 
require high-grade heat input. This study focuses on some of these industries, namely cement, lime, glass, and 
steelmaking. This work details the incumbent kiln and furnace technologies and explores the developing pro-
cesses with examples of existing projects that aim to reduce carbon emissions, such as carbon capture and storage 
(CCS), fuel switching, and other technological changes. We provide tools to evaluate the most appropriate low- 
carbon solutions at existing facilities and on new-build infrastructure while taking into account the local context 
and resources. 

◦
C, if not below 1.5 

This paper highlights two states within the U.S. with a high concentration of cement, lime, glass, and steel-
making facilities, California and Pennsylvania. The emissions from cement, lime, and glass facilities in California 
total 8.5 MtCO2eq/yr. About 6.3 MtCO2/yr (7.1% of in-state industrial emissions) could be captured from cement 
and lime facilities, transported, and stored in sedimentary basins below the Central Valley. Replacing 20% of coal 
by biomass could also reduce the fossil emissions by 0.5 MtCO2/yr (6.2% of in-state industrial emissions) without 
making changes to the facilities. In Pennsylvania, heavy industry (cement, lime, glass, and steelmaking) emits 
about 9.4 MtCO2eq/yr. Most of the facilities are located near sedimentary basins, facilitating the development of 
CCS. In addition, the presence of low-carbon energy sources can help in the deployment of electrified processes. 
Also, industrial byproducts such as steel slag and fly ash can be reused in low-carbon concrete mix. As shown 
with these two examples, there are many strategies leading to the deep decarbonization of the economy and they 
need to be adapted to the local context.   

1. Introduction 

1.1. Global context for industrial decarbonization 

The scientific community has linked the increase of anthropogenic 
greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  release  in  the  atmosphere  to  global  climate 
change, which has been theorized since 1856 by Eunice Newton Foote 
[1].  In  2019  global  greenhouse  gas  emissions  reached  59.1  ± 5.9 
GtCO2eq/yr  [2],  primarily  from  the  combustion  of  fossil  fuels.  CO2 
represents  the  majority  of  these  emissions  (76%).  Methane  (16%), 
nitrous oxide (6%), and fluorinated gasses (2%) are responsible for the 

◦

remaining  quarter  of the  greenhouse  gas effect [3].  The baseline  sce-
nario of the IPCC predicts a global temperature increase between +3.7 
◦
C and + 4.8 
C in 2100 compared to pre-industrial levels [4], which 
would  have  major  consequences  on  human  lives  and  biodiversity.  In 
order to limit these negative effects, the IPCC recommends limiting the 
◦
global average temperature increase to a maximum of 2 
C, if not below 
1.5 
C [5]. This requires decarbonizing our economy and reaching car-
bon neutrality shortly after mid-century [5]. 

◦

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: mpisciot@seas.upenn.edu (M. Pisciotta).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100982 
Received 2 July 2021; Received in revised form 22 November 2021; Accepted 19 December 2021   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100982Availableonline4January20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

1.2. U.S. contributions to global industrial greenhouse gas emissions 

The United States emitted 6.7 GtCO2eq in 2018, distributed between 
transportation  (28%),  electricity  (27%),  industry  (22%),  commercial 
and residential (12%), and agriculture (10%) [6]. Most greenhouse gas 
emissions in the transportation, electricity, commercial, and residential 
sectors  are  from  the  combustion  of  fossil  fuels.  Reducing  the  carbon 
footprint  of  these  sectors  can  be  addressed  by  replacing  the  energy 
source with renewable and low-carbon energy, which is a challenge that 
will not be covered here. 

The industrial sector faces a separate challenge, as the processing of 
raw materials can generate CO2  emissions as a by-product of chemical 
reactions. For example, in cement processing, the calcination of lime-
stone to lime results in the production and emission of CO2. These hard- 
to-avoid process emissions are the focus of this study. They require their 
own set of decarbonization solutions, in particular for the production of 
essential materials like cement, lime, glass, and steel, which will still be 
needed in a decarbonized economy. 

In  addition  to  process  emissions,  the  industrial  sector  needs  large 
energy inputs that generate stationary combustion emissions and indi-
rect  emissions.  Stationary  combustion  emissions  are  those  associated 
with  the  heating  of  raw  materials  through  combustion  of  fossil  fuels, 
biomass, or other wastes. These emissions are discussed further in this 
study, as the type of fuel combusted has a significant impact on the GHG 
emissions of the non-ferrous mineral (cement, lime, glass) and steel in-
dustries.  Indirect  emissions  come  from  the  purchase  of  electricity 
generated outside of the facility. These emissions were not considered in 
the study, as the facilities do not have control over the carbon intensity 
of the grid. 

1.3. Production and emissions from the cement, lime, glass, and steel 
sectors in the U.S 

In  the  United  States,  direct  process  emissions  from  iron  and  steel 
production and metallurgical coke production reached 42.6 MtCO2eq in 
2018, and emissions from cement production totaled 40.3 MtCO2eq the 
same year [6]. Lime and glass industries require high temperature inputs 
and face similar challenges to cement and steel industries and were thus 
included in this study. Direct emissions due to the production of lime 
and  glass  in  the  U.S.  in  2018  were  13.2  MtCO2eq  and  1.3  MtCO2eq, 
respectively [6]. 

These  energy  intensive  processes  are  also  large  emitters  of  GHGs, 

which need to be addressed to mitigate climate change. Fig. 1 shows the 
distribution of emissions of the mineral and steel industries in the U.S. 
for the year 2018, along with the amount of material produced and the 
CO2 intensity of each product. 

A large variety of decarbonization options are already on the market 
or in development today, including fuel switching, carbon capture and 
storage (CCS), and technological changes such as electrification or oxy- 
fired kilns. The choice of decarbonization pathway will depend on the 
availability  of  resources  locally  (raw  materials,  low-carbon  fuels  and 
energy, etc.), the readiness of the technology, and the cost. This study 
shows the spatial distribution and time of next likely update, along with 
local resources, to outline the best opportunities for each facility. 

1.4. Kiln technologies and materials carbon intensity 

The main piece of equipment of a cement, lime, glass, or steelmaking 
facility  is  a  kiln  or  furnace,  which  reaches  the  high  temperatures 
required  to  produce  these  materials.  Kilns  have  different  designs  and 
heat sources based on the material produced and the demand for im-
provements  within  each  individual  process.  Unique  production  re-
quirements  have  driven  the  optimization  of  each  type  of  kiln  for  its 
specific process. Rotary kilns, shaft kilns, hearth kilns, blast furnaces, 
basic oxygen furnaces, and electric arc furnaces are the main systems 
used to produce materials such as cement, lime, glass, and steel. 

Across the globe cement and steel are major industries. Of which, 
rely  on  similar  incumbent  technology.  The  decarbonization  pathways 
presented  here  are  not  limited  to  the  context  of  the  U.S.,  and  can 
therefore, be applied in any region depending on the local resources, 
however how they are implemented may differ based on local policy. 
From a global perspective, a total of 4.10 Gt of cement and 1.86 Gt of 
steel  were  produced  globally  in  2019,  emitting  2.3  GtCO2  and  2.6 
GtCO2, respectively [10,11]. These emissions are distributed such that 
1.8 GtCO2 and 3.1 GtCO2 are direct and process emissions, respectively 
[11].  These  emissions  are  expected  to  rise  to  2.3  GtCO2/yr  for  the 
cement industry and 3.3 GtCO2/yr for the steelmaking industry in 2050, 
◦
whereas the 2 
C scenario from the IPCC advises to reduce the emissions 
to  1.7  GtCO2/yr  and  1.3  GtCO2/yr  by  mid-century  [12–14],  respec-
tively. Since 2000, the production of steel has approximately doubled 
while the total CO2 emissions stayed roughly the same. This is due to the 
development of more efficient processes and the increased use of EAFs 
and of scrap steel [7,14]. The share of production from EAFs reached 
about 29% of the global production in 2018, and is predicted to rise, 

Fig. 1. Distribution of CO2eq emissions from  industrial processes  in the U.S. in  2018 (BF/BOF: blast furnace /  basic oxygen furnace, EAF: electric arc furnace) 
compared to the total production of the material. Data markers refer to the carbon intensity measured by the total emissions divided by the total production, resulting 
in an estimate of MtCO2eq per Mt of material produced [7–9]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009822M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

particularly  in  developing  countries  in  the  coming  decades  [14,15]. 
GHG emissions from the cement industry have roughly doubled since 
2000, while the production of cement has nearly increased by a factor 
2.5 [16], indicating only a slight decrease in carbon intensity. This is due 
to the lack of major technological changes to reduce carbon emissions in 
the  cement  industry,  which  would  need  to  take  place  in  order  to 
decrease the emissions to be in line with the IPCC goals. 

The selection of decarbonization options by a facility would depend 
on the local context. As noted previously, the kiln or furnace is a major 
piece of equipment at a facility. Replacing this unit will require a major 
investment  by  the  company,  which  is  most  likely  to  happen  if  the 
facility’s  equipment  is  old,  and  the  company  has  already  invested  in 
renovating it. On the other hand, investment in a carbon capture unit is 
more likely to happen at facilities where the equipment still has a long 
lifetime. To foresee likely changes, it is important to know the date of 
last renovation and the lifetime of current equipment. 

1.5. Outline of the study 

This study details the incumbent kiln and furnace technologies and 
explores  different  decarbonization  options  of  the  cement,  lime,  glass, 
and steel industries with the perspective of local availability of materials 
in  the  U.S.  California  and  Pennsylvania  are  analyzed  more  deeply  to 
outline opportunities in these two states. 

2. Existing kiln and furnace technology 

2.1. Non-metallic mineral industries 

2.1.1. Rotary kilns for cement and lime production 

Rotary kilns are primarily used in the cement and lime industries to 
produce  clinker  and  lime,  respectively.  Fig.  2  shows  a  side  view  and 
cross-sectional view schematic of a rotary kiln. This paper focuses on the 
kiln technology specifically, and the complete cement production pro-
cess  is  documented elsewhere  [17].  For clinker  production, feedstock 
made up primarily of limestone (CaCO3) and clay, is typically fed into 
pre-calciner  cyclones  that  raise  its  temperature  to  600–900 
C  in  a 
preheating  step.  The  pre-calciner  cyclones  are  heated  using  exhaust 
gasses from the downstream pre-calciner and rotary kiln. The feedstock 
then enters the pre-calciner. In the pre-calciner, the feedstock is further 
heated.  In  these  conditions,  the  limestone  is  calcined,  releasing  CO2, 
leaving lime (CaO), shown in Eq. (1). Just above half of the CO2 emis-
sions  from  this  process  originate  from  the  calcination  step  [17].  The 

◦

Fig. 2. Side and cross-sectional view of a rotary kiln, illustrating the feedstock 
entering through the pre-calciner cyclones and then entering the rotating kiln 
body. As the feedstock moves down the rotary kiln body, it increases in tem-
perature, as shown by the color change, before exiting [20]. 

◦

pre-calciner and rotary kiln are often fired with coal, coke, or natural gas 
C [8,18]. In the kiln, the limestone finishes 
and can reach up to 1500 
calcination and the lime and clay fuse together, resulting in solid clinker. 
The solid clinker particles typically measure between 5 mm and 25 mm 
upon exiting the kiln, and rotation of the kiln ensures the clinker par-
ticles produced are uniform and nearly spherical [19]. Lime production 
is  almost  the  same  as  clinker  production,  but  the  feedstock  is  only 
limestone and after it is calcined, the resulting product is lime (CaO). 
Additionally, the pre-calciner cyclones are often replaced with the ver-
tical preheater, but it operates in the same capacity. 

LimestoneCalcination CaCO3 → CaO + CO2

(1) 

In  the  clinker  and  lime  production  processes,  the  calcination  of 
feedstock materials (mainly limestone), and the combustion of fuel in 
the kiln results in CO2  emissions. To reduce costs and potential emis-
sions,  some  cement  facilities  use  biomass  or  municipal  solid  waste 
(MSW) as fuel in place of fossil fuels. When MSW, such as tires, are used 
to fire cement kilns, it can reduce demand for other fossil fuels, such as 
coal or natural gas, but a life cycle assessment is needed to determine the 
total emissions savings. For example, nearly 44% of cement plants in the 
U.S.  use  tires  or  tire-derived  fuel  (TDF)  to  power  their  kilns  [18]. 
Additionally, two cement plants, located in Texas and New York, use 
waste automotive carpet and one cement plant in California uses pis-
tachio  shells  to  supplement  kiln  fuel  [18].  In  the  lime  industry,  fuel 
switching has not gained much traction, and all lime rotary kilns use 
forms of fossil fuels for heating to avoid a reduced-quality lime product 
[21]. The current distribution of fuels used in rotary kilns for cement and 
lime production in the U.S. can be seen in Table 1. 

2.1.2. Shaft kilns for lime production 

Nearly 40% of lime producers use shaft kilns rather than rotary kilns 
[22]. When a shaft kiln is used, the limestone is preheated in a vertical 
preheater before entering the kiln. The lime enters the shaft kiln at the 
top and moves downwards through it. There are burners nearly midway 
down the shaft where fuel is burned to heat the limestone to calcination 
◦
temperatures (above 800 
C). Air enters through the bottom to assist in 
keeping the lime moving through the shaft and to allow the lime to cool 
before exiting the kiln at the bottom. The CO2 that exits the kiln is both 
from the calcination of lime and from the fossil fuels used in the burner. 
The fuel used in lime kilns is similar to that of cement; however, there 
seems to be less adoption of fuel switching. Roughly 26% of lime shaft 
kilns currently use biomass as fuel [18]. When biomass is used in lime 
kilns, it is often done so in the side burners of the shaft kiln. This method 
has proven to keep NOx emissions down and maintain the quality of the 
lime product [21]. Table 2 shows the distribution of fuels used in the 
shaft kiln lime production and the associated emissions in the U.S. lime 
industry. 

2.1.3. Hearth furnaces for glass production 

Glass making usually takes place in a hearth furnace, as shown in 

Table 1 
Predominant fuel use in rotary kilns and emissions (MtCO2eq) distribution in the 
cement and lime industries in the U.S. [18].  

Dominant 
Fossil Fuel 
(s) 

Coal 
Natural Gas 
Coal and 
Natural 
Gas 

Other Fuelsa 
Unknown 

Number of 
Cement 
Facilities 

Number of 
Lime 
Facilities 

Total Emissions 
from Cement 
(MtCO2eq) 

Total Emissions 
from Lime 
(MtCO2eq) 

21 
7 
48 

1 
14 

12 
5 
29 

0 
0 

18.96 
5.83 
35.15 

0.36 
6.71 

4.64 
2.57 
16.11 

0 
0  

a Biomass and municipal solid waste (MSW) are not included in this category, 

as neither make up the predominant fuel used at cement facilities in the U.S. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009823M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Table 2 
Fuel use and emissions (MtCO2eq) distribution for shaft kilns in the lime industry 
in the U.S. [18,22].  

Dominant Fossil Fuel 
(s) 

Number of Shaft Kiln 
Facilities 

Total Emissions 
(MtCO2eq) 

Coal 
Natural Gas 
Coal and Natural Gas 

2 
4 
17 

0.72 
1.23 
2.83  

Fig. 3. Inside of a hearth furnace which heats glass feedstock until it is molten. 
The oxygen-enhanced atmospheric  gasses are circulated through the regener-
ator and the molten glass exits, where it is later cooled to the desired temper-
ature with the air circulated by the regenerator [22,23]. 

◦

◦

C and 2000 

Fig. 3, heated using natural gas or oil-derived fuels and reaching tem-
C. Hearth kilns are fed with sili-
peratures between 1400 
cate  sand,  soda  ash,  limestone,  and  recycled  glass  pieces.  These  are 
heated in an oxygen-enhanced atmosphere until molten in the hearth 
kiln. This molten material is tapped so it pools onto a bed of molten tin. 
The melting point of tin is substantially lower than the temperature of 
the molten glass, allowing the glass to cool and solidify, while floating 
on the top of the molten tin. 

Some of the CO2 emissions associated with this process are from the 
soda ash and limestone being calcined in the hearth kiln Eqs. (1)–((2)). 
Approximately 37% of the emissions from glass production are process 
emissions, while the other 63% are from stationary combustion [23]. In 
addition to the process emissions from glass production, the CO2 emis-
sions associated with operating the kiln are produced by the combustion 
of natural gas or oil-derived fuels used to produce high temperatures. 

DecompositionofSodaAsh Na2CO3 → Na2O + CO2

(2)  

2.2. Iron and steel industry 

There are two main processes used to produce iron and steel. One 
includes a blast furnace and basic oxygen furnace (BF/BOF) configura-
tion while the other utilizes an electric arc furnace (EAF). The BF/BOF 
process is most often used in primary steelmaking, whereas the EAF is 
most often used for secondary steelmaking using recycled steel scrap. 
Here,  we  will  only  be  discussing  the  furnace  configuration  of  each 
production route, but full details of each process can be found in Bains 
et al. (2017) [17]. 

2.2.1.

Integrated steel mill (BF/BOF process) 

Steel mills that include sintering, coke production, blast furnace, and 
basic oxygen furnace processes, are referred to as integrated steel mills. 
Before entering the blast furnace, iron ore is ground down into pellets 
and heated with coke and lime to produce sinter. As shown in Fig. 4, 
sinter and limestone flux are put into the top of the blast furnace where 
they are met by hot blasts of air that come from the bottom. Inside the 
furnace, the raw materials reach white hot temperatures (2200 
C) to 
form pools of liquid slag and molten iron. The slag produced at this step 
is  made  up  of  the  lime  and  iron  ore  impurities.  The  molten  iron  is 

◦

Fig.  4. Inside  of  a  blast  furnace  showing  sinter  and  limestone  feedstock 
entering at the top, with air entering near the bottom and the outlet of steel slag 
and molten iron [24]. 

referred to as pig iron, which is known and utilized for its high carbon 
content. 

◦

The BF is heated using natural gas and coke. The natural gas is used 
to heat the air blown into the main body from below. As this hot air 
comes  in  contact  with  the  coke,  which  enters  from  the  top,  the  coke 
C  environment  which  re-
combusts.  Together  these  create  the  2200 
duces (removes the oxygen from) and melts the iron ore. The primary 
reactions that take place in the blast furnace are as follows: combustion 
of coke in air (Eqn. (3)), calcination of limestone (Eqn. (1)), reaction of 
coke with CO2  (Eqn. (4)), and reduction of the iron ore (Eqn. 5). The 
process  emissions  that  originate  from  the  limestone  calcination  is 
approximated to make up 7% of the total emissions from the process. 
The process emissions from the reduction of iron are difficult to estimate 
because the coal used in the process serves a dual purpose; of providing 
heat as well as establishing a reduction environment of CO. Part of the 
emissions from the use of coal should be allocated to process emissions, 
while  the  remaining  portion  would  be  accounted  for  in  stationary 
combustion emissions. 

Combustionofcokeinair C + O2 →CO2

ReactionofcokewithCO2 C + CO2 → 2CO

Reductionofironore Fe2O3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO2

(3)  

(4)  

(5) 

The pig iron that exits the blast furnace still contains carbon, sulfur, 
phosphorus, manganese, and silicon, some of which need to be removed 
to produce steel. Most of these impurities can be removed through the 
processing in a basic oxygen furnace (BOF), as shown in Fig. 5. Pig iron 
from the BF and scrap steel are fed into the BOF for processing. Once in 
the BOF, a lance is lowered to blow high purity oxygen at supersonic 
speeds  over  the  scrap  and  molten  iron.  This  causes  the  impurities  to 
oxidize and produces heat. The temperature in the BOF is controlled by 
altering the amount of scrap steel and iron ore that is used in this step of 
the process. Steel is removed from the BOF and further additions can be 
made for alloying. Slag produced in this step is recovered and recycled. 
In addition to the BF and BOF, some integrated steel mills also have 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009824M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

efficiently  on  a  smaller  scale  than  a  BF/BOF  configuration.  The  EAF 
process is most often used in steel recycling but can be used for primary 
steel production when coupled with a direct reduction pathway. Direct 
reduction of iron (DRI) is used in place of the BF. Rather than melting the 
iron to remove impurities, the iron is heated to temperatures below its 
melting point in an environment of reduction gasses. These gasses drive 
off the oxygen contained in iron ore, producing metallic iron. Unlike pig 
iron (the product of a BF), the result of the DRI process, sponge iron, 
which  still  retains  silica  that  must  be  removed  in  the  EAF  [26].  A 
combination  of  recycled  scrap,  sponge  iron,  and  hot-briquetted  iron 
(compacted  form  of  DRI)  is  first  loaded  into  an  EAF  chamber.  The 
chamber is then shut, and graphite electrodes are lowered into the main 
body and treated with a strong electric current. This current produces an 
arc that heats and melts the iron, creating a molten pool. A cross section 
of an EAF can be seen in Fig. 6. Lime, feldspar, carbon, and oxygen are 
all used to react with impurities that create a slag pool which can then be 
separated and removed from the molten refined steel. 

The  reduction  gas  environment  required  for  the  DRI  process  is 
typically carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen (H2), or both (syngas). If coal 
is used, then CO is the reducing gas, and if natural gas is used, then the 
reducing  gas  is  syngas.  To  achieve  a  CO  or  syngas  environment,  the 
heating  of  coal  or  a  mixture  of  oxygen  (O2)  and  natural  gas  (CH4)  is 
typically  used,  resulting  in  direct  CO2  emissions.  Although  a  pure  H2 
environment does not directly result in CO2 emissions, there may be CO2 
emissions associated with the process to produce the H2 being used. The 
EAF process does not use fossil fuels directly, but depending on the fuel 
used  for  electricity  generation,  there  are  associated  CO2  emissions, 
which are expected to decrease in the coming decades, as the electricity 
grid decarbonizes [31]. There are also small amounts of process emis-
sions to be considered with the EAF process. As the carbon from the iron 
is released, it binds with the oxygen being blown in to create carbon 
monoxide.  This  carbon  monoxide  partially  burns  in  the  oxygen-rich 
atmosphere  and  produces  CO2.  Due  to  the  high  electrical  current 
needed for EAF operation, the graphite electrodes used in this process 
also degrade at a rate of 1 to 2 kg/tonne of steel produced [32], resulting 

Fig. 5. Basic oxygen furnace (BOF) showing the central lance providing high- 
purity oxygen at high velocities, and a pool of refined molten steel at the bot-
tom of the furnace. When the molten steel has reached the desired purity, the 
furnace is rotated and the molten steel flows out of the taphole [25]. 

on-site  power  plants,  or  “captive”  power  plants.  These  power  plants 
ensure  consistent  provision  of  electricity  and  can  often  provide  it  at 
lower  cost  than  if  the  plant  was  to  rely  on  the  grid.  In  addition  to 
decarbonizing their BF/BOF process, these facilities also have the op-
portunity to generate electricity with a lower carbon intensity than the 
grid. 

2.2.2. Mini mill (EAF process) 

The other main method of producing steel is through the EAF. Steel 
mills with primarily EAF steel production are also referred to as mini- 
mills.  The  name  comes  from  the  fact  that  EAFs  can  be  operated 

Fig. 6. Inside of an electric arc furnace (EAF) showing the graphite electrodes that conduct an arc with the steel feedstock to drive off impurities. The slag collects on 
top of the molten steel and is released through the slag door while the molten steel is collected through the bottom taphole [27–30]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009825M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

in additional CO2 emissions. 

3. Innovative pathways to reduce CO2  from industrial furnaces 
and kilns 

Improvements  can  be  made  to  the  existing  kiln  and  furnace  tech-
nologies in these sectors to reduce the amount of CO2 emissions that end 
up in the atmosphere. Although many existing and adopted technologies 
result in far fewer CO2 emissions than those currently in use, favorable 
economics  and  production  capacity  of  existing  furnaces  leads  to 
continued production using furnaces with greater emissions intensities. 
For example, steel produced from scrap in an EAF results in markedly 
fewer CO2 emissions than the BF/BOF route, but replacing existing BF/ 
BOF production capacity, especially for higher quality steel products, is 
currently economically prohibitive. 

3.1. Timescale for innovation 

Industrial  kilns  and  furnaces  are  designed  to  have  long  lifetimes 
because it is often expensive and time intensive to upgrade or replace 
them. Most kilns and furnaces have a steel outer shell and oxide bricks 
lining the inside. The oxide bricks are called refractory bricks and pro-
tect  the  metal  outer  shell  from  overheating  and  prevent  deformation 
during  operation.  Due  to  the  consumable  nature  of  refractory  bricks, 
they must be replaced on a regular basis to ensure proper operation of 
the kiln or furnace. 

Table  3  summarizes  the  lifetimes  of  kilns  and  furnaces  used  in 
cement, lime, glass, and iron and steel production. These lifetimes reflect 
the time between substantial repairs, replacements, and needed main-
tenance.  This  time  frame  was  specified  because  these  activities  often 
result in industrial downtime and can require financial investment on 
the order of adopting new kiln technology. Due to the capital investment 
required  for  an  industrial  kiln  or  furnace,  retrofits  and  upgrades  are 
more attractive when they coincide with a needed replacement. Given 
the longer lifetimes of these industrial kilns and furnaces, the timescale 
for retrofits and upgrades can range anywhere between 8 and 100 years. 
Estimates for the retirement year of rotary kilns, BF, BOF, and EAF were 
calculated for the facilities located in the U.S. using lifetimes of 40 years, 
15 years, 100 years, and 65 years, respectively. 

For  each  of  the  configurations,  knowing  the  lifetime  of  the  infra-
structure helps to understand the dynamics of its replacement. This in-
formation coupled with the date of the last update of each unit indicates 
when a facility is planning for large investments and might be interested 
in changing for an upgraded or newer technology. 

3.2. Energy and materials savings 

3.2.1. Energy and materials savings for non-metallic minerals 

There are few opportunities to reduce emissions from cement, lime, 

Table 3 
Lifetimes for kilns and furnaces used in cement, lime, glass, and iron and steel 
production.  

Kiln or Furnace 
Type 

Lifetime 

Additional Service or 
Maintenance 

Reference 

Refractory brick replacement 
every 1–3 yrs 

[33,34] 

and  glass  industries  without  changing  the  process  equipment  or 
deploying carbon capture and storage (CCS). The methods covered here 
relate to materials recycling and energy savings that can be achieved 
with existing process technology. Lime cannot be recycled because it is a 
product of a chemical reaction and faces energetic barriers to return to 
its  original  state.  However,  lime  waste  can  be  spread  across  soil  to 
enhance nutrients [44]. 

Recycling cement and glass have proven to be promising in reducing 
CO2  emissions through the lessened demand for virgin material. When 
concrete is decommissioned, hydrated and unhydrated cement can be 
separated from each other and from other constituent materials by use of 
smart crushing technologies [45]. The hydrated cement must be recy-
cled by being heated in a cement kiln to drive off the water content [12]. 
In addition to reducing the need for raw material mining, this recycling 
process only results in CO2 emissions from the fuel used in the kiln. The 
unhydrated cement can be re-crushed and reused in concrete [12]. The 
remainder of the concrete constituents can be reclaimed and recycled as 
an aggregate additive to road-based construction [12]. 

Another option for reducing CO2 emissions from the cement industry 
is to decrease the demand for cement clinker by changing the chemistry 
of concrete to be less reliant on CO2-intensive feedstocks. Clinker is the 
primary reactive component of ordinary Portland cement, which com-
bines with water to bind together aggregates to produce concrete, while 
gypsum  controls  the  reaction  time  [46,47].  Concretes  that  use  blast 
furnace  slag  and  fly  ash  are  considered  industry  standard  today,  but 
these feedstocks could become less available as deep decarbonization of 
the industrial and energy sectors continue [47,48]. Some alternatives to 
replace these industrial waste materials have been identified as bauxite 
mine tailings, more commonly referred to as and natural pozzolan ma-
terials [48–52]. 

An important emerging substitute for cementitious material in con-
crete is limestone calcined clay (LC3), developed by Dr. Karen Scrivener. 
This concrete recipe consists of cement feedstock that utilizes both clay 
and limestone and results in a lower carbon footprint by up to 40% [53, 
54]. Trial production of this cement was undertaken by the Siguaney 
Cement Factory in Cuba and JK Lakshmi in India [55–57]. In these trials, 
the cement produced can be used in a one-for-one capacity with most 
standard uses. Since its inception, LC3 has gained traction in the global 
cement industry and nearly 40 cement companies in 25 countries are 
interested in adopting it [54]. 

Glass can be recycled with no loss in product purity. Reclaimed glass 
with the purpose of recycling is called cullet. Increasing the cullet used 
in glass processing can reduce energy use by up to 3% and the need for 
primary glass feedstocks that contain carbon dioxide, such as limestone 
and soda ash [58,59]. The European Container Glass Federation (FEVE) 
estimates that when 100% cullet is melted to produce molten glass, CO2 
emissions are reduced by nearly 58% [59]. 

3.2.2. Energy and materials savings in the iron and steel industry 

There are many options for reducing emissions in the steelmaking 
process, from retrofitting existing equipment to replacing infrastructure 
with  innovative  technologies.  Energy  efficiency  and  carbon  emission 
reduction  measures  can  be  implemented  with  existing  equipment  in 
integrated mills and mini-mills, and these can offer low-cost and effec-
tive emissions mitigation options. Fig. 7 outlines available energy effi-
ciency and emissions reduction retrofits and new build opportunities for 
blast furnaces, basic oxygen furnaces, and electric arc furnaces. 

Rotary Kiln for 

Cement and Lime 
Production 
Blast Furnace 

(BF) 

Basic Oxygen 

Furnace (BOF) 
Electric Arc Furnace 

(EAF) 

40–80 
yrs 

15–20 
yrs 
100 yrs 

65 yrs 

Hearth Furnace 

8–20 yrs 

– 

[35–38] 

3.2.3. Waste heat utilization 

Oxygen lance replacement needed 
after 400 heats 
Graphite electrode replacement 
needed every 8–10 hrs of 
operation 
Refractory materials lifespan 
14–18 yrs 

[39] 

[39,40] 

[41–43]  

The  cement  and  steel  processes  are  energy  intensive  and  produce 
waste heat that can be used by decarbonization processes. It is estimated 
that  the  technical  potential  for  waste  heat  to  power  with  a  steam 
Rankine cycle to be around 2.1 GW at primary metal facilities and 0.7 
GW at mineral plants in the U.S. at facilities producing over 5 MW of 
waste heat [60,61]. The lower bound for assessing the potential of the 
waste  heat  to  power  process  is  232 
C,  as  commercially  available 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009826M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig.  7. Blast  furnace,  basic  oxygen  furnace,  and  electric  arc  furnace  energy  efficiency  opportunities,  where  “N/A”  indicates  that  the  data  lacked  granularity  to 
calculate a percentage of energy savings. Notes: Baseline energy consumption for the above processes are 22.1 GJ/tonne steel for integrated steel mill operations, 5.8 
GJ/tonne steel for EAF, and 2.9 GJ/tonne coke [32]. Electric arc furnace steelmaking consumes 350 to 600 kWh/tonne of steel produced, depending on design 
details [32]. 

◦

technologies  predominantly  requires  medium-  to  high-temperature 
waste  heat  sources  [60].  Instead  of  being  used  for  power  generation, 
this waste heat could be used partially or in totality by a point source 
carbon capture unit, which requires temperatures around 100 
C [62]. 
Readily  available  waste  heat  would  increase  the  efficiency  of  the 
carbon capture process as no additional energy supply would need to be 
built  for  this  process.  Pilorg´e  et  al.  [63]  estimate  that  this  industrial 
waste heat available on site could supply the energy to capture the to-
tality of the 19.4 MtCO2 of capture potential at iron and steel plants, and 
45.9  MtCO2  from  cement  kilns  (about  80%  of  the  capture  potential). 
However,  part  of  this  heat  might  already  be  used  at  the  facilities  for 
processes requiring lower grade heat, as in the pre-calciner cyclones in 
the  rotary kilns, and  the reuse of the BF gas downstream in the steel 
production process, reducing their overall fuel inputs [32,64]. 

3.3. Retrofitting technologies: carbon capture and storage (CCS) 

3.3.1. Readiness and projects 

Carbon  capture  and  storage  includes  three  major  steps:  capture, 
transport,  and  storage.  Transportation  and  storage  techniques  are 
already deployed at a commercial scale, mostly for the use of CO2  in 
enhanced  oil  recovery  (EOR)  operations.  This  existing  infrastructure 
could be used for transporting and storing industrially sourced CO2 [65, 
66]; however, its deployment is very sparse, and the private ownership 
of  currently  installed  pipelines  might  be  an  obstacle  for  usage  and 
connecting  subsidiary  pipelines.  Today,  most  of  this  infrastructure  is 
located  around  the  Permian  Basin,  so  would  need  to  be  expanded  to 
service areas where there is more industrial activity, such as the Great 
Lakes region. New CO2 pipelines and storage sites need to be built in the 
coming  years in  order to  connect large industrial  facilities to CO2  in-
jection sites and successfully deploy CCS. 

Technologies for capturing CO2 from flue gas are already in place at a 
few industrial facilities (e.g., Air Products’  Port Arthur hydrogen pro-
duction facility and the Archer Daniels Midland ethanol plant) [67], but 

CO2  capture requires technical adaptation to accommodate the differ-
ences in composition of flue gas from cement, lime, glass, or steelmaking 
facilities [68]. Among the cement, lime, glass, and steel industries, only 
one large scale CCS project is operational on a DRI unit of an iron and 
steel plant: the Abu Dhabi CCS project in the United Arab Emirates since 
2016 [67]. The technology has proven effective and could be replicated 
at other DRI plants. DRI plants are not widely deployed in the U.S. yet 
but are expected to be looked at as viable replacements for BFs. 

A partnership between Svante, LafargeHolcim, and Oxy Low Carbon 
Ventures is setting out to determine the feasibility of carbon capture at a 
cement plant in Colorado (U.S.), the LH CO2MENT Project, that is partly 
funded by the DOE [67,69]. The capture plant alone is estimated to cost 
around  $300  M  [68].  This  project  is  aligned  with  LafargeHolcim’s 
commitment to reduce the carbon emissions of their cementitious ma-
terials  to  be  475  kg  CO2/tonne  by  2030  [70].  Additionally,  Hei-
delbergCement has approved a project in Brevik, Norway at the Norcern 
cement plant to implement CCS. The CCS system is estimated to capture 
400,000 tonnes of CO2 per year starting in 2024 [71]. This will be the 
first full-scale CCS cement plant in the world. 

3.3.2. Capture potential 

Implementing CCS generally does not require modifications to the 
industrial process in itself [12], which is attractive for many facilities. 
Using an air environment for combusting fuel in kilns and furnaces leads 
to  a  mix of  CO2, N2,  NOx,  and  H2O gas  in  the  exhaust  stream(s);  the 
capture of CO2  requires the separation of CO2 from these other gasses. 
Some  of  these  other  gasses  would  have  to  be  scrubbed  ahead  of  the 
separation of CO2, resulting in cleaner air for communities living in the 
vicinity of the facility [72]. 

Most studies consider that CO2 capture can be achieved with a 90% 
capture efficiency [12,13,65]. A recent study questions this number and 
shows that 98% efficiency can be achieved with a marginal cost increase 
at industrial facilities [73]. Most of industrial exhaust concentrations are 
in  the  range  15–30%  CO2  [17,65,74,75].  For  that  range  of  CO2 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009827M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

concentration,  the  total  annual  cost  increases  from  $56–60/tCO2  for 
90%  capture  to  $58–66/tCO2  for  98%  capture  [73].  The  remaining 
emissions need to be captured with direct air capture to reach net carbon 
neutrality.  The  marginal  cost  increase  of  less  than  $10/tCO2  is  small 
compared to the cost of direct air capture, showing that achieving a 98% 
capture efficiency would decrease the overall cost of carbon neutrality 
for these industrial processes. 

For practical and economic reasons, a facility is likely to implement 
carbon  capture  on  the  exhaust  stream  with  the  highest  volume  and 
concentration of CO2  [65]. Also, CCS is currently the only solution to 
mitigate process emissions. Thus, there should be an emphasis made on 
implementing  CCS  to  abate  process  emissions,  as  emissions  from  sta-
tionary combustion sources could oftentimes be solved by fuel switching 
or electrification. A common source of process emissions in the cement, 
lime, and steel industries is the use of limestone in the process. These 
process emissions can only be avoided through CCS [36]. 

In  the  cement  and  lime  industries,  the  heating  of  reactants  and 
burning of fuel both occur in the kiln, which reduces the exhaust to a 
single stack embodying all the process emissions from limestone calci-
nation and emissions from fuel combustion. Point source capture thus 
had the potential to capture about 90% of the emissions from the cement 
and lime industries and avoid the release of roughly 57.8 MtCO2  and 
14.6 MtCO2 in the atmosphere in 2017 [65,76], respectively. 

At iron and steel facilities, there are multiple exhaust streams, with 
roughly 2/3 of non-process emissions originating from stationary com-
bustion units. The major process stream is the blast furnace gas, which 
represents 78% of the process emissions [17]. Pilorg´e et al. [65] estimate 
that  implementing  point  source  capture  on  the  blast  furnace  exhaust 
could have avoided the emission of 19.4 MtCO2 (70.2% of point source 
emissions from integrated steel mills) from iron and steel plants in 2017. 

3.3.3. Storage and pipelines 

To impact climate change mitigation, the captured CO2 then needs to 
be stored safely and durably. Various options exist for the injection and 
storage  of  CO2  in  subsurface  reservoirs  [77–81].  Injection  of  CO2  in 
sedimentary formations is the most established technique and has been 
demonstrated at a commercial scale by the Sleipner project since 1996 
[82–84], the global capacity of sedimentary formations is evaluated in 
the range 8,200 - 34,700 GtCO2 [77–81]. Alternatively, injection of CO2 
in basalt formations is promising with the success of the CarbFix (Ice-
land) and Wallula (Washington state, USA) pilot projects [85–87]. These 
projects  have  demonstrated the  mineralization  of CO2  in basaltic res-
ervoirs in less than two years [88,89], minimizing the risks of leakage. 
The capacity of on-land basalts is estimated to be in the 1000 s to 100, 
000 s GtCO2  with similar additional capacity in submarine basalt for-
mations [77,78,81]. Ultramafic rocks are also attracting interest, as they 
react more readily with CO2 than basalt [77], and their storage capacity 
could be even greater from 60,000 to 600,000 GtCO2 [77,78,81]. Local 
studies will have to be conducted to assess the true storage capacity of a 
specific rock formation. The action of secondary trapping mechanisms in 
geologic formations should mitigate any leakage from the reservoir and 
reduce the risk of leakage over time [88,90,91]. Well-regulated storage 
sites should retain over 98% of CO2  over 10,000 years, down to 78% 
over the same period of time in a worst case scenario [92]. Concerns 
have also been raised about the feasibility of a fast deployment of per-
manent storage at the scale of Gt/yr, as this industry is facing cultural, 
legal, regulatory, and economic barriers [90]. 

For small volumes of CO2  captured, transportation by truck is still 
viable, but for larger volumes and long-distance transportation to stor-
age sites, pipelines are more economical [65]. Large-scale deployment of 
carbon  capture  with  utilization  and/or  storage  (CCUS)  would  thus 
require the development of sequestration sites and utilization facilities, 
as well as a CO2 pipeline network. Trunk pipelines collecting CO2 from 
multiple  sources  can  benefit  from  economies  of  scale,  while  feeder 
pipelines  serving  individual  plants  do  not.  A  CO2  pipeline  network 
already exists locally in the U.S. in the Permian Basin and along the Gulf 

Coast for transporting CO2  to EOR sites, for which 80% of the CO2  is 
mined from natural underground CO2 reservoirs [93]. The CO2 pipeline 
network  could  be  extended  to  include  industrial  sources  of  CO2  and 
injection  sites  in  saline  aquifers.  Studies  have  been  conducted  in  the 
Midwest to link ethanol plants to sedimentary basins with EOR opera-
tions [94,95]. A pipeline collecting 4.30 MtCO2/yr from 15 bioethanol 
plants would cost $1.06 B in CAPEX and $53 M in OPEX, while a more 
ambitious  pipeline  network  involving  34  bioethanol  production  facil-
ities and collecting 9.85 MtCO2/yr would have a CAPEX of $2.67 B, and 
an OPEX of $131 M [94]. Sanchez et al. estimate a maximum levelized 
cost of pipeline transportation from bioethanol plants to geologic stor-
age of $19/tCO2  and discuss the impact of credits [95]. Stolaroff et al. 
is  roughly 
indicates 
$0.05–0.08/tCO2/km and goes down to $0.02–0.03/tCO2/km for 1000 
km-long pipelines based on a NETL cost model aggregating models of 
three  research  groups  [96–100].  Similar  work  could  be  done  to  link 
other  industrial  facilities  to  storage  facilities.  However,  as  cement  fa-
cilities are more geographically distributed from each other than blast 
furnaces (mostly located in the Great Lakes area), connecting cement 
plants to CO2 pipeline networks is expected to be more challenging for 
facilities in remote locations. Pipelines can also face public resistance, 
and  alternative  means  of  transportation  could  be  envisioned  for  the 
long-distance transportation of CO2  such as rail and barges integrated 
with trucking for increased flexibility close to the capture and delivery 
locations. 

the  cost  of  40  km-long  pipelines 

that 

CO2 can also be used as a feedstock for building material processes, 
including curing concrete [47]. Utilization options might be financially 
attractive but present the risk to release CO2 into the atmosphere later 
on and/or to create a product that is emitting CO2  itself (e.g., oil from 
EOR operations). With the goal of decreasing use of fossil fuels, the most 
secure option for storing CO2  long-term (> 1000 years) is injection in 
saline aquifers. 

3.3.4. Cost 

The cost of capturing CO2  is inversely correlated with the concen-
tration  of  CO2  in  the  industrial  exhaust  stream.  The  exhaust  streams 
from cement kilns and blast furnaces contain about 14–33 wt% CO2 and 
20–25  wt%  CO2,  respectively  [17,74,75].  As  the  cement  kiln  designs 
combine the process emissions and the emissions from fuel combustion, 
the  exhaust  stack  might  contain  more  pollutants  that  will  have  to  be 
separated upstream of the CO2  capture, increasing the cost of capture. 
The global CCS institute estimates the cost of CCS at cement and iron and 
steel plants in the U.S., including the cost of transportation and storage. 
First-of-a-kind costs should be roughly $124/tCO2 for cement kilns and 
$77/tCO2,  for  blast  furnaces.  This  is  expected  to  decrease  for 
nth-of-a-kind  infrastructure  to  roughly  $100/tCO2  and  $65/tCO2, 
respectively  [101,102].  The  competitivity  of  CCS  compared  to  heat 
provided by zero-carbon electricity or hydrogen based on zero-carbon 
electricity depends on the cost of electricity. According to a McKinsey 
report [103], the tipping point is $50/MWh for the cost of zero-carbon 
electricity, over which CCS is more economically viable. 

3.3.5. Opportunities in the U.S 

Fig. 8 shows the distribution of cement, lime, glass, and BF facilities 
in the U.S. along with CO2  pipeline transportation and storage oppor-
tunities.  Carbon  capture  retrofit  on  flue  gas  exhaust  is  a  significant 
capital cost, so facilities that are expected to retire in the next decade are 
not expected to invest in that type of technology and thus were removed 
from the  map. The best opportunities  for CCUS  in the  short term are 
those facilities that are close to existing CO2-EOR operations or close to 
CO2 pipelines that are currently sending CO2 to oil fields. This includes 
facilities located in Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Oklahoma, Michigan, 
and Indiana. 

Clusters of cement, lime, glass, and BF facilities can be found in many 
locations  including  close  to  Detroit  (Michigan),  Chicago  (Illinois),  St 
Louis  (Missouri),  Cincinnati  (Ohio),  Birmingham  (Alabama),  Los 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009828M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 8. Carbon capture in the cement, lime, glass, and steel industries, transportation, and storage opportunities in the U.S. for facilities retiring in more than 10 years 
[18,22,33–38,106–112]. Note that no retirement year estimate is given for lime and glass. 

Angeles (California), Dallas (Texas), San Antonio (Texas) and Martins-
burg  (West  Virginia).  Each  of  these  clusters  are  opportunities  to  find 
common places for CO2  sequestration or utilization –  depending upon 
the local context and the availability of geologic formations suitable for 
CO2  sequestration –  and to build pipelines that could connect nearby 
facilities to storage or utilization sites. For instance, the presence of a 
cluster  of  4  cement  plants  and  multiple  lime  and  glass  facilities  in 
southern Indiana could justify the construction of a pipeline that would 
send the CO2 to the EOR site located in Illinois. Clusters that are located 
over  or  close  to  sedimentary  reservoirs  but  far  from  EOR  operations 
would have to build dedicated CO2 injection sites, like in southern Illi-
nois, southern California, Pennsylvania, Alabama, or Texas. Blast fur-
naces  are  also  mostly  aggregated  close  to  Chicago  (Illinois),  Detroit 
(Michigan), and Cleveland (Ohio) along with lime and glass facilities. If 
blast  furnaces  need  to  continue  producing  for  supplying  high  quality 
steel, opportunities can be found nearby for CO2 sequestration. 

In addition, a study from the CO2-EOR deployment working group 
[94] worked on a project regarding a CO2 pipeline that would connect 
ethanol plants in the Midwest to the existing pipeline network in Texas 
and New Mexico. Three cement plants in Nebraska and Iowa are in the 
vicinity of this project and could be connected to the pipeline. 

It should be noted that the implementation of CCS, pipeline trans-
port,  and  storage  is  also dependent on  the  public perception  of  these 
projects. This has been shown in cases where public protests have led to 
CCS projects being canceled. An example of this was Shell’s Barendrecht 
project  in  the  Netherlands  in  2010.  Due  to  community  activism  and 
protest, regarding the fear that residents had about safety and housing 
prices, among other complications, the project was canceled [104,105]. 
Similar examples can be seen with the Vattenfall project slated in Bee-
skow,  Brandenberg,  Germany.  Vetoes  from  Schleswig-Holstein  and 
Lower  Saxony  concerning  the  CO2  pipeline  that  would  be  used  to 
transport CO2  from local power plants put an end to onshore CCS for 
Germany [105]. Both of these cases resulted in the understanding that 
enhanced  education  and  communications  with  surrounding  commu-
nities and the public are needed when developing CCS projects. 

3.4. Fuel switching opportunities 

3.4.1. Replacement of coal with biomass 

Fuel  switching  using  biomass  can  be  attractive  for  any  facility, 
regardless of their next planned upgrade, as the utilization of some types 
of biomass do not require any infrastructure change. Drop-in biomass 
could be used right now to replace part of the coal and the conversion 

factor could be increased in the future by using pre-processed biomass. 
Using biomass instead of fossil fuels in industrial kilns and furnaces does 
not necessarily reduce the emissions of CO2  at the facility level; how-
ever, the source of CO2 differs, which changes the lifecycle emissions of 
the  feedstock  and  process.  Fossil  fuels  source  their  carbon  from  the 
subsurface where it was securely stored for millions of years resulting in 
a net release of CO2 in the atmosphere, whereas biomass sources its CO2 
from the atmosphere via photosynthesis. The full lifecycle emissions of 
biomass depend on the counterfactual use of the biomass, processing, 
and  transportation to the  facility [113–115]. For  the purposes  of this 
analysis,  we  assume  biomass  feedstocks  would  be  carbon  neutral. 
However, in practice there would be emissions from transportation and 
processing. Combusting biomass instead of coal thus reduces the emis-
sions of fossil CO2 in the atmosphere and can at best result in a carbon 
neutral cycle. 

The cultivation of dedicated biomass feedstocks may require a sig-
nificant amount of land, water, and energy and could disturb existing 
ecosystems  and  compete  with  other  human  needs  such  as  food  pro-
duction and settlements. The use of residual biomass (e.g., wood resi-
dues, nut shells, and fruit pits) instead of whole trees can both protect 
intact ecosystems by reducing direct and indirect land use change and 
reduce reliance on artificial inputs. Land use change for dedicated en-
ergy  crops  might  result  in  larger  GHG  emissions  than  the  fossil  CO2 
avoided by switching from coal to biomass in these industries. The type 
and  source  of  biomass  should  thus  be  carefully  considered  to  truly 
address  climate  change.  The  U.S.  used  about  330  million  dry  metric 
tonnes (Mdt) of biomass resources in 2017, including 130 Mdt of agri-
cultural residue, for the generation of heat and power and the produc-
tion  of  biofuels,  biobased  chemicals,  and  wood  pellets  [116].  The 
amount of unused agricultural residues in 2017 is estimated to be 95 
Mdt, and is expected to rise gradually to 160–180 Mdt in 2040 [116]. 
For the  purpose of this case study, we consider two types of biomass 
residue for fuel switching. First, we assess fruit hulls/pits and nut shells 
that are separated from edible crops at industrial processing facilities as 
secondary  byproducts  that  have  few  existing  use  cases  or  markets 
despite their high energy density [117]. Second, we consider mill and 
forest  management residues,  including orchard  prunings,  unused mill 
residues, urban wood waste, and fire treatment thinnings [116]. In each 
of these cases, we reserve eligible biomass to feedstocks that would have 
been  removed  from  the  ecosystem  or  orchard  regardless  of  the 
fuel-switching approaches described here and currently lack high vol-
ume and value use cases. 

The  heating  value,  carbon  content,  moisture  content,  and  pore 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009829M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

structure distribution of a fuel influences its combustion. Substituting 
current fuels requires finding alternative fuels with similar characteris-
tics. While sub-bituminous and bituminous coals are used in cement and 
lime industry, only bituminous coal is used in the steel industry [118] 
indicating the need for a higher quality coal. Given its characteristics, 
nut  shells  and  fruit  stones  are  particularly  promising  to  replace  solid 
carbon  fuels  (namely  coal  and  petroleum  coke)  in  some  instances 
without  any  pre-processing,  whereas  woody  biomass  has  a  higher 
moisture content which might hinder the combustion (Table 4). 

Some forms of biomass require more pretreatment than others before 
being usable as fuel for a given process. The pretreatment required is 
often pyrolysis, which reduces moisture content, improves grindability, 
and  increases  fixed  carbon  content  [119].  The  product  of  biomass 
pyrolyzation, biochar, is similar to coal in regard to its carbon, sulfur, 
volatiles,  and  ash  contents.  Additionally,  pyrolyzation  changes  the 
biomass pore structure to be more comparable to that of coal [120–125]. 
The composition of coal compared to different types of biomass-derived 
fuel can be seen in Table 4, with additional properties listed in Table S1. 
In the U.S., 11 cement plants are already co-firing biomass providing 
up to 1.6% of the heat generated [18,148]. Cement facilities currently 
use regionally available biomass: nutshells are used for heat generation 
in Arizona, California, Florida, and Texas, and corn is used in one facility 
in Iowa [148]. A facility in Oklahoma is also firing biogas in its cement 
kiln [148]. The geographic source of biomass is an important parameter 
and using local biomass would minimize the energy required for trans-
port and the GHG emissions associated with it. Currently, high-quality 
biomass  such as  nut  shells  and  fruit stones can be  co-fired  in cement 
and lime kilns with a maximum substitution of 20% on a thermal energy 
basis  [149].  Because of  the  heterogeneity of  biomass feedstocks,  sub-
stitution beyond this rate may disrupt the stability and temperature of 
flame without changes to the kiln, potentially yielding inferior products 
[149]. 

Biomass  has  the  potential  to  greatly  reduce  emissions  intensity  of 
steelmaking in the integrated mill production route, and this is currently 
being  tested  at  the  experimental  scale  [150].  It  can  be  used  in  coke 
making at rates between 2% and 10%, resulting in an emissions reduc-
tion of up to 0.1 tCO2eq/tonne steel. Biomass can also be used in the 
blast furnace as a substitute for nut coke (coke of smaller grain size) at a 
rate  of  50%  to  100%,  resulting  in  emissions  reductions  of  up  to  0.2 
tCO2eq/tonne steel. It can be injected into the blast furnace in place of 
pulverized  coal  or  natural  gas  injection  to  a  rate  of  25%,  reducing 
emissions  intensity  by  0.5  tCO2eq/tonne  steel.  Finally,  it  can  also  be 
used as a solid fuel in sintering, reducing emissions by 0.3 tCO2eq/tonne 
steel. In all, emissions reduction opportunities of using biomass in the 
integrated steel production route total over 1.2 tCO2eq/tonne steel, or 
nearly 60% of the emissions intensity of an integrated steel mill [150]. 
However,  the  production  of  coke  does  not  always  take  place  at  inte-
grated steel mills, so when determining the emission reduction potential 
from co-firing biomass, rather than including those from coke making 
and  sintering,  it  was  calculated  solely  for  the  BF  and  estimated  to 
roughly 25% of its emissions. 

Agriculture and forest residues are unevenly distributed across the U. 
S. While facilities in California, and in the Southeast U.S. might have 
multiple sources of biomass available, facilities in the Mountain West 
region might have greater difficulties sourcing local waste biomass in 
sufficient quantities to replace fossil fuels. While nut orchards process 
their  crops  mostly  on  site,  fruits  are  more  likely  to  be  processed  at 
beverage or canning facilities. This affects the strategy for purchasing 
these  biomass  byproducts.  Moreover,  there  are  several  practical  con-
cerns for collecting and transporting biomass, including the volume of 
stones or shells removed at the commercial scale during processing and 
the current uses and commercial prices for these resources. In the next 
paragraph, we quantify the total technical potential of nutshell and fruit 
stones  feedstocks,  without  considering  collection  constraints,  alterna-
tive uses, transportation, or pre-processing. However, in practice these 
factors will determine the emissions abatement potential and economics 
of agricultural residues as kiln feedstocks. 

Using the total annual tonnage of each type of biomass produced, 
adjusted to consider that the shell or stone only accounts for a portion of 
the mass, it was determined that the U.S. produces 1,488,000 tonnes of 
nut  shells  and  241,700  tonnes  of  fruit  stones  [120,124,125,130–135, 
137–147,151–179]. The heating values of the nut shells range from 17.4 
to 20.6 MJ/kg, and the heating values of the fruit pits are between 18.8 
and  21.4  MJ/kg  [120,124,125,130–135,137–147,151–179].  These 
heating values and the quantities of biomass were used to calculate the 
available energy from these biomass sources, finding that nut shells and 
fruit stones could provide 2.93 × 1010  MJ/yr and 4.70 × 109  MJ/yr, 
respectively (feedstock volumes and shell/stone percentage of biomass 
total  mass,  available  in  Table  S1  in  the  Supplementary  Information). 
These figures can be compared with the total energy provided by coal 
and coke in the cement and steel industries, that equal approximately to 
2.16 × 1011  MJ/yr and to 1.91 × 1011  MJ/yr, respectively [148,180]. 
The available energy from the waste nut shells account for 7.2% of the 
energy  used  in  these  industrial  processes  and  fruit  stones  1.2%.  The 
share of energy from coal and coke in the lime industry and the emis-
sions intensities were assumed to be the same as in the cement industry 
given  the  similar  processes.  This  indicates  a  consumption  of  roughly 
5.56 × 1010 MJ/yr in the lime industry. The replacement of coal by nut 
shells and fruit stones could reduce fossil CO2 emissions by roughly 2.7 
MtCO2/yr  (1.8%  of  emissions  from  cement,  lime,  and  primary  steel-
making in the U.S.) in the U.S through direct substitution on a thermal 
basis  [18,32].  This  does  not  account  for  the  other  aspects  of  using 
biomass, which could reduce this potential. For example, charcoal-based 
steel production has a lower efficiency than coal-based steel production 
(about 60%) [103]. 

Fig. 9a shows the distribution of nut and fruit production along with 
the  distribution  of  cement,  lime,  glass,  and  steel  plants  [18,106,107, 
155]. The amount of coal that could be replaced by drop-in biomass in 
cement kilns, lime kilns, and BF is calculated at the state level on an 
energy basis. Details are given in the SI regarding the emissions from 
fuel combustion, the share of coal in the fuel mix, and the share of coal 
that can be replaced by drop-in biomass. This fuel substitution has the 

Table 4 
Composition of biochar derived from different types of biomass compared to the composition of coal.  

Material 

Fixed Carbon Content Before 
Pyrolysis (%) 

Carbon Content After 
Pyrolysis (%)1 

Moisture Content Prior to Additional 
Drying (%) 

Higher Heating Value 
(MJ/kg) 

References 

Bituminous Coal 

84 median (69–86) 

Subbituminous 

Coal 

Woody Biomass 
Nut Shells2 
Fruit Stones3 

35.7–36.4 

12.85–18.(cid:0) 1 
16.3–27.6 
19.2–23.8 

N/A 

N/A 

81.2–86.9 
77.3–87.4 
84.0–89.5 

8–18 

25.8–28.4 

12.5–18.5 
3.3–10.5 
6.2–35 

24.4–32.6 

19.9–20.5 

19.5–21.0 
17.4–20.6 
18.8–21.4 

[120,122,123, 
126] 
[120,122,123, 
126] 
[39,127–129] 
[125,130–137] 
[138–147]  

1 Temperature range for pyrolysis is 700–773 K, based on maximum energy density and yield tradeoff. 
2 Almond, hazelnut, walnut, pistachio, peanut, and pecan. 
3 Apricot, plum, avocado, nectarine, peach, cherry, and olive. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098210M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 9. Opportunities in the U.S. to fuel switch using biomass and hydrogen in the cement, lime, glass, and steel industries. The top map shows the CO2 emissions that 
could be offset by replacing 20% of coal with drop-in biomass, indicated by the CO2 balance. The green colors indicate an excess of drop-in biomass compared to the 
needs in BFs, cement, and lime kilns while the orange-red colors indicate a deficit in nut shells and fruit pits availability, showing the need for other types of biomass 
sources  or  other  of  decarbonization  options.  The  bottom  map  shows  the  hydrogen  that  can  be  produced  from  waste  woody  biomass  sources  [18,106,107,116, 
155,192]. 

potential  to  result  in  an  overall  fossil  CO2  emissions  reduction  of  4.3 
MtCO2/yr (6.4% of annual emissions), 1.1 MtCO2/yr (3.6% of annual 
emissions),  and  3.1  MtCO2/yr  (5.8%  of  annual  emissions)  at  cement 
kilns, lime kilns, and blast furnaces, respectively [18,32]. However, the 
availability of the drop-in biomass feedstocks identified above would not 
be able to cover the needs of that scenario and could only offset up to 2.7 
MtCO2/yr. 

The energy provided by coal and coke was compared to the energy 
potentially available from nut shells and fruit pits for each state and the 
associated  CO2  emissions  reduction. The calculations assume that the 
biomass is harvested and used in the same state. This analysis highlights 
the states that would have to look for other types of locally available 
biomass, which might require additional pre-processing, or other types 
of alternative fuels. Nut shells and fruit stones are unevenly distributed 
with about 830,000 dry tonne (dt) biomass in California, 350,000 dt in 
Georgia, 150,000 dt in Florida, and 90,000 dt in Alabama. This distri-
bution positions California, Georgia, and Florida as regions that could 

utilize drop-in biomass at cement, lime, and steel plants. However, most 
of  the  blast  furnaces,  which  would  also  benefit  from  biomass  fuel 
switching, are located in the Great Lakes region, requiring the biomass 
to  be  transported  for  utilization,  and  posing  additional  difficulty. 
Enough nut shells are available in California and Georgia to replace 20% 
of the coal in the cement plants as recommended by Murray and Price 
[149]. 

3.4.2. Replacement of fossil fuels with hydrogen 

In regions where waste biomass is more difficult to acquire locally, 
hydrogen may be a viable replacement for carbon-intensive fuels in kilns 
and furnaces. Today the production of hydrogen is still tightly related to 
fossil  fuels,  as  95%  of  the  hydrogen  is  produced  via  steam  methane 
reforming (SMR) in the U.S. [181]. Worldwide, 48% of the hydrogen 
comes from SMR, 30% from petroleum reforming, 18% from coal gasi-
fication, and 4% from water electrolysis [182]. Future clean sources of 
hydrogen include SMR with sufficient (90%+) carbon capture, metallic 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098211M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

membranes and water electrolysis [183]. Hydrogen from these sources 
are often referred to using different colors; gray for hydrogen that comes 
from natural gas, such as through SMR (~355 gCO2eq/kWh), blue for 
hydrogen  from  natural  gas  with  sufficient  carbon  capture  (~40 
gCO2eq/kWh), and  green  for  hydrogen  produced  through  water  elec-
trolysis using renewable electricity (~14 gCO2e/kWh) [184]. The use of 
hydrogen fuel switching has gained the attention of the scientific com-
munity but has yet to be proven at the industrial scale for cement, lime, 
and glass. It has, however, gained traction in the iron and steel industry 
for DRI. DRI is usually achieved in a carbon monoxide-rich environment, 
resulting in pure iron and CO2. Instead, a hydrogen environment can be 
used with only iron and water as resulting products [185]. 

There are many initiatives and pilot programs in the steel industry 
aimed at developing hydrogen iron ore reduction and melting technol-
ogy. HYBRIT is a pilot project which began in 2016 in Sweden – headed 
by steelmaker SSAB, iron ore mining company LKAB, and gas provider 
Vattenfall–that  aims  to  demonstrate  nearly  zero-carbon,  fossil-free 
steelmaking using hydrogen. Construction on the pilot plant began in 
2018, and the companies indicate that initial costs of steel production to 
be 20% to 30% higher than fossil fuel-based steel production, but that 
this cost gap could shrink as the technology is improved [186]. 

Assuming an energy density of 121 MJ/kg hydrogen gas, approxi-
mately 80 kg of hydrogen is needed to produce 1 tonne of steel [186]. 
Therefore,  a  5  million  tonne/year  steel  plant  would  require  400,000 
tonnes of hydrogen per year, or approximately 45 tonnes of hydrogen 
per hour. Current global production of hydrogen is around 70 million 
tonnes [187], which, if fully utilized for steelmaking, could produce 175 
million tonnes of steel, or approximately one tenth of current global steel 
production.  As  renewable  energy  production  is  added  to  electricity 
grids,  dedicated  and  excess  renewable  energy  could  be  used  for 
hydrogen production by means of electrolysis. 

Additional  considerations  and  research  are  needed  to  validate  the 
successful use of hydrogen in cement, lime, and glass kilns. Hydrogen 
burns at much higher temperatures and has a higher flame speed than 
the  fossil  fuels  used  in  these  applications  today,  so  material  re-
quirements  and  burner  configurations  for  the  kilns  might  be  altered 
upon adoption of this emissions-reduction pathway [188]. By changing 
the burner configuration to one that promotes a diffusion flame upon the 
adoption of a hydrogen-fired system, additional NOx emissions from the 
higher burn temperatures can be reduced [188]. Coinciding the adop-
tion of this technology with an update and relining could better justify 
the cost of the upgrade to a hydrogen-fired system. 

Hydrogen  flames  burn  differently  than fossil  fuel  powered  flames, 
specifically with less soot production. The reduction of soot promotes 
less particulates in the combustion environment and the exhaust gas, but 
also reduces the radiative heat transfer available within the kiln [189]. 
The  reduced  radiative  heat  transfer  might  be  made  up  by  the  higher 
temperatures at which hydrogen burns. These differences would require 
significant changes to existing processes to accommodate for this change 
in fuel [12]. 

When hydrogen is used to produce cement, lime, glass, or in the blast 
furnace, there will still be CO2 process emissions in the exhaust stream. 
However, the reduction of soot in the exhaust gas is beneficial because it 
will reduce the risk of poisoning any carbon capture module that would 
be implemented. The major constituents of this exhaust gas would be 
CO2 and water vapor. The effects of the newly present moisture would 
need to be evaluated such that they do not interfere with the quality of 
the clinker, lime, glass, or iron products. Before hydrogen can be used 
for  full  decarbonization  of  cement,  lime,  and  glass  kilns  or  blast  fur-
naces,  it  could  be  used  as  an  additive  to  existing  fuel  for  significant 
emissions reductions [13]. The CEMEX plant in Spain recently finished a 
campaign in 2019 in which it was fired with a blend of natural gas and 
hydrogen. CEMEX plans to keep iterating on this process, with the goal 
of reaching 5% hydrogen injection by 2030 [190]. The company plans to 
test a plant that will run on 100% hydrogen starting in 2021 [191]. 

Current sources of hydrogen are hydrogen plants via SMR, petroleum 

refineries, and biomass. Hydrogen is produced through various chemical 
reactions including gasification of fossil fuels or biomass and electrolysis 
of water. In the U.S., 12 refineries out of 55 and 5 hydrogen plants out of 
57 are suppliers of CO2 according to the EPA [18]. This means that 17 
locations  producing  hydrogen  already  have  CO2  capture  systems  and 
can supply blue hydrogen and 75 plants can supply gray hydrogen. Ideal 
production places would be the Great Plains for wind energy and Cali-
fornia, Texas, and the Southeast for solar energy, even if multiple other 
opportunities exist. As described above, the use of waste woody biomass 
for sustainable hydrogen production has U.S. wide opportunities. 

Due  to  its  lower  carbon  content  and  higher  moisture  content  (see 
Table 4), woody biomass is a good candidate for bio-syngas generation. 
About  13  kg  of  biomass  are  needed  for  generating  1  kg  of  hydrogen 
[192]. Oak Ridge National Lab (ORNL) made the inventory of biomass in 
the United States and in 2016 forest residues, forest thinnings, primary 
mill  residues,  and  secondary  mill  residues  totaled  approximately  20 
million dry tonnes of biomass [116]. This could result in the production 
of up to 1.5 Mt H2, that could be used in multiple industries for pro-
ducing heat. Fig. 9b shows cement, lime, glass, and steel facilities, the 
readily  available  waste  biomass  and  hydrogen,  and  the  estimated 
amount of hydrogen that could be produced from the waste biomass in 
each state. 

3.5. Technological changes 

3.5.1. Fluidized bed reactors 

When kilns need to be replaced, they are often replaced by the same 
technology.  However,  with  the  substantial  investment  of  time  and 
money needed to fully replace a retired kiln, upgrading to a new tech-
nology that promotes emissions-reduction should also be considered a 
viable option. One of those technologies is a fluidized bed reactor. As 
shown in Fig. 10, feedstock enters the fluidized bed at the top of the 
reactor while hot gasses are fed in towards the bottom. Additional air is 
fed in at the bottom of the reactor at the fluidization velocity causing the 
particles  and  hot  gasses  to  behave  like  a  liquid  [193].  The  increased 
combustion efficiency and heat transfer in a fluidized bed reactor allows 
for  shorter  processing  time  and  more  effective  use  of  fuel.  The  only 
limitation to the hot gas composition is any that would compromise the 
end product. This allows for the hot gasses to be optimized using waste 
gas or a specific blend to reduce the energy needed for carbon capture. 
Fluidized bed reactors require more electrical input than rotary or shaft 
kilns due to the blowers needed to provide the fluidizing air. Electricity 
sourced  from  low-carbon  resources  can  meet  this  demand  without 
compromising the emissions reductions gained from this technological 
innovation. 

Fluidized bed reactors can be used in the cement, and lime industries 
to heat the feedstock materials. The limestone and clay feedstocks must 
be  preprocessed  to  ensure  they  are  finely  ground  before  entering  the 
fluidized bed kiln. The clinker and lime products that are recovered from 
the fluidized bed kilns are typically smaller (1–3 mm in diameter) than 
those that are formed in a rotary or shaft kiln [194]. Fluidized bed re-
actors  can  also  be  applied  in  iron  reduction.  The  iron  ore  is  usually 
pelletized or finely ground before use in a fluidized bed, but the prep-
aration can vary depending on the technology. 

The Japan Coal Energy Center (JCOAL) has developed the Fluidized- 
bed  Advanced  Cement  Kiln  System  (FAKS)  and  has  demonstrated  its 
ability  to  produce  1000  tonnes  of  clinker  per  day.  The  configuration 
tested  at  this  capacity  from  2005  to  2008  was  fueled  with  coal  and 
resulted in a decrease of 10,000 tCO2/yr (8.5% of annual CO2 emissions 
compared to the baseline case) [197]. JCOAL reports that FAKS is ex-
pected to be adopted on the commercial scale for cement production. 
Improvements can still be made by switching the coal fuel to natural gas 
and  by  partnering  FAKS  with  CCS.  Additionally,  in  the  US,  Specialty 
Minerals uses a fluidized-bed kiln to produce lime in Adams, MA [22]. 
Given  the  similarities  between  the  cement  and  lime  industries,  the 
technological  development  and  learning  from  one  industry  may  be 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098212M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

separation unit (ASU) to be located onsite. Replacing air with oxygen 
results  in  higher  flame  temperatures  and  higher  temperatures  of  the 
exhaust gas, which could reduce overall energy requirements and pro-
cess time. By removing the nitrogen, the thermal efficiency is increased 
to nearly 80%, while for air it is between 40–60% [35–37]. When fossil 
fuels are used in an enhanced oxygen environment, the exhaust gasses 
mainly consist of CO2  and H2O, as opposed to exhaust gas from an air 
environment,  which  also  includes  N2  and  NOx.  The  CO2  and  H2O 
mixture requires less processing and energy to separate the CO2 and can 
be  achieved  through  a  condensing  unit,  which  is  often  much  less 
expensive  than  conventional  carbon  capture  equipment.  For  oxy-
combustion with fossil fuels to result in avoided CO2 emissions, it must 
be coupled with CCS. 

An oxyfuel glass furnace was first demonstrated by the Carr-Lowrey 
Company in 1990 using an 73-tonne-per-day (TPD) furnace. Soon after 
this demonstration, the Gallo Glass Company, the largest glass producer 
in North America, permanently converted one of their 318 TPD furnaces 
to operate in oxyfuel conditions [38]. Since then, oxyfuel furnaces have 
been implemented at industrial scale throughout the glass industry. In 
oxyfuel conditions, glass requires less energy for production and the NOx 
emissions are reduced. The main considerations when glass producers 
switched to oxyfuel technology were the refractory materials and the 
geometry of the hearth kilns [39]. To further the adoption of this tech-
nology, the U.S. DOE hosted two workshops focused on the changes that 
would need to be made to successfully adopt this technology [38]. 

Oxyfuel kilns can also be applied to the cement and lime industries, 
as well as the blast furnace in ironmaking and electric arc furnace in 
steelmaking. The basic oxygen furnace already employs this technology 
and could be connected to a downstream CCS unit to result in avoided 
CO2 emissions. To deploy oxyfuel in the cement industry, there needs to 
be considerations surrounding the precalciner cyclones that utilize the 
exhaust gas to preheat the feedstock. The elevated concentration of CO2 
in  the  exhaust  gas  could  lead  to  less  feedstock  decomposition  in  the 
precaliner cyclones, however this can be remedied through alterations 
in process infrastructure [35]. In 2009, LafargeHolcim, FLSmidth, and 
Air Liquide collaborated to design and test a pilot scale oxyfuel calciner. 
The FLSmidth pilot plant calciner was modified to be oxy-fired and 7 test 
campaigns were run with a feed rate of 2 t/hr through 2011 and 2012 
[40]. These partners concluded that there were no safety concerns with 
the oxyfuel process, there was no impact on the quality of cement that 
was produced, and existing preheaters and calciners can be retrofitted 
for oxycombustion. Due to the similarities between the cement and lime 
processes, the technological innovations in the cement industry are ex-
pected to be transferable to the lime industry. 

Pure oxyfuel technology has not yet been demonstrated in iron and 
steel blast furnaces, but experiments have been conducted to evaluate 
the feasibility and advantages of adding oxygen enrichment. A full ox-
ygen blast furnace (FOBF) would still allow for coke to be used as a fuel 
such that the carbon monoxide environment will still reduce the iron 
ore.  The  main  hurdle  faced  in  deploying  a  FOBF  is  the  inconsistent 
temperature  profile  that  would  result  in  a  “hot  bottom  and  cold  top 
problem” [37]. To mitigate this problem, the blast furnace top gas can be 
recirculated back into the furnace with fuel input. This recirculation also 
increases  energy  efficiency.  In  addition  to  conventional  oxyfuel  tech-
nologies  that  can  be  adopted  for  use  in  the  blast  furnace,  flameless 
oxyfuel technology can provide more stable environments for the use of 
blast  furnace  top  gas  farther  down  the  iron and  steel  production  line 
[37]. 

3.5.3. Electric kilns and furnaces 

The use of electric kilns and furnaces can help reduce process and 
stationary combustion emissions in industrial processes. This is seen in 
the use of an EAF for steel production, where process GHG emissions are 
only due to combustion of fuels for process heating, indirect emissions 
due to electricity usage, and the degradation of the graphite electrodes 
[32].  EAFs  are  most  commonly  used  in  secondary  steel  production, 

Fig.  10. Representative  schematic  diagram  of  a  fluidized  bed  furnace  using 
limestone. In this schematic, the kiln temperature is maintained via combustion 
of a given fuel with air, resulting in a waste gas that exits from the top of the 
kiln. The fluidizing gas is air which is used to ensure the proper residence time 
for the limestone inside the kiln. The calcined limestone will exit through the 
bottom of the reactor as a product, while the limestone particles too fine to use 
are  pulled  from  the  calciner  to  a  fine  materials  cyclone  which  separates  and 
treats these byproducts [195,196]. 

transferable to the other [198]. 

Fluidized bed technology in the steel industry was pioneered in the 
1990s  with  the  invention  of  the  FINMET  process.  This  provided  a 
continuous  production  method  of  hot-briquetted  iron  from  iron  ore 
fines,  which  offered  a  cheaper  input  relative  to  pellets  and  iron  ore 
lumps. There are no FINMET plants currently in production due to the 
limitations  of  the  high  pressures  that  were  required,  but  the  FINEX 
process, developed by Primetals Technologies and Posco, combines the 
original  FINMET  process  with  COREX  melter-gasifier  technology  to 
result in a continuous production process that uses iron ore fines as input 
and  produces  hot  metal  equal  in  quality  to  blast  furnace  technology 
[199,200]. A FINEX plant in Korea with a production capacity of two 
million  tonnes  per  year  commenced  operation  in  2014  [201].  Addi-
tionally, Metso Outotec has developed a fluidized bed technology, Cir-
cored, that is used to produce DRI and hot-briquetted iron for direct use 
in  an  EAF  [202].  This  system  is  powered  by  natural  gas,  but  the 
reduction  is  primarily  hydrogen-based.  Given  the  Circored  process 
coupled with an EAF CO2 emissions can be reduced as much as 90% in 
comparison  to  a  conventional  BF-BOF  route  [202].  In  2010,  Metso 
Outotec also expanded their facility to incorporate a CO2 removal pilot 
plant that can be paired with the iron reduction fluidized bed [203]. 

3.5.2. Oxyfuel kilns and furnaces 

In oxygen-fired (also referred to as oxyfuel or oxycombustion) kilns 
the  main  difference  is  that  the  air  in  existing  kilns  and  furnaces  is 
replaced  by  an  enhanced  oxygen  environment,  often  requiring  an  air 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098213M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

through which new steel products are made from recycled steel scrap, as 
opposed to primary steel production where steel products are made from 
virgin iron ore. EAFs, therefore, rely on the availability of steel scrap, 
and the quality of steel produced in the EAF is largely determined by the 
quality of steel scrap used in production. Steel scrap quality is charac-
terized by the number and amount of impurities contained in the scrap, 
such as copper, sulfur, tin, phosphorus, and zinc. Higher quality scrap 
can be used to produce automotive steel, while lower quality scrap can 
be  used  to  make  rebar  and  other  structural  steel  products.  Given  the 
limited supply of high-quality scrap, EAFs are predominantly used in the 
production of structural steel products, where corrosion resistance and 
other special physical qualities of the product are not required [204]. 

EAFs can also use direct-reduced iron, pig iron, and hot-briquetted 
iron as feedstocks, and these can be used to increase the quality of the 
feedstock by diluting the impurities in the scrap. The DRI-EAF produc-
tion  method  can,  in  theory,  be  used  to  produce  any  quality  of  steel, 
including  exposed  automotive  sheet,  as  the  DRI  can  be  tailored  to 
contain  any  specified  alloying  elements  and  purity  of  iron  [204,205] 
(see  Fig.  11).  Globally,  DRI  production  exceeded  100  million  tons  in 
2019  [206] so,  the  DRI-EAF production  route  is  a  proven technology 
that can be scaled up to produce high-quality steel products in the near 
future. 

In steel EAFs, the electric arc can be formed between the electrode 
and the steel scrap or DRI since iron and most steels are electrical con-
ductors.  However,  for  a  material  such  as  limestone,  an  indirect  arc 
furnace would need to be considered. An indirect arc furnace conducts 
an electric arc between electrodes, and the process material is heated 
through the radiant heat transfer from the arc [207]. This allows the 
indirect  electric  arc  configuration  to  be  used  in  the  production  of 
non-conducting materials. 

The  EAF  is  only  one  method  of  electrical  heating.  Other  methods 
include direct and indirect resistance heating. Resistance heating can be 
used in the cement, lime, and glass industries. Resistance heating in a 
rotary kiln is achieved by heating the rotating steel drum on the outside 
with  electric  heaters,  while  the  material  is  fed  through  the  inside,  as 
shown in Fig. 12. The inside of the drum is lined with refractory material 

to  assist in  keeping  the cylindrical shape  under the  high temperature 
conditions. IBUtec and FEECO are both prominent suppliers of indirectly 
heated rotary kilns, which tend to have lower material throughput than 
natural gas or coal fired rotary kilns [208,209]. As quoted by FEECO, 
indirect-fired rotary kilns have a reduced throughput of 91 kg/hr (200 
lb/hr) to 18 tonnes/hr (20 tons/hr) [208], while IBUtec quotes 0.1 kg/hr 
(0.2 lb/hr) to 1000 kg/hr (2,200 lb/hr) [209]. The material throughput 
reduction is due to the inefficiencies of conductive heat transfer from the 
electric heaters to the steel drum, to the refractory, to the material, or to 
the kiln atmosphere. Additionally, the use of electric heaters also elim-
inates the radiative heat transfer that would be present given a flame. 
Resistance  heating  is  also  used  in  the  glass  industry  and  is  often 
referred to as electric boosting. The resistance heaters are submerged 
into the glass feedstock, and as they are heated, the glass melts around 
them and then flows out of the hearth furnace where it is cooled. In some 
existing  configurations,  the  resistance  heaters  are  positioned  at  the 
bottom of the  hearth kiln extending  upwards into  the glass feedstock 
[210].  This  allows  for  the  furnace  to  be  co-fired  with  natural  gas, 
resulting in electric boosting or for all electric melting. Major consid-
erations  when  switching  to  an  all-electric  melting  system  in  a  glass 
furnace are the positioning and the resulting convection currents in the 
molten  glass  [210,211].  The  Fives  Group  and  Electroglass  have  both 
developed  all  electric  glass  kilns  for  most  types  of  glass  production. 
These kilns have the ability to produce from 20 kg/day (44 lb/day) to 
over 250 tonnes/day (2755 tons/day), ranging from an energy intensity 
of 720 - 850 kWh/tonne of glass produced [212]. These configurations 
have resulted in increased energy efficiency and reduced CO2 emissions. 
Although the use of electric kilns and furnaces does not reduce the 
process CO2 emissions produced by calcination, these processes could be 
paired with CCS to become carbon neutral. It must also be noted that to 
fully decarbonize the energy needed for these industrial processes via 
electricity, the electric grid or source of electricity must be decarbon-
ized.  Additionally,  co-locating  electric  kilns  with  low-  or  no-carbon 
electricity  can  reduce  or  eliminate  the  CO2  emissions  from  the  elec-
tricity  generation  needed  for  cement  and  lime  calcination  or  glass 
melting. Fig. 13 shows the areas in the U.S. where cement, lime, glass, 

Fig. 11. Level of residual impurities allowed for various steel applications. Sourced from IIMA, Use of Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) in the Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) for 
Steelmaking [204]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098214M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 12. Indirect resistance heating applied to a rotary kiln in which the resistance heaters are located around the rotating shell of the kiln. Image courtesy of IBUtech 
Advanced Materials, Weimar, Germany [209]. 

Fig. 13. U.S. map showing cement, lime, glass, and iron and steel facilities with retiring kilns in the next decades overlayed with the locations of no- or low-carbon 
energy and established air separation units (ASUs). The co-location of the retiring facilities and these resources can be evaluated to determine which of the innovative 
pathways may be most accessible and least costly to adopt upon kiln or furnace retirement [18,33–38,106,107,213–216]. The list of ASU locations might not be 
complete due to proprietary data. 

and blast furnaces can be co-located with low- and no-carbon electricity 
sources so these facilities can take advantage of the natural resources 
that are available. 

3.6. Other CO2  reducing innovations 

In  addition  to  the  emissions-reducing  technologies  covered 

previously, there are other emerging innovations with the same aim. The 
Low Emissions Intensity Lime and Cement (LEILAC) project, located at 
the HeidelbergCement plant at Lixhe in Belgium, uses technology that 
decouples the exhaust gas of calcination from the exhaust gas of fuel 
combustion at cement plants in order to increase the concentration of 
CO2  in the process exhaust and lower the cost of capture [103]. This 
pathway  was  developed  by  Calix  Global  and  has  proven  productive 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098215M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

when  calcining  magnesite  at  their  commercial-scale  plant  in  Bacchus 
Marsh, Australia [217]. Their design allows their kilns to be heated in 
various ways, making it easier to couple to the most cost or emissions 
efficient energy source. 

The Hoffmann GreenCement Technologies startup has developed a 
way of making cement that does not require any mining of raw materials 
or heat input. The process is based on the use of industrial by-products 
such as blast furnace slag, clay slurry and gypsum that is reacted with 
chemical activators. This reduces the CO2 emissions by 5 to 188 kgCO2 
per  tonne  of  cement  [218].  The  availability  of  industrial  by-products 
might  however  limit  the  production  of  low-carbon  cement  with  this 
process,  as  the  steel  industry  is  also  looking  for  reducing  its  carbon 
footprint. This might result in the retirement of BF, and the decrease of 
blast furnace slag supply. 

Origen Power is a company that is developing a fuel cell powered 
calciner. To achieve this, methane is fed to a fuel cell, which then pro-
duces electricity that is used to calcine limestone, producing lime and a 
pure stream of CO2, which can be compressed for storage [219,220]. 

Another  option  that  has  been  introduced  to  electrify  cement  pro-
duction is electrochemical calcination. Electrochemical calcination in-
volves splitting water and limestone (CaCO3) into their component parts 
(cid:0)
by  applying  renewable  electricity.  The  hydroxide  (OH
)  and  CaO 
combine to form Ca(OH)2 (slaked lime) in solid form, while releasing H2, 
O2, and CO2 in pure form. The slaked lime produced from this reaction 
can be used in the production of Portland cement, as well as other ap-
plications [221]. 

◦

Electrolysis  and  electrowinning  can  be  used  to  reduce  iron  ore  to 
make steel. A U.S. research firm, Boston Metal, is leading the research 
and development of molten oxide electrolysis steelmaking technology. 
The electrolytic process uses electrodes and a liquid oxide electrolyte at 
a temperature of 2000 
C to separate iron from oxygen and other ele-
ments found in iron ore [222]. Additionally, the Siderwin steel project is 
a consortium of 12 companies whose aim is to build a pilot plant by 2022 
demonstrating large-scale steel production by an electrowinning process 
[223]. The electrowinning process differs from the electrolytic process 
in the type of electrode and solution used. By eliminating the need for a 
blast furnace and coke, the Siderwin process is expected to reduce the 
energy  use  and  carbon  intensity  of  integrated  steelmaking  by  30% 
[224]. 

3.7. Combination of innovation pathways 

CCS can be combined with many of the proposed innovative path-
ways  towards  decarbonization  to  result  in  carbon-neutral  or  carbon- 
negative operations. 

3.7.1. Biomass and CCS 

One of the main paths to reducing anthropogenic CO2 emissions is to 
reduce the use of fossil fuels. As discussed above, biomass could replace 
coal in the cement and steel industry. Burning biomass still emits CO2, 
but its source is different. While the source of CO2 emitted by fossil fuels 
is  the  subsurface,  biomass  is  sourcing  its  CO2  from  the  atmosphere. 
Using sustainable biomass in cement kilns and blast furnaces with CCS is 
a  means  of  capturing  CO2  from  the  atmosphere  and  could  thus  be 
considered  as  a  type  of  bioenergy  with  carbon  capture  and  storage 
(BECCS), which is traditionally propositioned to be used for the elec-
tricity  production.  Due  to  the  emission  of  CO2  as  a  byproduct  of  the 
cement and steel manufacturing, using sustainable biomass instead of 
fossil  fuels  whenever  possible  is  the  only  path  that  could  result  in  a 
carbon neutral process or in negative emissions. To verify the neutrality 
or negativity of a process that employs both biomass fuel switching and 
CCS, a lifecycle analysis must be conducted such that the less-carbon 
intensive  process  can  be  adequately  compared  to  the  baseline  case 
using  coal.  Tanzer  et  al.  (2020)  has  modeled  multiple  pathways  to 
achieve emissions reductions in the steelmaking industry through the 
use  of  both  and  has  concluded  that  with  high  rates  of  biomass  fuel 

switching and use of CCS, CO2  emissions from steel production can be 
nearly offset [115]. 

3.7.2. Oxyfuel and CCS 

One of the many benefits of an oxyfuel kiln is that the exhaust gasses 
consist of only H2O and CO2. To avoid the CO2  emissions entering the 
atmosphere, this technology can be paired with CCS. This can be ach-
ieved by simply condensing the H2O out of the exhaust stream, leaving 
high-purity CO2. The CO2 can then be pressurized for transportation and 
storage. The advantage of this combination of innovative pathways is 
that  it  leads  to  a  separation  process  that  is  significantly  less  energy 
intensive  and  less  expensive  than  CCS  given  an  air  combustion  envi-
ronment. Oxyfuel combustion can also be paired with a fluidized bed 
kiln configuration by replacing the fluidizing air with pure oxygen. This 
combination of innovative pathways would lead to the same separation 
process  using  a  condenser,  but  also  enhance  the  heat  transfer  to  the 
feedstock  material.  By  capturing  the  CO2  from  the  oxyfuel  kiln,  the 
resulting operation can be close to carbon neutral. 

3.7.3. Electricity and CCS 

The use of electricity in industrial furnaces ultimately reduces the 
CO2 emissions that would come from the combustion of fossil fuels, but 
it  does  not  mitigate  the  process  emissions  associated  with the  heated 
feedstock.  By  combining  electric  furnaces  with  CCS,  the  CO2  process 
emissions can be separated from the other exhaust gasses and pressur-
ized for transportation and storage. Given a renewable energy source, 
the capturing of process emissions from an electric furnace results in a 
carbon-neutral operation. 

4. Case studies 

4.1. California and biomass fuel switching 

4.1.1. Context 

In  California,  GHG  emissions  totaled  to  418.2  MtCO2eq  in  2018, 
21.1% from the industrial sector [226]. In this state, 8 cement, 2 lime, 
and 6 glass facilities respectively result in 8.1 MtCO2eq, 0.16 MtCO2eq, 
and  0.5  MtCO2eq  of  emissions  [18].  The  state  also  presents  various 
options for CO2 sequestration–deep saline aquifers in the Central Valley, 
basalts in the North East, and ultramafic rocks in the North West – and 
for  fuel  switching  –  large  resources  of  biomass  waste  in  the  Central 
Valley,  and  hydrogen  (SMRs)  mostly  close  to  Los  Angeles  and  San 
Francisco (Fig. 14). 

4.1.2. Carbon capture 

Given  this  beneficial  geology  in  California,  carbon  capture  and 
storage  should  be  considered  for  cement  facilities  who  are  not 
approaching retirement or  kiln technology  upgrading within  the next 
10–20  years.  If  each  of  the  facilities  that  are  projected  to  retire  after 
2030 were to adopt carbon capture and storage with a capture rate of 
90% from cement kilns, 6.3 MtCO2eq (77% of annual in-state cement 
emissions, 7.1% of annual in-state industrial emissions) anthropogenic 
emissions could be kept out of the atmosphere and stored permanently 
in geologic reservoirs, negating CO2  emissions incurred from compres-
sion, transportation, and injection in the subsurface [65]. 

4.1.3. Fuel .switching 

Another  option  for  all  cement  and  lime  facilities  is  fuel  switching 
with biomass wastes. In the Central Valley of California, there are an 
estimated 731,000 tonnes of nut shells and 99,000 tonnes of fruit pits 
[124,125,130–135,137–147,151–179].  Roughly  40%  of  this  resource 
could  be  used  to  replace  20%  [48]  of  the  5.2  million  tonnes  of  coal 
currently  used  in  these  industrial  processes.  This  replacement  could 
reduce anthropogenic emissions by 0.5 MtCO2eq (6.2% of state emis-
sions  from  cement  and  lime,  0.6%  of  annual  in-state  industrial  emis-
sions) compared to the current use of coal. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098216M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 14. Maps for California highlighting alternative pathways to coal use at cement and lime facilities by fuel switching using biomass or hydrogen or by tech-
nological change to oxyfired kilns using commercial-scale air separation units (ASUs) (left map) and the electrification of glass facilities using renewable sources of 
electricity (right map). These pathways are overlaid with CO2  storage opportunities, and with the railroad networks to illustrate transportation potential [18,106, 
108–111,155,213–216,225]. The list of ASU locations is not complete due to proprietary data. 

4.1.4. Technology upgrade 

For  facilities  that  have  retiring  kilns  or  are  in  the  market  for 
upgrading their technology, hydrogen-fired, oxyfuel, and electric kilns 
should be considered. In central and southern west California, there are 
opportunities  to  leverage  co-location  near  blue  hydrogen  (hydrogen 
production with CCS) sources for kiln or furnace fuel production in the 
Bay  Area and  close  to  Los Angeles.  Additionally,  in similar  locations, 
large air separation units are stationed and could provide opportunities 
for  partnerships  given  an  oxygen-demanding  oxyfuel  kiln  or  furnace. 
Electric kilns should be considered because western California has a vast 
potential for solar electricity production and the Central Valley for hy-
dropower which could be leveraged to provide electricity to the nearby 
industrial facilities. Specifically, there are 5 glass facilities that lie within 
the Central Valley and would have access to hydropower for their op-
erations. Lastly, in the southernmost part of California, there is a hub of 
geothermal  energy  sources  that  can  be  used  to  provide  power  to  the 
nearby lime facility. 

4.1.5. Storage and transportation 

Many of the above cited industrial facilities are located within 150 
km of a sedimentary storage reservoir in the Central Valley, the most 
promising locations being the depleted oil and gas fields in the southern 
Sacramento  and  the  southern  San  Joaquin  basins  [227].  While  local 
in-depth field studies should be conducted to assess the pertinence of 
specific CO2  storage sites, potential sites and CO2  pipeline routes have 
been identified [228,229]. In addition to technical considerations, ba-
sins located close to population centers, such as the Los Angeles basin, 
are unlikely to be used for CO2 storage due to safety concerns. Facilities 
located far from CO2  injection sites in the Central Valley sedimentary 
reservoirs might have alternative storage opportunities in basalts and 
ultramafic rocks, as soon as commercial demonstration  projects show 
the  viability  of  these  methods.  The  distance  and  the  means  of  trans-
portation between the CO2 capture site and the CO2 sequestration site is 
an important parameter to consider as longer transportation distances 
increase  the  overall  costs  and  decrease  the  CO2  avoidance  potential. 
Facilities with capture volumes below 500 ktCO2/yr and located close to 
CO2 injection sites might favor truck transportation, while a joint access 

pipeline connecting farther facilities with large capture volumes (> 500 
ktCO2/yr)  to  the  storage  location  could  be  a  more  economically 
attractive option [65]. Also, most of the above cited industrial facilities 
are  located  close  to  the  rail  network  that  passes  through  the  Central 
Valley. Rail could thus be considered for biomass transportation from 
processing facilities and for CO2 transportation to storage sites. 

4.2. Pennsylvania and the decarbonization of heavy industry 

4.2.1. Context 

In  Pennsylvania,  the  total  gross  emissions  amounted  to  233.2 
MtCO2eq in 2017, 31% being from industrial sources [231]. The heavy 
industry in the state of Pennsylvania includes 7 cement, 3 lime, 7 glass, 
15 steel facilities, resulting in 2.8 MtCO2eq, 1.2 MtCO2eq, 0.6 MtCO2eq, 
and 4.9 MtCO2eq emissions respectively [18]. These industrial facilities 
are located near or on top of the sedimentary reservoir that resides under 
the majority of the west and northern parts of the state (Fig. 15). With 
such close access to potential CO2 storage sites, the facilities that do not 
expect to retire their kiln or furnaces within the next 10–20 years should 
consider  adopting  CCS,  as  transportation  costs  for  the  captured  CO2 
could be minimal. If each of the facilities that are projected to retire after 
2030  would  implement  point  source  capture,  this  could  result  in  the 
capture  of  2.2  MtCO2/yr,  0.6  MtCO2/yr,  and  0.6  MtCO2/yr  from  the 
cement, lime, and steel industries, respectively, totaling to 3.4 MtCO2/yr 
(36% of emissions from the heavy industry, and 4.2% of the total in-state 
industrial emissions). 

Local opportunities for fuel switching are limited as large sources of 
nut shells or fruit stones and gray or blue hydrogen are located out of the 
state, driving up the transportation costs. Currently, 5 cement facilities 
out of 7 are combusting coal in their kiln [18], which may be motivated 
by the large production of coal in the state. For facilities that are ex-
pected to retire or upgrade their technology, oxyfuel and electric kiln 
technology  should be considered. Specifically,  the four cement plants 
located in the eastern part of Pennsylvania that are all centered near an 
industrial air separation unit (ASU). A partnership could be forged be-
tween these facilities and the industrial ASU to readily provide oxygen 
for  oxyfuel  cement  kilns.  Another  cement  plant  with  a  similar 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098217M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 15. Map of Pennsylvania highlighting cement, lime, glass, and steelmaking operations with estimated retiring year. These are overlaid with CO2  storage op-
portunities, regions suitable for low-carbon energy, established oxygen production from commercial-scale air separation units (ASUs) and areas that produce ma-
terials suitable for clinker replacement [18,106–111,213–216,225,230]. The list of ASU locations is only indicative, as this data is proprietary. 

opportunity can be seen slightly more west than the hub of four, but it is 
not expected to retire its kiln until after 2050. 

Electric kiln technology is also an option in Pennsylvania because of 
the  low-carbon electricity that is  available. Throughout the state, but 
specifically near larger pockets of population density (outside of Phila-
delphia  and  Pittsburgh),  nuclear  power  plants  provide  low-carbon 
electricity, and opportunities exist for the development of wind energy 
(Fig. 15). The steel industry in Pennsylvania is already largely electrified 
with  14  EAF  for  1  BF/BOF  [18,107].  The  BF/BOF  located  near  Pitts-
burgh could also transition to an EAF. However, EAFs tend to produce 
lower quality steel than the BF/BOF process. The total electrification of 
the steel sector should be considered carefully to avoid the disruption of 
supply for industries requiring high grade steel. It may be necessary to 
keep  a  minimum  number  of  BF/BOFs  in  operation  to  ensure  higher 
quality steel production for industries in which this is crucial. 

The  coal  power  plants  and  the  steel  industry  are  generating  large 
amounts of fly ash and steel slag, which can replace part of the clinker in 
the  concrete  mix. The  use of  these  materials  can reduce  the  need for 
clinker for the construction industry and the GHG emissions associated 
with its production. Large amounts of fly ash and steel slag are produced, 
about 900 ktonne/yr and 600 ktonne/yr, respectively [230]. In addition, 
the byproducts stockpiled during the past years of operation could also 
be used for clinker replacement. Most of the locations with fly ash and 
steel slag are connected to the rail network, which can help transport 
these materials across the state. 

5. Conclusions 

Decarbonization  of  the  cement,  lime,  glass,  and  iron  and  steel  in-
dustries  is met with unique  challenges due to the  CO2  emissions  that 
originate from the chemical reactions of feedstocks and the high tem-
peratures required for processing. Existing kiln and furnace technologies 
have  been  optimized  for  their  specific  processes.  So,  changes  to  the 
geometry, design, or fuel handling can come with tradeoffs. The timeline 
for  decarbonization  in  these  industrial  sectors  may  be  limited  by  the 
lifetime of existing kiln or furnace technology, but it could be acceler-
ated with the adoption of energy and materials savings practices, CCS, 
fuel switching with biomass, or feedstock switching. A summary of the 
primary  decarbonization  options  investigated  here,  and  the  current 
stage of development for each kiln, can be seen in Table 5. Some of these 
options  will  be  further  limited  by  the  regional  resources,  such  as 
geological storage options for CCS or the availability of waste biomass. 
Through the evaluation of regional resources, the pathways of innova-
tion that are most applicable can be prioritized. 

Facilities with kilns or furnaces approaching their end of life are in a 
position to replace existing technology with low-carbon infrastructure. 
A regional resource analysis can be used to determine the most appro-
priate  pathways  of  innovation.  For  example,  established  technologies 
such as fluidized bed or electric kiln technology coupled with CCS could 
be used at facilities with lower material throughput and access to low- 
carbon electricity. On the other hand, for a facility located near an ox-
ygen  producer,  an  oxyfuel  kiln  with  CCS  could  be  a  viable  option. 
Further and more in-depth analyses can be conducted to better highlight 

Table 5 
Summary of development stages and applicability of decarbonization solutions for each industrial kiln.   

CCS 

Biomass Fuel Switching 

H2 Fuel Switching 

Fluidized Bed Kiln 

Oxyfuel Kiln 

Electric Kiln 

Cement Kiln 
Lime Rotary Kiln 
Lime Shaft Kiln 
Glass Furnace 
BF 
BOF 
EAF 

Demonstration 
Demonstration 
Demonstration 
Research 
Pre-Research 
N/A 
N/A 

Commercial 
Demonstration 
Demonstration 
N/A 
Research 
N/A 
N/A 

Research 
Research 
Research 
Research 
Commercial* 
Commercial* 
N/A 

Demonstration 
Commercial 
Commercial 
N/A 
Commercial** 
Commercial** 
N/A 

Demonstration 
Research 
Research 
Commercial 
Research 
Commercial 
N/A 

Commercial 
Research 
Research 
Research 
Demonstration*** 
N/A 
Commercial  

* BF/BOF replaced with DRI process. 
** BF/BOF replaced with FINMET or FINEX processes. 
*** Molten Oxide Electrolysis pathway demonstrated by Boston Metal. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098218M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

innovation  pathways  and  potential  partnerships  that  would  be 
preferential. 

Further development is needed to validate the emerging kiln tech-
nologies  at  a  commercial  scale,  specifically  hydrogen  switching  for 
natural gas in rotary and shaft kilns and electric kiln technology at high 
material throughput. Mapping studies should be conducted to determine 
the regional resources co-located with facilities to assist in developing 
technological roadmaps for the phase-out of carbon-intensive technol-
ogy. Additionally, economic incentives for decarbonization in these in-
dustrial  sectors  should  be considered  to  assist  in  offsetting  additional 
costs of upgrading to low-carbon kiln technologies. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

No Conflicts of Interest have arisen in the preparation or publication 

of this article. 

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100982. 

References 

[1] Foote E. Circumstances affecting the Heat of the Sun’s Rays. Am J Sci Arts 1856 

Nov;XXII(2):382–3. 

[2] United nations environment programme. Nairobi: Emissions Gap Report; 2020. 

p. 2020. 

[3] US EPA O. Global greenhouse gas emissions data [Internet]. US EPA. 2016 [cited 
2021 Jan 6]. Available from: https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/global-gree 
nhouse-gas-emissions-data. 

[4] IPCC Working Group III. Climate change 2014: mitigation of climate change. New 

York: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; 2014. 

[5] [Internet] IPCC. Global warming of 1.5 

C. In: Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, 

◦
P¨ortner H-O, Roberts D, Skea J, Shukla PR, et al., editors. An IPCC special report 
◦
C above pre-industrial levels and related 
on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 
global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the 
global response to the threat of climate change. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Meteorological Organization; 2018. p. 562 [Internet]editorsAvailable from, https: 
//www.ipcc.ch/sr15/. 

[6] U.S. EPA. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks 1990-2018. 

2020. 

[7] Bureau of International Recycling. World steel recycling in figures 2015-2019. 

Bureau of international recycling. 2020. Report No.: 11. 

[8] USGS. Mineral commodity summaries 2020 [Internet]. U.S Department of the 

Interior; 2020. p. 1. Available from, https://www.usgs.gov/centers/nmic/mi 
neral-commodity-summaries. 

[9] US EPA O. Glass: Material-specific data [Internet]. US EPA. 2017 [cited 2021 Jan 
6]. Available from: https://www.epa.gov/facts-and-figures-about-materials 
-waste-and-recycling/glass-material-specific-data. 

[10] World Steel Association. World steel figures. brussels. Belgium: World Steel; 

2020. Association; 2020 Apr. 

[11] Iron and steel technology roadmap – Analysis [internet]. IEA; 2021 Nov 21 

[cited]. Available from: https://www.iea.org/reports/iron-and-steel-technolog 
y-roadmap. 

[12] Energy Transitions Commission (ETC). Mission possible: reaching net-zero carbon 
emissions from harder-to-abate sectors by mid-century. Sectoral Focus: CEMENT 
[Internet]. Energy Transitions Commission (ETC); 2019 [cited 2020 Oct 28] p. 
30. Available from: https://www.energy-transitions.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
2020/08/ETC-sectoral-focus-Cement_final.pdf. 

[13] Energy Transitions Commission (ETC). Mission Possible: reaching net-zero carbon 

emissions from harder-to-abate sectors by mid-century. Sectoral Focus: STEEL 
[Internet]. Energy Transitions Commission (ETC); 2019 [cited 2020 Nov 25] p. 
25. Available from: https://www.energy-transitions.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
2020/08/ETC-sectoral-focus-Steel_final.pdf. 

[14] International Energy Agency. Energy technology perspectives 2017. 2017 p. 441. 
[15] World Steel Association. World steel in figures 2019 [Internet]. World Steel 

Association; 2019. p. 30 [cited 2021 Jan 8]Available from: https://www. 
worldsteel.org/en/dam/jcr:96d7a585-e6b2-4d63-b943-4cd9ab621a91/World% 
2520Steel%2520in%2520Figures%25202019.pdf. 

[16] Andrew R. Global CO2 emissions from cement production. Earth Syst Sci Data 

2019;11:1675–710. 

[17] Bains P, Psarras P, Wilcox J. CO2 capture from the industry sector. Prog Energy 

Combust Sci 2017;63:146–72. 

[18] Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Facility level information on 

greenhouse gases tool (FLIGHT)–2018 greenhouse gas emissions from large 
facilities [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2020 Sep 24]. Available from: https://ghgdata. 
epa.gov/ghgp/main.do#. 

[19] Schumacher G, Juniper L. Coal utilisation in the cement and concrete industries. 

editor. In: Osborne D, editor. The coal handbook: towards cleaner production 
[Internet]. Woodhead Publishing; 2013. p. 387–426 [cited 2021 Jan 17] 
(Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy; vol. 2). Available from: http://www.sci 
encedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781782421160500153. 

[20] Cement Kilns: design features of rotary kilns [Internet]. [cited 2021 Jan 6]. 

Available from: https://www.cementkilns.co.uk/kiln_design.html. 

[21] Modernising the annular shaft kiln with wood-fired side burners–cement lime 

gypsum [Internet]. [cited 2021 Apr 14]. Available from: https://www.zkg.de/en 
/artikel/zkg_Modernising_the_annular_shaft_kiln_with_wood-fired_side_burners_3 
630078.html. 

[22] Usgs. Mineral industry surveys directory of lime plants and hydrating plants in 

the United States in 2016. 2017. 

[23] Technical support document for the glass manufacturing sector: proposed rule for 

mandatory reporting of greenhouse gases. office of air and radiation, US EPA; 
2009 p. 1. 

[24] Blast Furnace Anatomy #1–To the heart of steelworks operation [Internet]. [cited 

2021 Jan 6]. Available from: https://newsroom.posco.com/en/blast-furnace-a 
natomy-1/. 

[25] The chemistry of steelmaking–the basic oxygen furnace structure [Internet]. 

[cited 2021 Jan 6]. Available from: http://resources.schoolscience.co.uk/Corus/ 
14-16/steel/msch4pg1.html. 

[26] Lu L. Iron ore: mineralogy, processing and environmental sustainability 

[Internet]. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Elsevier Science & Technology; 2015 
[cited 2020 Sep 29]. Available fromhttp://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ 
upenn-ebooks/detail.action?docID=2102154. 

[27] Taonga NZM for C and HTM. Electric arc furnace [Internet]. Ministry for culture 
and heritage Te Manatu Taonga; [cited 2021 Jan 6]. Available from: https://tear 
a.govt.nz/en/diagram/5885/electric-arc-furnace. 

[28] Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) A global refractory leader calderys [Internet]. [cited 

2021 Jan 6]. Available from: https://www.calderys.com/refractory-by-indust 
ry/steelmaking/electric-arc-furnace-eaf. 

[29] Electric Arc Furnace [Internet]. Allied mineral products. [cited 2021 Jan 6]. 

Available from: https://alliedmineral.com/solutions/integrated-steel/electric-arc 
-furnace/. 

[30] Industrial solutions international [Internet]. [cited 2021 Jan 6]. Available from: 

http://www.indsolint.com/index.php?id=electricarcfurnaces. 

[31] Grubert E. Fossil electricity retirement deadlines for a just retirement. Science 

2020;370(6521):1171–3. Dec 4. 

[32] U.S. EPA. Available and emerging technologies for reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions from the iron and steel industry. U.S. EPA; 2012. Sep. 
[33] Theulen J. Cement kilns: a ready made waste to energy solution? Waste 

Management World; 2015 [Internet][cited 2020 Sep 29]. Available from, https:// 
waste-management-world.com/a/cement-kilns-a-ready-made-waste-to-energy- 
solution. 

[34] Villalba Weinberg A, Varona C, Chaucherie X, Goeuriot D, Poirier J. Extending 

refractory lifetime in rotary kilns for hazardous waste incineration. Ceram Int 
2016 Nov 15;42(15):17626–34. 

[35] European Cement Research Academy. ECRA CCS project: report on phase IV.A 

[Internet]. 2016 p. 44–44. Report No.: TR-ECRA-119/2012. Available from: 
https://ecra-online.org/fileadmin/redaktion/files/pdf/ECRA_Technical_Report_ 
CCS_Phase_IV_A.pdf%0Ahttp://www.ecra-online.org/fileadmin/redaktion/files/ 
pdf/ECRA_Technical_Report_CCS_Phase_III.pdf. 

[36] Barker DJ, Turner SA, Napier-Moore PA, Clark M, Davison JE. CO2 capture in the 

cement industry. Energy Procedia 2009;1(1):87–94. 

[37] von Scheele J. Oxyfuel combustion in the steel industry: energy efficiency and 

decrease of CO2 emissions. In: Palm J, editor. Energy Efficiency [Internet]. Sciyo; 
2010 [cited 2020 Oct 14]. Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/e 
nergy-efficiency/oxyfuel-combustion-in-the-steel-industry-energy-efficiency-and- 
decrease-of-co2-emissions. 

[38] Levine E., Jamison K. Oxy-Fuel firing for the glass industry: an update on the 

impact of this successful government-industry cooperative effort. In 2001. p. 9.. 

[39] Kobayashi H, Wu KT, Tuson GB, Dumoulin F, Kiewall HP. Tall crown furnace 

technology for oxy-fuel firing. Combustion efficiency. 2005. p. 78–80 [Internet] 
Available from: http://gmic.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/praxairhorn-g- 
Apr2005-QK.pdf. 

[40] Gimenez M. CCUS Projects at LafargeHolcim Focus on Oxycombustion [Internet]. 
ECRA/CEMCAP Workshop; 2015 Sep 16 [cited 2020 Oct 9]; Dusseldorf. Available 
from: https://www.sintef.no/globalassets/sintef-energi/cemcap/gimenez_ccus_ 
projects-at-lafargeholcimco2capture.pdf/. 

[41] Glass Global Consulting. Glass melting furnaces [Internet]. glass global 

consulting; [cited 2020 Sep 30]. Available from: https://www.glassglobal.com/ 
consulting/reports/technology/. 

[42] Glasstech Refractory. What is the lifetime of refractory materials? [Internet]. 

2016 [cited 2020 Oct 1]. Available from: http://www.glasstechrefractory.com/ 
faq/what-is-the-lifetime-of-refractory-materials. 

[43] Grayson K. Are electric furnaces the future of glass manufacturing? Mo-Sci 

Corporation; 2019 [Internet][cited 2020 Sep 30]. Available from, https://mo-sci. 
com/electric-furnaces-future-glass-manufacturing/. 

[44] Beerling DJ, Leake JR, Long SP, Scholes JD, Ton J, Nelson PN, et al. Farming with 
crops and rocks to address global climate, food and soil security. Nat Plants 2018 
Mar;4:138–47. 

[45] Why Smartcrushers - martCrusher bv - Concrete recycling–c2c [Internet]. [cited 

2021 Apr 15]. Available from: https://www.slimbreker.nl/why-smartcrushers. 
html. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098219M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[46] How Concrete is Made [Internet]. 2021 Feb 15. Available from: https://www. 

[76] Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Facility level information on 

cement.org/cement-concrete/how-concrete-is-made. 

[47] Woodall CM, McQueen N, Pilorg´e H, Wilcox J. Utilization of mineral carbonation 
products: current state and potential. Greenh Gases Sci Technol 2019;9(6): 
1096–113. 

[48] Juenger MCG, Snellings R, Bernal SA. Supplementary cementitious materials: 
new sources, characterization, and performance insights. Cem Concr Res 2019 
Aug 1;122:257–73. 

[49] Danso H., Boadi J.K. Replacement of sand with bauxite mining waste in concrete 

production. 2019;10.. 

greenhouse gases Tool (FLIGHT)–2017 greenhouse gas emissions from large 
facilities [Internet]. 2017 [cited 2019 Aug 2]. Available from: https://ghgdata. 
epa.gov/ghgp/main.do#. 

[77] Kelemen P, Benson SM, Pilorg´e H, Psarras P, Wilcox J. An overview of the status 
and challenges of CO2 storage in minerals and geological formations. Front Clim 
2019;1:9. 

[78] Pilorg´e H, Kolosz B, Wu GC, Freeman J. Global Mapping of CDR opportunities. 
Carbon Dioxide Removal Primer. 2021 [Internet][cited 2021 Nov 21]. Available 
from: https://cdrprimer.org/read/chapter-3. 

[50] Shetty K.K., Nayak G., Vijayan V. Effect of red mud and iron ore tailings on the 

[79] Consoli CP, Wildgust N. Current status of global storage resources. Energy 

strength of self- compacting concrete. 2014;9.. 

Procedia 2017;114:4623–8. 

[51] Diaz-Loya I, Juenger M, Seraj S, Minkara R. Extending supplementary 

[80] Kearns J, Teletzke G, Palmer J, Thomann H, Kheshgi H, Chen Y-HH, et al. 

cementitious material resources: reclaimed and remediated fly ash and natural 
pozzolans. Cem Concr Compos 2019 Aug 1;101:44–51. 

Developing a consistent database for regional geologic CO2 storage capacity 
worldwide. Energy Procedia 2017;114:4697–709. 

[52] Ghafari E, Feys D, Khayat K. Feasibility of using natural SCMs in concrete for 
infrastructure applications. Constr Build Mater 2016 Nov 30;127:724–32. 
[53] The road to greener concrete is paved with clay. bloomberg.com [Internet]. 2020 
Oct 1 [cited 2020 Nov 17]; Available from: https://www.bloomberg.com/news 
/features/2020-10-01/lc3-clay-cuts-cement-industry-co2-emissions. 

[54] LC3 – Limestone Calcined Clay Cement [Internet]. LC#. 2021 [cited 2021 Apr 

19]. Available from: https://lc3.ch/. 

[55] Scrivener K, Martirena F, Bishnoi S, Maity S. Calcined clay limestone cements 

(LC3). Cem Concr Res 2018;114:49–56. 

[56] Vizcaíno-Andr´es LM, S´anchez-Berriel S, Damas-Carrera S, P´erez-Hern´andez A, 

Scrivener KL, Martirena-Hern´andez JF. Industrial trial to produce a low clinker, 
low carbon cement. Mater Constr 2015;65(317):e045. 

[57] Bishnoi S, Maity S, Kumar M, Saxena SK, Wali SK. Pilot scale production of 

limestone calcined clay cement. In: Martirena F, Favier A, Scrivener K, editors. 
Calcined clays for sustainable concrete. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands; 2018. 
p. 69–74 (RILEM Bookseries). 

[58] Glass Packaging Institute. Why recycle glass? 2021, [Internet]. [cited 2021 Feb 

2]. Available from: https://www.gpi.org/why-recycle-glass. 

[59] The European Container Glass Federation. Recycling: why glass always has a 

happy CO2 ending [Internet]. The European Container Glass Federation; 2016. 
Available from: https://feve.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/FEVE-brochure- 
Recycling-Why-glass-always-has-a-happy-CO2-ending-.pdf. 

[60] U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). Combined heat and power (CHP) technical 

potential in the United States. US Dep Energy 2016;(March):219. 

[61] Elson A, Tidball R, Hampson A, International ICF. Waste heat to power market 

assessment. Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL); 2015. 

[81] NASEM. Negative emissions technologies and reliable sequestration. negative 

emissions technologies and reliable sequestration. 2019.. 

[82] Baklid A, Korbøl R, STATOIL, Owren G. SINTEF. Sleipner vest CO2 disposal, CO2 
injection into a shallow underground aquifer. In: SPE Annual Technical 
Conference and Exhibition. Society of Petroleum Engineers; 1996. p. 269–77. 
[83] Torp TA, Brown KR. CO2  underground storage costs as experienced at sleipner 

and weyburn, 7. Elsevier Science Ltd; 2005. p. 531–8. editorGreenhouse Gas 
Control Technologies. 

[84] Eiken O, Ringrose P, Hermanrud C, Nazarian B, Torp TA, Høier L. Lessons learned 
from 14 years of CCS operations: sleipner. In Salah and Snøhvit Energy Procedia 
2011;4:5541–8. 
[85] Snæbj¨ornsd´ottir S

´
O, Sigfússon B, Marieni C, Goldberg D, Gislason SR, Oelkers EH. 

Carbon dioxide storage through mineral carbonation. Nat Rev Earth Environ 
2020;1(2):90–102. 

[86] McGrail BP, Schaef HT, Spane FA, Horner JA, Owen AT, Cliff JB, et al. Wallula 
basalt pilot demonstration project: post-injection results and conclusions. Energy 
Procedia 2017;114(November 2016):5783–90. 

[87] Gíslason SR, Sigurdard´ottir H, Arad´ottir ES, Oelkers EH. A brief history of 

CarbFix: challenges and victories of the project’s pilot phase. Energy Procedia 
2018;146:103–14. 

[88] Matter JM, Stute M, Snæbj¨ornsdottir S

´
O, Oelkers EH, Gislason SR, Aradottir ES, 

et al. Rapid carbon mineralization for permanent disposal of anthropogenic 
carbon dioxide emissions. Science 2016;352(6291):1312–4. 

[89] Marieni C, Pˇrikryl J, Arad´ottir ES, Gunnarsson I, Stef´ansson A. Towards ‘green’ 
geothermal energy: co-mineralization of carbon and sulfur in geothermal 
reservoirs. Int J Greenh Gas Control 2018;77(June):96–105. 

[62] Beuttler C., Charles L., Wurzbacher J. The role of direct air capture in mitigation 

[90] Scott V, Haszeldine RS, Tett SFB, Oschlies A. Fossil fuels in a trillion tonne world. 

of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. front clim [Internet]. 2019 [cited 
2020 Jul 10];1(10). Available from: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/ 
10.3389/fclim.2019.00010/full. 

[63] Pilorg´e H., McQueen N., Psarras P., Woodall C.M., Wilcox J. DAC paired with 

industrial waste heat as a path towards carbon neutrality for the U.S. industrial 
sector [Internet]. Applied Energy Symposium MIT A+B 2020; 2020 Aug 13 [cited 
2020 Dec 7]. Available from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LbLvou 
X20Ow&t=59s. 

Nat Clim Change 2015;5(5):419–23. 

[91] Clark DE, Oelkers EH, Gunnarsson I, Sigfússon B, Snæbj¨ornsd´ottir S

´
O, 

Arad´ottir ES, et al. CarbFix2: CO2 and H2S mineralization during 3.5 years of 
continuous injection into basaltic rocks at more than 250 C. Geochim Cosmochim 
Acta 2020;279:45–66. 

[92] Alcalde J, Flude S, Wilkinson M, Johnson G, Edlmann K, Bond CE, et al. 

Estimating geological CO2 storage security to deliver on climate mitigation. Nat 
Commun 2018;9(1):2201. 

[64] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Available and emerging 

[93] Kuuskraa VA, Van Leeuwen T, Wallace M, DiPietro P. Improving domestic energy 

technologies for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from the portland cement 
industry. Office of Air and Radiation; 2010. p. 26 [Internet][cited 2020 Dec 10] 
Available fromhttps://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-12/ 
documents/cement.pdf. 

[65] Pilorg´e H, McQueen N, Maynard D, Psarras P, He J, Rufael T, et al. Cost analysis 
of carbon capture and storage of process emissions from the U.S. industrial sector. 
Environ Sci Technol 2020. 

[66] Psarras PC, He J, Pilorg´e H, McQueen N, Jensen-Fellows A, Kian K, et al. Cost 
analysis of carbon capture and sequestration from U.S. natural gas-fired power 
plants. Environ Sci Technol 2020. 

[67] Global CCS Institute. CO2RE database [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Dec 7]. 

Available from: https://co2re.co. 

security and lowering CO2  emissions with “next generation” CO2-enhanced oil 
recovery (CO2-EOR). Pittsburgh, PA, USA: National Energy Technology 
Laboratory; 2011. 

[94] Fry M., Schafer A., Ellsworth S., Farmer F., Mandel R., McDonnell P., et al. 

Capturing and utilizing CO2 from ethanol: adding economic value and jobs to 
rural economies and communities while reducing emissions. 2017 p. 1–28.. 
[95] Sanchez DL, Johnson N, McCoy ST, Turner PA, Mach KJ. Near-term deployment 
of carbon capture and sequestration from biorefineries in the United States. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci 2018;115(19):4875–80. 

[96] Stolaroff JK, Pang SH, Li W, Kirkendall WG, Goldstein HM, Aines RD, et al. 

Transport cost for carbon removal projects with biomass and CO2 storage. Front 
Energy Res 2021;9:165. 

[68] Great Plains Institute. Industrial Carbon Capture and Removal: a Necessary 

[97] Morgan D, Grant T. FE/NETL CO2 transport model. United States: National 

Climate Strategy [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Oct 5]. Available from: https:// 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIo1PftAUI8&feature=youtu.be&mc_ 
cid=5ff7645daa&mc_eid=86e443aebf. 

[69] National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL). LH CO2MENT colorado project 
[Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Dec 7]. Available from: https://netl.doe.gov/ 
project-information?p=FE0031942. 

[70] LafargeHolcim. Becoming a net zero company: our pledge in numbers [Internet]. 
2020 [cited 2020 Dec 7]. Available from: https://www.lafargeholcim.com/our- 
climate-pledge. 

[71] HeidelbergCement to install the world’s first full-scale CCS facility in a cement 

plant [Internet]. [cited 2020 Dec 16]. Available from: https://www. 
heidelbergcement.com/en/pr-15-12-2020. 

[72] Varanasi A. You asked: does carbon capture technology actually work? State of 

the Planet; 2019 [Internet][cited 2021 Nov 21]. Available fromhttps://news. 
climate.columbia.edu/2019/09/27/carbon-capture-technology/. 

[73] Brandl P, Bui M, Hallett JP, Mac Dowell N. Beyond 90% capture: possible, but at 

what cost? Int J Greenh Gas Control 2021;105:103239. 

[74] Worrell E, Price L, Martin N, Hendriks C, Meida LO. Carbon dioxide emissions 

from the global cement industry. Annu Rev Energy Environ 2001;26:303–29. 

[75] Bosoaga A, Masek O, Oakey JE. CO2  capture technologies for cement industry. 

Energy Procedia 2009;1(1):133–40. 

Energy Technology Laboratory; 2018 [Internet][cited 2021 Nov 21]. Available 
from, https://www.netl.doe.gov/energy-analysis/details. 

[98] McCoy ST, Rubin ES. An engineering-economic model of pipeline transport of 
CO2 with application to carbon capture and storage. Int J Greenh Gas Control 
2008 Apr 1;2(2):219–29. 

[99] Parker N. Using natural gas transmission pipeline costs to estimate hydrogen 

pipeline costs. Inst Transp Stud UC Davis; 2004. 

[100] Rui Z, Metz PA, Reynolds DB, Chen G, Zhou X. Regression models estimate 

pipeline construction costs. Oil Gas J 2011;109(27):120–7. 

[101] Irlam L. Global costs of carbon capture and storage. Melbourne, Australia: Global 
CCS Institute; 2017 [Internet][cited 2020 Dec 10]. Available fromhttps://www. 
globalccsinstitute.com/archive/hub/publications/201688/global-ccs-cost- 
updatev4.pdf. 

[102] Budinis S, Krevor S, Dowell NM, Brandon N, Hawkes A. An assessment of CCS 

costs, barriers and potential. Energy Strategy Rev 2018;22:61–81. 
[103] de Pee A, Pinner D, Roelofsen O, Somers K, Speelman E, Witteveen M. 

Decarbonization of industrial sectors: the next frontier. McKinsey & Company; 
2018. p. 68 [Internet][cited 2020 Dec 10]Available from: https://www.mckinsey. 
com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/Sustainability/Our% 
20Insights/How%20industry%20can%20move%20toward%20a%20low% 
20carbon%20future/Decarbonization-of-industrial-sectors-The-next-frontier.pdf. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098220M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[104] Limousin L. CCS communication: lessons learnt from Barendrecht [Internet]. 
Bellona.org. 2010 [cited 2021 Nov 21]. Available from: https://bellona.org/ 
news/ccs/2010-11-ccs-communication-lessons-learnt-from-barendrecht. 
[105] Shackley S, Evar B. Up and down with CCS: the issue-attention cycle and the 

[136] Loredo Medrano JA, Bustos Martínez D, Rivera De la Rosa J, Carrillo Pedraza ES, 

Flores-Escamilla GA, Ciuta S. Particle pyrolysis modeling and thermal 
characterization of pecan nutshell. J Therm Anal Calorim 2016;126(2):969–79. 

[137] Demirbas¸  A. Kinetics for non-isothermal flash pyrolysis of hazelnut shell. 

political dynamics of decarbonisation. The social dynamics of carbon capture and 
storage: understanding CCS representations, governance and innovation. New 
York: Routledge; 2012. 

[106] IndustryAbout. USA industrial map [Internet]. IndustryAbout. 2019 [cited 2020 

Sep 25]. Available from: https://www.industryabout.com/usa-industrial-map. 

[107] Plant Fact database. 2018.. 
[108] U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). National assessment of geologic carbon dioxide 
storage resources [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2019 Feb 20]. Available from: 
https://pubs.usgs.gov/ds/774/. 

[109] Hartmann J, Moosdorf N. The new global lithological map database GLiM: a 

representation of rock properties at the Earth surface. Geochem Geophys 
Geosystems 2012;13(12) [Internet][cited 2020 Jul 2]Available from: https://a 
gupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2012GC004370. 

[110] Johansson L, Zahirovic S, Müller RD. The interplay between the eruption and 

weathering of large igneous provinces and the deep-time carbon cycle. Geophys 
Res Lett 2018;45(11):5380–9. 

[111] Coleman RG, Irwin WP. Ophiolites and ancient continental margins. editors. In: 
Burk CA, Drake CL, editors. The geology of continental margins. Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 1974. 

[112] Hart Energy Publishing. Carbon dioxide (CO2) pipelines in the united states. 2014 

[Internet]Available from, http://purl.stanford.edu/yf510bb3744. 

[113] Committee on Climate Change. Biomass in a low-carbon economy. London: 

Committee on Climate change; 2018. 

[114] Faber G, Mangin C, Sick V. Life Cycle and techno-economic assessment templates 
for emerging carbon management technologies. Front Sustain 2021;2:93. 
[115] Tanzer SE, Blok K, Ramírez A. Can bioenergy with carbon capture and storage 

result iin carbon negative steel? Int J Greenh Gas Control 2020:100. 
[116] Langholtz M.H., Stokes B.J., Eaton L.M. 2016 billion-ton report: advancing 

domestic resources for a thriving bioeconomy [Internet]. 2016 Jul [cited 2021 
Jan 15] p. DOE/EE-1440, ORNL/TM-2016/160, 1271651. Report No.: DOE/EE- 
1440, ORNL/TM-2016/160, 1271651. Available from: http://www.osti.gov/servl 
ets/purl/1271651/. 

Bioresour Technol 1998;66(3):247–52. 

[138] Apricots [Internet]. Agricultural marketing resource center: a national 

information resource for value-added agriculture. 2018 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. 
Available from: https://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/fruits/apricots#: 
~:text=Today%2C%20nearly%2085%20percent%20of,a%20value%20of%20% 
2453%20million.. 

[139] Atlas Big World’s top apricot producing countries [Internet]. Atlas Big. 2020 

[cited 2020 Aug 6]. Available from: https://www.atlasbig.com/en-us/countries 
-apricot-production. 

[140] Gezer ˙I, Hacisefero˘gulları H, Demir F. Some physical properties of Hacıhalilo˘glu 

apricot pit and its kernel. J Food Eng 2003;56(1):49–57. 

[141] Kaynak B, Topal H. Atimtay AT. Peach and apricot stone combustion in a 
bubbling fluidized bed. Fuel Process Technol 2005;86(11):1175–93. 
[142] Kamel BS, Kakuda Y. Characterization of the seed oil and meal from apricot, 

cherry, nectarine, peach and plum. J Am Oil Chem Soc 1992;69(5):492–4. 
[143] Hawash SI, Farah JY, El-Diwani G. Pyrolysis of agriculture wastes for bio-oil and 

char production. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2017;124:369–72. 

[144] Domínguez MP, Araus K, Bonert P, S´anchez F, San Miguel G, Toledo M. The 

avocado and its waste: an approach of fuel potential/application. In: Lefebvre G, 
Jim´enez E, Caba˜nas B, editors. Environment, energy and climate change II: 
energies from new resources and the climate change [Internet]. Cham: Springer 
International Publishing; 2016. p. 199–223. https://doi.org/10.1007/698_2014_ 
291 [cited 2021 Jan 12](The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry). Available 
from. 

[145] Sawe BE. Where do plums grow? World Atlas; 2018 [Internet][cited 2020 Aug 6]. 
Available from, https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/the-leading-producers-of-p 
lum-in-the-world.html. 

[146] Ceylan S. Kinetic analysis on the non-isothermal degradation of plum stone waste 

by thermogravimetric analysis and integral Master-Plots method. Waste Manag 
Res 2015;33(4):345–52. 

[147] Perea-Moreno AJ, Aguilera-Ure˜na M-J, Manzano-Agugliaro F. Fuel properties of 

avocado stone. Fuel 2016;186:358–64. 

[117] Breunig HM, Huntington T, Jin L, Robinson A, Scown CD. Temporal and 

[148] Portland Cement Association (PCA). U.S. labor-energy input survey [Internet]. 

geographic drivers of biomass residues in California. Resour Conserv Recycl 2018 
Dec 1;139:287–97. 

[118] World Coal Institute. Coal & steel. richmond TW9 1BP, United. Kingdom: World 

2018 p. 35. Available from: https://www.cement.org/morereports/labor-energy- 
input-survey. 

[149] Murray A, Price L. Use of alternative fuels in cement manufacture: analysis of fuel 

Coal Institute; 2007. 

[119] Hu Z, Zhang J, Zuo H, Tian M, Liu Z, Yang T. Substitution of biomass for coal and 

coke in ironmaking process. Adv Mater Res 2011;236–238:77–82. 

[120] Edgar TF. Coal processing and pollution control. United States: Gulf Publishing 

Company; 1983. p. 13–37 [Internet]Available from: https://che.utexas.edu/ 
course/che359&384/lecture_notes/topic_3/Chapter2.pdf. 

[121] Wilcox J. Carbon capture. 1st ed. New York: Springer; 2012. 
[122] Krerkkaiwan S, Fushimi C, Tsutsumi A, Kuchonthara P. Synergetic effect during 
co-pyrolysis/gasification of biomass and sub-bituminous coal. Fuel Process 
Technol 2013;115:11–8. 

[123] Chern JS, Hayhurst AN. Does a large coal particle in a hot fluidised bed lose its 
volatile content according to the shrinking core model? Combust Flame 2004;139 
(3):208–21. 

[124] Lua AC, Yang T, Guo J. Effects of pyrolysis conditions on the properties of 

characteristics and feasibility for use in the chinese cement sector. Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory; 2008. 

[150] Mathieson J, Jahanshahi S, Somerville M, Biomass Deev A. Providing a low 

capital route to low net CO2 emissions. minerals down under research flagship. 
Tokyo; 2013. Nov 7. 

[151] Erol M, Haykiri-Acma H, Küçükbayrak S. Calorific value estimation of biomass 
from their proximate analyses data. Renew Energy 2010;35(1):170–3. 

[152] Peters A. This USDA lab is turning billions of pounds of almond waste into beer, 
plastic, and power [Internet]. Fast Company. 2018 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. Available 
from: https://www.fastcompany.com/40544360/this-usda-lab-is-turning- 
billions-of-pounds-of-almond-waste-into-beer-plastic-and-power. 

[153] Rogers E. Nut shells fire up a power plant [Internet]. ABC Rural. 2013 [cited 2020 

Aug 6]. Available from: https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2013-06-14/nrn- 
macadamia-fuel/4754978. 

activated carbons prepared from pistachio-nut shells. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2004; 
72(2):279–87. 

[154] FAO. Food and agriculture organization of the United Nations. 2018.. 
[155] U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Cropscale–cropland data layer. National 

[125] Savova D, Apak E, Yardim F, Petrov N, Budinova T, Razvigorova M, et al. Biomass 

conversion to carbon adsorbents and gas. Biomass Bioenergy 2001 Aug;21(2): 
133–42. 

[126] National Energy Technology Laboratory. Quality guidelines for energy system 

studies: detailed coal specifications [Internet]. 2019. Available from: https://netl. 
doe.gov/projects/files/QGESSDetailedCoalSpecifications_100119.pdf. 

[127] Keipi T, Tolvanen H, Kokko L, Raiko R. The effect of torrefaction on the chlorine 
content and heating value of eight woody biomass samples. Biomass Bioenergy 
2014 Jul;66:232–9. 

[128] Kwiatkowski M, Kalderis D. A complementary analysis of the porous structure of 
biochars obtained from biomass. Carbon Lett 2020 Jun 1;30(3):325–9. 
[129] Duong D., Nac F.W. Characteristics of biomass combustion emissions. 2012.. 
[130] Gonz´alez JF, Ramiro A, Gonz´alez-García CM, Ga˜n´an J, Encinar JM, Sabio E, et al. 

Pyrolysis of almond shells. Energy applications of fractions. Ind Eng Chem Res 
2005;44(9):3003–12. 

[131] Gonz´alez JF, Ramiro A, Sabio E, Encinar JM, Gonz´alez CM. Hydrogasification of 
Almond shell chars. influence of operating variables and kinetic study. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2002;41(15):3557–65. 

Agricultural Statistics Service; 2019 [Internet][cited 2020 Dec 11]. Available 
from: https://nassgeodata.gmu.edu/CropScape/. 

[156] USDA ERS - Fruit and Tree Nuts Yearbook Tables [Internet]. [cited 2021 Jan 12]. 

Available from: https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/fruit-and-tree-nuts- 
data/fruit-and-tree-nuts-yearbook-tables/#Tree%20Nuts. 

[157] Hazelnuts [Internet]. Agricultural marketing resource center: a national 

information resource for value-added agriculture. 2018 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. 
Available from: https://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/nuts/hazelnuts. 
¨
Ozdemir M. Comparison of the quality of hazelnuts shelled with modified conical 
sheller and stone sheller. J Agric Eng Res 1999;72(3):211–6. 

[158]

[159] Phyllis2 - pistachio shells (#706) [Internet]. TNO innovation for life. 2020 [cited 

2020 Nov 10]. Available from: https://phyllis.nl/Biomass/View/706. 

[160] Xie J. Should the US be harvesting more energy from nuts? [Internet]. Bloomberg. 
2014 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. Available from: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/art 
icles/2014-05-12/should-the-u-s-be-harvesting-more-energy-from-nuts. 

[161] Pistachios [Internet]. Agricultural marketing resource center: a national 

information resource for value-added agriculture. 2018 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. 
Available from: https://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/nuts/pistachios. 

[132] Demirbas A. Effect of temperature on pyrolysis products from four nut shells. 

[162] Açıkalın K, Karaca F, Bolat E. Pyrolysis of pistachio shell: effects of pyrolysis 

J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2006;76(1–2):285–9. 

conditions and analysis of products. Fuel 2012;95:169–77. 

[133] Onay O, Beis S, Kockar OM. Pyrolysis of walnut shell in a well-swept fixed-bed 

[163] García R, Pizarro C, Lavín AG, Bueno JL. Biomass proximate analysis using 

reactor. Energy Sources 2004;26(8):771–82. 

[134] Fermanelli CS, C´ordoba A, Pierella LB, Saux C. Pyrolysis and copyrolysis of three 
lignocellulosic biomass residues from the agro-food industry: a comparative 
study. Waste Manag 2020;102:362–70. 

[135] Kaveeshwar AR, Ponnusamy SK, Revellame ED, Gang DD, Zappi ME, 

Subramaniam R. Pecan shell based activated carbon for removal of iron(II) from 
fracking wastewater: adsorption kinetics, isotherm and thermodynamic studies. 
Process Saf Environ Prot 2018;114:107–22. 

thermogravimetry. Bioresour Technol 2013;139:1–4. 

[164] Açıkalın K, Karaca F. Fixed-bed pyrolysis of walnut shell: parameter effects on 

yields and characterization of products. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2017;125:234–42. 
[165] Florida Peanut Producers Association Where do peanuts grow? [Internet]. 2020 

[cited 2020 Aug 6]. Available from: https://www.flpeanuts.com/where-pean 
uts-grow/. 

[166] . US Pecans How pecans are grown [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. Available 
from: https://uspecans.org/how-pecans-are-grown/#:~:text=The%20U.S.%20is 
%20the%20world’s,Georgia%2C%20New%20Mexico%20and%20Texas.. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098221M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

[167] Aldana H, Lozano FJ, Acevedo J, Mendoza A. Thermogravimetric characterization 
and gasification of pecan nut shells. Bioresour Technol 2015;198:634–41. 

[168] Antal MJ, Allen SG, Dai X, Shimizu B, Tam MS, Grønli M. Attainment of the 

[196] Encyclopedia Britannica Fluidized-bed combustion technology [Internet]. [cited 
2021 Jan 6]. Available from: https://www.britannica.com/technology/fluidized- 
bed-combustion. 

theoretical yield of carbon from biomass. Ind Eng Chem Res 2000;39(11): 
4024–31. 

[197] Japan Coal Energy Center. Clean coal technologies in Japan. Tokyo: Japan Coal 

Energy Center; 2021. p. 53–4. 

[169] Cherries [Internet]. Agricultural marketing resource center: a national 

[198] Jun W. Technology spillovers in the multinational outsourcing system and 

information resource for value-added agriculture. 2018 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. 
Available from: https://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/fruits/cherries#: 
~:text=The%20primary%20tart%20producing%20state,producer%20(FAOSTAT 
%2C%202013). 

[170] Lussier MG, Shull JC, Miller DJ. Activated carbon from cherry stones. Carbon NY 

1994;32(8):1493–8. 

[171] Akalın MK, Tekin K, Karag¨oz S. Hydrothermal liquefaction of cornelian cherry 
stones for bio-oil production. Bioresour Technol 2012 Apr 1;110:682–7. 
[172] Shepherd JS. Average Weights of Selected Avocado Cultivar. California Avocado 

Society 1984 Yearbook 68.. 1984. p. 109–19. 

[173] Shahbandeh M. US avocado production 2019, by state [Internet]. Statista 2020 
[cited 2020 Aug 7]. Available from, https://www.statista.com/statistics/610460/ 
production-avocados-us-by-state/. 

[174] Peaches [Internet]. Agricultural marketing resource center: a national 

information resource for value-added agriculture. 2019 [cited 2020 Aug 6]. 
Available from: from https://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/fruits/ 
peaches#:~:text=As%20of%202017%2C%20peaches%20are,peaches%20(NASS 
%2C%202018).https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peach#:~:text=Production,- 
Peach%20(and%20nectarine&text=In%202018%2C%20world%20production% 
20of,the%20world%20total%20(table). 

[175] García R, Pizarro C, Lavín AG, Bueno JL. Characterization of Spanish biomass 
wastes for energy use. Bioresour Technol 2012 Jan 1;103(1):249–58. 

[176] Miloˇseviü N, Mratiniü E, Gliˇsiü IS, Miloˇseviü T. Precocity, yield and postharvest 
physical and chemical properties of plums resistant to Sharka grown in Serbian 
countries. Acta Sci Pol Hortorum Cultus 2012;11(6):23–33. 

[177] Fruit & Nut Research & Information Center. 2020. 
[178] Miles T.R., Miles J., Baxter L.L., Bryers R.W., Jenkins B.M., Oden L.L. Alkali 
deposits found in biomass power plants: a preliminary investigation of their 
extent and nature. Volume 1 [Internet]. National Renewable Energy Lab., Golden, 
CO (United States); Miles (Thomas R.), Portland, OR (United States); Sandia 
National Labs., Livermore, CA (United States); Foster Wheeler Development 
Corp., Livingston, NJ (United States); California Univ., Davis, CA (United States); 
Bureau of Mines, Albany, OR (United States). Albany Research Center; 1995 Apr 
[cited 2021 Jan 17]. Report No.: NREL/TP-433-8142-Vol.1; SAND-96-8225- 
Vol.1. Available from: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/251288. 

technological innovation in recipient countries. Soc Sci China 2014;35(2):44–63. 

[199] AZoM. Posco commence construction of new steel plant that will use FINEX 

technology–news item [Internet]. AZoM.com. 2004 [cited 2020 Dec 14]. 
Available from: https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=2597. 
[200] The World Leader in Ironmaking Solutions [Internet]. Primetals technologies. 

2020 [cited 2020 Dec 14]. Available from, https://www.primetals.com/portfoli 
o/ironmaking. 

[201] Primetals Technologies. FINEX®–environmentally safe ironmaking. Primetals 

Technologies; 2020 [Internet][cited 2020 Dec 14]. Available from: https://www. 
primetals.com/portfolio/ironmaking/finexr. 

[202] Outotec. Circored® Hydrogen-based reduction 2020 [Internet]. [cited 2020 Nov 
26]. Available from: https://www.outotec.com/products-and-services/technolog 
ies/direct-and-smelting-reduction/circored-hydrogen-based-reduction/. 
[203] Metso Outotec. Outotec launches new CO2 removal pilot plant. 2020 [Internet] 
Metso Outotec[cited 2020 Nov 26]. Available from, https://www.mogroup.com 
/news/2010/12/outotec-launches-new-co2-removal-pilot-plant/. 

[204] IIMA. Use of direct reduced iron (DRI) in the electric arc furnace (EAF) for 

steelmaking [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2020 Dec 14]. Available from: https://www. 
metallics.org/assets/files/Public-Area/Fact-Sheets/_11_%20DRI%20in%20EAF% 
20Fact%20Sheet%20V2.pdf. 

[205] Hoffman C, Van Hoey M, Zeumer B. Decarbonization challenge for steel. 

McKinsey & Company; 2020. 

[206] DRI output tops 100 million tons in 2019 [Internet]. Recycling Today. [cited 2020 

Dec 14]. Available from: https://www.recyclingtoday.com/article/dri-eaf-steel 
-scrap-output-2019/. 

[207] Sandalow D., Friedmann J., Aines R., McCormick C., McCoy S., Stolaroff J. ICEF 
industrial heat decarbonization roadmap. innovation for cool earth forum; 2019 
Dec.. 

[208] FEECO. Rotary Kilns [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2020 Dec 1]. Available from: htt 

ps://feeco.com/rotary-kilns/. 

[209] IBUtec. Fact sheet: indirectly heated Rotary Kilns. 2020.. 
[210] Stormont R. Electric melting and boosting for glass quality improvement. Glass 

Worldwide; 2010. 

[211] Reynolds A. Electric boosting and melting technology. Glassman Latin America 

2018; 2018. 

[179] Bianchi G. Lipids and phenols in table olives. Eur J Lipid Sci Technol 2003;105(5): 

[212] Electroglass 2021 [Internet]. [cited 2021 Nov 21]. Available from: http://www. 

229–42. 

electroglass.co.uk/products.html. 

[180] Energy Information Administration (EIA) Manufacturing energy consumption 
survey (MECS) steel analysis brief [Internet]. [cited 2020 Dec 14]. Available 
from: https://www.eia.gov/consumption/manufacturing/briefs/steel/. 
[181] Lattin WC, Utgikar VP. Transition to hydrogen economy in the United States: a 

[213] Matheson Company. Air separation plants in the U.S. [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 
Dec 11]. Available from: https://www.mathesongas.com/gases/bulk/air-separati 
on-plants. 

[214] Messer Company. Messer company presentation 2019 [Internet]. 2019 [cited 

2006 status report. Int J Hydrog Energy 2007;32(15):3230–7. 

[182] Konieczny A, Mondal K, Wiltowski T, Dydo P. Catalyst development for 

thermocatalytic decomposition of methane to hydrogen. Int J Hydrog Energy 
2008 Jan 1;33(1):264–72. 

[183] Liguori S, Kian K, Buggy N, Anzelmo BH, Wilcox J. Opportunities and challenges 
of low-carbon hydrogen via metallic membranes. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020; 
80:100851. 

[184] International Energy Agency. Global hydrogen review 2021 [Internet]. OECD; 

2021 Oct [cited 2021 Nov 21]. Available from, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/ 
energy/global-hydrogen-review-2021_39351842-en. 

[185] Association IIM. DRI production [Internet]. International iron metallics 

2020 Dec 11]. Available from: https://www.messergroup.com/documents/ 
20182/1119059/Company+presentation+2019/7d4a19d3-d762-4cdd-8db0- 
19740aaa9d6c?version=1.18. 

[215] World Resources Institute (WRI). Global power plant database [Internet]. 2019. 

Available from: https://datasets.wri.org/dataset/globalpowerplantdatabase. 

[216] Baruch-Mordo S, Kiesecker JM, Kennedy CM, Oakleaf JR, Opperman JJ. From 

Paris to practice: sustainable implementation of renewable energy goals. Environ 
Res Lett 2019 Feb;14(2):109501. 

[217] LEILAC Project Carbon capture technology EU innovation [Internet]. LEILAC. 
2020 [cited 2020 Dec 1]. Available from: https://www.project-leilac.eu. 
[218] Pooler M. Cracks in cement industry’s CO2 response. The financial times 

association; 2017 [cited 2020 Nov 17]. Available from: https://www.metallics. 
org/dri-production.html. 

[Internet]. 2020 Nov 10; Available from: https://www.ft.com/content/b765836 
5-4af3-4bba-8b23-9ecd88a2519a. 

[186] SSAB, L.K.A.B., Vattenfall. hybrit: fossil-free steel. 2016.. 
[187] IEA. The future of hydrogen. Japan; 2019. p. 38–43. 
[188] IChemE. Hydrogen: The burning question [Internet]. [cited 2021 May 19]. 

Available from: https://www.thechemicalengineer.com/features/hydrogen-the- 
burning-question/. 

[189] Sheikhani H, Ajam H, Ghazikhani M. A review of flame radiation research from 
the perspective of factors affecting the flame radiation, measurement and 
modeling. Eur Phys J Plus 2020 Apr 1;135(4):343. 

[190] CEMEX 2020. Integrated report. San Pedro Garza Garcia, Mexico: CEMEX; 2020. 

p. 196. 

[191] Mandel E. Cemex announces plans for its european cement plant. H2 Bulletin; 
2021 [Internet][cited 2021 Nov 21]. Available from, https://www.h2bulletin. 
com/cemex-announces-plans-for-its-european-cement-plant/. 

[192] Melaina M, Penev M, Heimiller D. Resource assessment for hydrogen production: 
hydrogen production potential from fossil and renewable energy resources. 
Golden, CO, USA: National Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL; 2013. Report No.: 
NREL/TP-5400-55626. 

[193] Reynoldson RW. Heat treatment in fluidized bed furnaces. ASM International; 

1993. 

[194] Yuko T, Ikabata T, Akiyama T, Yamamoto T, Kurumada N. New clinker formation 
process by the fluidized bed kiln system. Cem Concr Res 2000 Jul;30(7):1113–20. 
[195] Service and R&D of Innovative Water Technology Anaerobic fluidized bed (AFB) 
process Website [Internet]. [cited 2021 Jan 6]. Available from: https://www.itri 
water.org.tw/Eng/Technology/More?id=106. 

[219] Carbon Negative Calciners Mineral sequestration | Fuel Cell Calciner | Balanced 

Energy Networks | BEN | Origen Power | Tim Kruger | Cranfield University 
[Internet]. [cited 2020 Dec 1]. Available from: https://www.benuk.net/Carb 
on-Negative-Calciners.html. 

[220] Origen Technologies to remove carbon dioxide from the air [Internet]. Origen. 

[cited 2020 Dec 1]. Available from: https://www.origenpower.com. 

[221] Ellis LD, Badel AF, Chiang ML, Park RJ-Y, Chiang Y-M. Toward electrochemical 

synthesis of cement - An electrolyzer-based process for decarbonating CaCO3 
while producing useful gas streams. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2020;117(23). 

[222] MOE Technology Boston Metal [Internet]. [cited 2021 Mar 10]. Available from: 

https://www.bostonmetal.com/moe-technology/. 

[223] Siderwin | Objectives Siderwin | Objectives [Internet]. [cited 2021 Mar 10]. 

Available from: https://www.siderwin-spire.eu/content/objectives. 

[224] Siderwin, Targeting radically new steel production without CO2 emissions 2020 
[Internet]. [cited 2020 Dec 14]. Available from: https://automotive.arcelormittal 
.com/news_and_stories/news/2019Siderwin. 

[225] U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics. North American rail lines [Internet]. U.S. 
Department of Transportation (DOT; 2021 [cited 2021 Mar 16]. Available from, 
https://data-usdot.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/north-american-rail-lines. 

[226] California greenhouse gas emissions for 2000 to 2019. California air resources 

board. Sacremento, California; 2021. 

[227] Laboratory LLN. Getting to neutral 2020;25(1):22–4.. 
[228] Baik E, Breckel A, Brown J, Cary V, Comello S, Kizer A, et al. An action plan for 
carbon capture and storage in california: opportunities, challenges, and solutions. 
Energy Future Iniative & Stanford University; 2020 [Internet][cited 2021 Mar 5]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098222M. Pisciotta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Available from: https://sccs.stanford.edu/sites/g/files/sbiybj7741/f/efi-stanford- 
ca-ccs-full-rev1.vf-10.25.20.pdf. 

[229] Electric Power Research Institute. California CO2 storage assurance facility 

enterprise (C2SAFE) [Internet]. Palo Alto, CA: Electric Power Research Institute; 
2018 [cited 2021 Mar 5]. Available from, https://www.osti.gov/servlets/pur 
l/1452864. 

[230] Kirchofer A, Becker A, Brandt A, Wilcox J. CO 2  Mitigation potential of mineral 
carbonation with industrial alkalinity sources in the United States. Environ Sci 
Technol 2013;47(13):7548–54. 

[231] 2020 Pennsylvania greenhouse gas inventory report. Pennsylvania, U.S: 

Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection; 2020. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10098223