Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Mechanical stimulation of gasless reaction in inorganic systems: A
mini review

Alexander S. Mukasyan a, *, Metin
a Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556, USA
b School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA
c Purdue Energetics Research Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA

 ̈
Ornek b,c, Steven F. Son b, c

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Hai Wang

Keywords:
Self-sustained reaction
Shock wave
Mechanical stimulation
Gasless reaction
Reaction mechanism
Inorganic reactants

The investigation of shock compression in highly exothermic inorganic powder mixtures leading to reaction has
been a subject of interest for several decades. In particular, understanding the processes occurring within the
time scale of the high-pressure shock state, resulting in the formation of new materials and phases, has garnered
significant  attention. Chemical reactions  in  shock-compressed media are generally  categorized  based on their
time scale: i) shock-induced chemical reactions occur in the shock front or shortly behind it (in the stress pulse)
during the time scale of mechanical equilibration (<1 μs), and ii) shock-assisted chemical reactions occur on the
longer time scale of bulk temperature equilibration (>10 μs) after the state of stress has been released. It is worth
noting that a solid-state detonation wave involves a type of combustion with a supersonic exothermic front that
accelerates through a medium, ultimately supporting the leading shock front. While extensive discussions have
focused on shock-induced and shock-assisted reactions, as well as the solid-state detonation, certain questions
regarding the possibility  of i)  shock-induced reactions  occurring within  the time scale of  high-pressure shock
state, and ii) chemical reactions occurring promptly enough after the shock wave to sustain a detonation wave
(ultra-fast  gasless  reactions),  remained  unanswered.  In  this  paper,  we  provide  a  brief  review  of  shock
compression of reactive heterogeneous media, with a particular emphasis on recent experimental studies. We
critically  address  the  chemical  reactions  occurring  within  these  material  systems  and  the  underlying  mecha-
nisms,  supported  by  in-situ  and  ex-situ  experimental  evidences.  Specifically,  our  primary  focus  lies  on  the
aluminum-nickel  and  the  metal  nitride-boron  systems.  Based  on  our  analysis,  we  conclude  that  the  shock-
induced reactions can occur in the time scale of the propagated shock wave and can be explained by the me-
chanically induced thermal explosion phenomena. However, the observed phenomena so far cannot be attributed
to solid-state detonation, since they cannot result in a self-sustained mode of shock wave propagation.

1. Introduction

The  investigation  of  reactions  occurring  in  inorganic  high  energy
density systems stimulated by shock waves has been a subject of interest
for several decades. In this brief review, we primarily focus on reactive
heterogeneous media, particularly powder mixtures of solid inorganic
reactants. Two specific points are addressed. First, the concept of shock-
induced reactions is explored. There is no doubt such reactions can be
initiated  by  sufficient  mechanical  impulse,  but  can  they  occur  in  the
time scale of the high-pressure shock state? Second, the concept of the
solid-state  detonation  wave  is  examined.  One  should  distinguish  the
cases when  the  reactions occur  in the  time scale of  the applied  high-

pressure  shock  state  and  solid-state  detonation.  The  latter  assumes  a
type  of  combustion  with  a  supersonic  exothermic  front  accelerating
through  a  medium  that  eventually  supports  a  leading  shock  front.
Consequently,  a  supersonic  reaction  front  following  a  shock  wave
temporarily is not a detonation. The wave must “self-propagate” along a
relatively long sample to be a solid-state detonation.

2. Brief historical overview

The first review of this topic, which dates back to 1967 [1], focused
on the chemical transformations in the inorganic substance under shock
compression.  The  main  topics  discussed  were:  (i)  the  possibilities  of

* Corresponding author. Stinson-Remick Hall, Room 210, Notre Dame, IN, 46556, USA.

E-mail address: amoukasi@nd.edu (A.S. Mukasyan).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101121
Received 20 March 2023; Received in revised form 28 August 2023; Accepted 28 August 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)101121Availableonline7September20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

dynamic high-pressure technology, including the pressing of powders,
(ii) the decomposition of chemical compounds, (iii)  defect formation,
and (iv) the realization of phase transitions. An attempt was made to
synthesize different chromium chalcogenides in the Cr - X (X = S, Se,
Te). It was concluded that “incomplete” crystalline CrX were formed “as
a result of dynamic synthesis”. It is worth noting that later Me(Zn)–S
system became the most popular one in the attempt to prove the exis-
tence of solid-state detonation.

In  another  review  published  in  1968  [2],  authors  extensively  dis-
cussed ultra-fast physical and chemical processes observed in the shock
waves.  The  extremely  high  rates  of  transformations  in  shock  waves
lacked clearly formulated explanations, although it was suggested that
the phenomenon might be related to the combination of extremely high
pressures and shear present in the dynamic shock experiments. Many
examples of the activation role of shear stress in chemical processes have
been  reported,  including  acceleration  of  decomposition  of  salts  and
oxides, phase transition in metals, and polymerizations (see references
53–68 in Ref. [2]). Specifically, Teller [3], analyzing classical works by
Bridgman [4], suggested that shear at high pressures can play a decisive
role  in  chemical  processes,  particularly  in  the  conversion  of  an
exothermic reaction into an explosive process.

Following [2], let us briefly describe the compression mechanism in
a shock wave. For substances not undergoing any transformations dur-
ing shock wave compression, the P–V curve has no specific change in its
slope  and  follows  the  Hugoniot  equation  for  inert  media  (curve  1,
Fig. 1).

To understand what is happening, it is useful to imagine an initially
very steep shock front entering this reactive system (pressure profile a,
Fig. 1).

However,  when  the  substance  undergoes  a  transformation,  the
Hugoniot curve exhibits a slope change in the direction depending on
the  nature  of  the  transformation.  And  the  shock  wave  front  then  be-
comes diffuse and broadens since the transformation requires a finite
time  (pressure  profiles  b-d,  Fig.  1).  If  the  transformation  leads  to  an
increase  in  volume,  the  shock  compressibility  curve  becomes  steeper
(curve 2, Fig. 1). In principle, waves with such a profile are capable of
steady-state propagation without the supply of energy from outside, i.e.,
in solid gasless reaction systems, this case would be manifest as a solid-
state detonation. On the other hand, a break in the direction of smaller
volumes  (curve  3,  Fig.  1)  has  been  observed  for  polymorphic  trans-
formations with a corresponding decrease in volume. In this case, the

Fig.  1. Hugoniot  curves  for  various  substances  and  the  corresponding  shock
wave profiles; 1) without transformations; 2) transformation with an increase in
volume; 3) transformation with a decrease in volume; a) pressure profile in the
shock  wave  in  the  absence  of  transformations;  b)  transformation  with  an  in-
crease  in  volume;  c)  transformation  with  a  decrease  in  volume;  d)  trans-
formation  with  a  decrease  in  volume  at  sufficiently  high  pressures  (adapted
from Dremin et al. [2]).

shock wave loses stability over a certain range of pressures, as shown
experimentally.  Thus,  the  complex  form  of  the  shock  compressibility
curve and the broadening of the shock wave front provide direct evi-
dence of the transformation in the wave front; i.e., during a period less
(cid:0) 6  s. This approach was widely used to prove the existence of
than 10
ultra-fast chemical reactions in the shock wave.

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  momentum  induced  by  the  shock
wave  in  a  few  atoms  is  generally  considered  insufficient  for  rapid,
essentially  instantaneous,  reactants  that  could  lead  to  chemical  re-
actions. Indeed, this can be elaborated considering alpha particles whose
speed are of 3-4 orders of magnitude faster than those in the shock wave,
but still are absorbed by a matter of several atomic layer thicknesses.
However, it is believed [2,3] that the combination of the shear stress and
associated  plastic  flow  under  high  pressure  in  the  shock  wave  may
explain observed effects.

From the macroscopic perspective, the shock wave affects the mono-
axial compression of the substance. When compression pressures exceed
the  dynamic  yield  point  of  the  media,  tangential  stresses  in  the  solid
surpass the critical value, and the material begins to flow. On the atomic
level, the displacement of atoms in the shock wave front becomes sig-
nificant,  allowing  atoms  to  acquire  a  certain  freedom  and  no  longer
return to the previous site but remain in the coordination environment
corresponding  to  the  thermodynamically  favorable  conditions  (Р,  Τ)
created during compression. This could lead to the formation of a large
number  of  small  nuclei  of  a  new  phase  in  the  wave  front,  which  are
randomly distributed in the media.

In other words, let us consider an exothermic mixture of the reactants
A and B. Under initial conditions Po, Vo, while the formation of AB phase
is thermodynamically favorable, the reaction proceeds extremely slow,
i.e.,  the  system  is  in  quasi-equilibrium  conditions  [5].  In  the  wave
structure, the temperature and the pressure increase, allowing for the
rapid  formation  of  a  thermodynamically  favorable  phase  (AB).  The
(cid:0) 9 cm2/s.
typical solid-state diffusion coefficient at ~1000 K is about 10
(cid:0) 5  s),  the
Given  the  characteristic  time  of  dynamic  compression  (10
diffusion length is up to 10 Å. This estimation suggests that the diffusion
mechanism may form nuclei with a diameter of about 10 Å.

However,  when  considering  the  much  larger  sizes  of  new  phases
observed  experimentally,  it  becomes  necessary  to  account  for  some
other mass transport mechanism. In this context, the role of shear stress
becomes critical. Following the idea suggested in Ref. [2], we may as-
sume that when the layers of A and B precursors are displaced relative to
each other, the nuclei AB of the new phase, located between them, can
be regarded as a ball rolling along the grain boundary, interacting with,
and “gathering” atoms from both A and B sides (Fig. 2). It is essential to
note that under considered conditions, the AB phase is thermodynami-
cally  more  stable  than  A/B  mixture,  and  as  a  result,  A-B  bonds  are
stronger than A-A and B–B bonds. Dremin et al. [2] estimated that for a
plastic displacement of 1 mm (achievable in the shock wave structure),
and the dimension of a single atom as ~2 Å, the time required for the
(cid:0) 12 s. This time is much shorter than
contact between two atoms is ~10
(cid:0) 5 s), allowing all A
the duration of the dynamic compression stage (10
and  B  atoms  “passing”  in  the  vicinity  of  “rolling”  AB  nuclei  to  have
sufficient time to combine with the nuclei.

Therefore, in contrast to the conventional diffusion growth mecha-
nism, where each atom must find its way to the nuclei of the new phase
through thermal motion, the mass of the precursors during the dynamic
compression is transported by the plastic flow in the vicinity of crys-
tallization  centers.  The  required  atoms  selectively  interact  with  the
particles of the new phase, undergoing their continuous growth during
this process. The new phase, formed by this mechanism, assuming cubic
crystallographic structure, can be estimated to have dimensions of the
order of ~3 × 104 atoms (or ~3 μm) [2].

The next extensive review on the same subject was published in 1977
[6]. It outlined that systematic work in the field was initiated by pio-
neering works of Riabinin [7], who suggested the method to preserve
samples after experiments, and D. Bancroft and co-workers [8], who, for

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011212

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

precursors. In this work, the authors introduced the concept of “thermal
back  pressure”,  which  may  also  account  for  the  media’s  thermal
expansion.  The  experimental  points  of  shock  compressibility  were
shown to deviate to the right relative to the calculated adiabats for SnS
and “inert” Sn + S mixtures at pressures above 15 GPa (Fig. 3).

The conclusion drawn from this observation is that it provides evi-
dence of energy release from a reaction in the shock-compressed mixture
immediately adjacent to the shock front. The authors also estimated the
amount of heat release, based on which they calculated the degree of
conversion in the shock wave (~30%). An explanation for the observed
high  rates  of  diffusion  processes  during  shock  compression  was  pro-
vided. It was suggested that in the mixture (Sn + S), consisting of ma-
terials  with  different  dynamic  rigidities,  the  difference  in  the  mass
velocities of components might reach values on the order of kilometers
per second (for Sn + S at P = 10–40 GPa, Us = ~0.7–2.0 km/s). This
difference in speed of motion allows one sort of particles to be “pressed”
through the other type, providing rapid mixing of the materials. Note
this mechanism differs from the one described in Ref. [2].

Chemical reactions occurring in shock-compressed media have been
classified according to their time scale [15]. The so-called shock-induced
chemical reactions occur in the shock front or shortly behind it (in the
stress pulse) during the time scale of mechanical equilibration (<1 μs).
On the other hand, shock-assisted chemical reactions occur on the longer
time scale of bulk temperature equilibration (>10 μs) after the state of
stress has been released.

The first publication on shock-synthesis of intermetallics appeared in
1985  [16],  focused  on  synthesizing  nickel  aluminides.  The  literature
review showed that the Ni–Al system was extensively investigated. For
the  purpose  of  understanding  the  phenomenon,  this  paper  primarily
analyzes  the  results  obtained  for  this  system.  Additionally,  the  B–N
system is considered as a specific example of shock-induced synthesis,
leading to the formation of the high-pressure phases [17,18].

Fig. 3. The shock adiabats for the SnS dense product, a stoichiometric reactive
mixture of Sn + S, and an inert Sn + S mixture (original figure from Batsanov
et  al.  [12],  reprinted  from  Eakins  and  Thadhani  2009  [14]  with  permission
from Taylor&Francis).

Fig.  2. Schematics  of  a  mechanism  for  the  A  + B  reaction  (adapted  from
Dremin et al. [2]).

the  first time,  observed phase  transition during  dynamic loading  of a
metal (Fe). The research was significantly accelerated after De Carli and
Jamieson discovered the shock wave synthesis of diamond from carbon
[9]. Regarding the direct synthesis of inorganic materials by applying
shock  compression,  it  was  stated  that  this  phenomenon  was  demon-
strated  in  several  works  (see  references  in  Ref.  [6]).  However,  the
question of whether the reactions occurred promptly enough after the
shock wave to sustain a detonation wave remained unanswered. Two
methods defining the existence of super rapid chemical reactions were
outlined: (i) in-situ monitoring of the processes during shock compres-
sion;  (ii)  synthesis  of  the  high-pressure  phases.  It  was  noted  that  the
latter  method  had  not  succeeded  yet,  while  the  former  led  to  some
indication that such an ultra-fast reaction may occur. The Al–Cu (3:1
mol  ratio) system  was  taken as  an  example.  It was  shown  that shock
adiabat for this powder mixture possesses an anomaly in the pressure
range 300–800 kbar, while those for separate metal powders do not. The
latter may indicate that the reaction between Al and Cu occurs promptly
in or very near the shock wave.

The review published in 1986 [10] covers the issues of the different
experimental  geometries  (cylindrical  and  plane)  for  dynamic  experi-
ments, which focused on the chemistry under high pressures. While most
of the reported chemistry was related to the organic substances, several
interesting  results  were  presented  on  inorganic  compounds  also,
including the synthesis of niobium nitride and niobium carbide in the
experiments with shock compression of the metal powder with liquid
nitrogen and solid carbon dioxide (see also [11]).

The original manuscript was published in the same year, investigated
the synthesis reactions behind the shock front [12]. The Sn + S––SnS
exothermic reaction (ΔHf  = (cid:0) 727 kJ/mol) was the focus of the study.
Notably, the theoretical density of the SnS is 5.22 g/cm3  (specific vol-
ume  0.192  cm3/g),  while  that  of  the  initial  (Sn  + S)  mixture  is  4.69
g/cm3  (specific volume 0.213 cm3/g). This indicates that the reaction
occurs with an increase in volume for this medium. The shock adiabats
were  determined  using  the  modified  reflection  method  proposed  by
Al’tshuler [13]. It was predicted that if the specific volumes of the re-
action mixture and reaction product are close, and the reaction itself is
highly exothermic, the experimental curve should deviate to the right
(toward lower compressibility) due to thermal back pressure. It is worth
noting  that  in  the  previous  work  [2],  the  deviation  of  the  Hugoniot
adiabat during chemical interactions was related to the change in the
volume  of  the  products  compared  to  that  of  the  mixture  of  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011213

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

3. Shock synthesis: Ni–Al system

3.1. Early studies

The Ni–Al system is widely used to investigate mechanisms of self-
sustained  reactions  [5,19].  The  reactions  between  Ni  and  Al  are
exothermic (ΔHf = (cid:0) 1079 kJ/kg) with adiabatic temperature ranges of
~1400–1911 K for the different ratios of the reagents (see Table 1). It is
worth  noting  that  the  1:1  mol  ratio  provides  the  highest  combustion
temperature (1911 K), equal to the melting point of the final product
(NiAl phase), while only 60% of the product is in the liquid state. The
adiabatic temperature for the 3Ni + Al system is only 1586 K, which is
below the melting point of the equilibrium product phase (Ni3Al).

It is important to recall that the first results on shock-synthesis in
Ni–Al  systems  were  reported  in  1985  [16].  A  mechanically  blended
Al–Ni mixture with approximately 1:3.5 mol ratio, with metal particle
sizes of Al (d < 45 μm) and Ni (45 < d < 75 μm), was pressed to an initial
relative density of 60%. The shock conditions involved plane loading
into the specimen and recovered in copper capsules with peak pressure
ranges (14–16 and 19–22 GPa, accuracy 10%), durations (4.5 and 4.7
μs). Numerically simulated peak temperatures of 723 K and 863 K (ac-
curacy 20%) were obtained. Note that these temperatures are below the
melting  point  of  aluminum  (933  K).  In  the  experiments  with  lower
pressure range, the formation of the Ni3Al phase was observed only in a
small triangular region close to the periphery of the specimen, where the
maximum  temperature  was  achieved.  On  the  other  hand,  at  higher
pressures,  intermetallics  (predominantly  Ni3Al,  but  also  some  tiny
amounts of NiAl, Ni2Al3, and even Al3Ni phases) were formed in three
regions.  It  was  believed  that  reaction  initiations  were  related  to  the
higher temperatures in hot regions. The speculation on the mechanisms
of  the  reaction  initiation  included  possible  “mechanical  activation”
(through  visco-plastic  deformation,  the  high-speed  motion  of  disloca-
tions,  formation  of  defects,  cleaning  of  surfaces,  and  possibly  the
opening of new surfaces) of the media, and as an initial step solid-state
diffusion of metals was suggested. It was concluded that while there is
no doubt that the reaction was initiated by the microsecond impulse of
the shock wave, the time frame in which the reactions go to completion
is not as certain.

In  the  following  year,  a  brief  review  paper  on  chemical  synthesis
under high-pressure shock loading was published [20]. The paper dis-
cussed two types of intermetallic reactive systems, i.e., Ni–Al and Al–Ti.
Again, the 3Ni–Al stoichiometry was investigated. In particular, it was
indicated that the reaction product’s yield strongly depends on shock
wave pressure (see Fig. 4). Up to 90% conversion was achieved at shock
pressure ~20 GPa. However, the degree of conversion reduces at pres-
sures above 20 GPa. The unexpected result of the NiAl phase formation
at  lower  pressures  can  be  explained  only  under  the  assumption  of
incorrect  estimates  of  temperatures.  Indeed,  melting  of  Al  with  Ni
dissolution in the melt is required to form the NiAl phase in the 3Ni–Al
system. In both publications [16,20], the experiments were conducted in
the  Sandia  recovery  fixtures  (Fig.  5).  The  fixtures  utilize  explosive
plane-wave  loading  into  the  specimen  recovery  capsules,  which  have
characteristic responses to the loading [21]. Each recovered capsule was
investigated  by  electron-probe  microanalysis.  Such  a  method,  in

Table 1
Some combustion characteristics of the Ni–Al system [19].

System

Adiabatic
temperature, K

Product
melting
point, K

Combustion
vawe velocity,
cm/s

Ni+3Al

1396

2Ni+3Al

1867

Ni + Al
3Ni + Al

1911
1586

1127

1405

1911
1754

0.09

0.90

1.24
0.22

Combustion
regime

Strong
pulsation
Weak
pulsating
Steady-state
Pulsating

Fig.  4. The  yield  of  Ni–Al  reaction  products  is  highly  dependent  on  shock
pressure  and  temperature.  Temperatures  values  were  obtained  by  simulation
(adapted from Graham et al. [20]).

principle,  does  not  allow  one  to  conclude  the  rate  of  the  chemical
reaction.

In 1992, the ultrafast chemical reactions between Ni and Al powders
during shock waves were reported [22], based on shock wave normal
stress  profile  measurements  and  metallographic  analysis.  The  experi-
mental setup is shown in Fig. 6. The placement of the gauge allowed
time-resolved monitoring of the reflected plane shock pressure at a point
in the steel block from which it reflects. The digitizing oscilloscope used
for data acquisition captured a data point at every 50 ns. The initiation
and propagation of chemical reactions in the samples were controlled by
varying flyer impact velocities (1064–1075 m/s).

Spherical Al particles (20 μm in diameter) were hand mixed with ~5
μm size Ni powder in a mole ratio of Al:Ni of 1:2.6. The mixture was
cold-pressed  to  less  than  3  mm  in  thickness  with  an  initial  relative
density of 55% inside 304 stainless steel retainer rings. It was shown that
at an impact velocity of 1064 m/s, the pressure overshoot was 20 kbar,
and analysis of the product showed only “signs of diffusion type reac-
tion”. However, at an impact velocity of 1075 m/s, pressure was ~60
kbar, and it did not change with a further increase in flyer velocity. The
excess  pressure  was  attributed  to  the  exothermic  heat  of  forming  an
intermetallic compound. EDS analysis showed that the Al3Ni interme-
tallic formed in some regions, while the remaining sample was unreac-
ted Ni. Based on this result, it was suggested that the reaction occurs in
the 100 ns wide shock front. Interparticle shear and microjetting, which
rapidly expose fresh reaction surfaces, were speculated to be responsible
for  the  observed  ultra-fast  reactions.  Based  on  current  knowledge,  a
plate velocity greater than 1000 m/s is sufficient to initiate the so-called
“mechanical  explosion”  phenomenon  [23]  in  a  thin  (<3  mm)  Ni–Al
specimen.  However,  the  quality  of  microstructure  analysis  was  poor.
The formation of the Al3Ni phase in the Al:Ni = 1:2.6 system suggests
that hot spots that appeared during the shock should have temperatures
below the melting point of Al (910 K), which is doubtful for the shock
pressure above 20 GPa. Additionally, the formation of the Al3Ni phase
contradicts the list of phases formed under similar shock wave pressures
(see Fig. 4) reported in Ref. [20].

Another paper on shock-induced synthesis in Ni–Al was published in
1992  [24].  In  this  work,  the  authors  did  not  address  the  issue  of
ultra-rapid reactions but investigated an important aspect: the influence
of  morphology  of  the  initial  precursors  on  their  reactivity  after  me-
chanical stimulation. The characteristics of the powders that were used
in the study are presented in Table 2. It is important to note that not only

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011214

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 5. Characteristic features of Sandia explosive shock recovery fixtures (reprinted from Thadhani [21] with permission from Taylor&Francis).

μm in width) and coarse spherical Al (45 μm) possessed the complete
reaction  yield,  in  contrast  to  the  spherical  Ni  (45  μm)  and  coarse
spherical Al (45 μm), which reacted only partially. In addition, in the
former  case,  the  NiAl  phase  predominately  formed,  while  for  other
mixtures,  only  the  Ni3Al  phase  was  detected.  It  was  mentioned  that
analysis  of  the  microstructure  of  the  products  allowed  authors  to
conclude  that  melting  of  interparticle  regions  between  Al–Al  and
particularly Ni–Ni particles is certain under investigated conditions.

Interesting  comments  were  made  regarding  the  reaction  mecha-
nisms. It was suggested that the reaction can be initiated locally (on the
Ni–Al interface) at localized spots at high temperatures and then dissi-
pate due to heat losses via heat conduction. This mechanism is observed
for mixtures with low conversion. On the other hand, the “bulk-initiated
reaction”  may occur in flake Ni or a  mixture of fine (1–3  mm) metal
powders. We will see later that this is due to two distinct combustion
modes,  specifically  a  self-propagating  reaction  and  thermal  explosion
[5,19].

Finally,  the  hypothesis  suggested  in  Ref.  [25]  that  overall
shock-induced  synthesis  is  controlled  by  CONMAH  (Configuration,
Mixing, Activation, Heating) model and it was used for the analysis. The
schematic of this conceptual model is shown in Fig. 8. The progress of
the synthesis is separated into three stages: the initial configuration, the
transition  zone,  and  the  final  compressed  configuration.  The  critical
region  in  the  synthesis  event  is  the  transition  zone.  During  shock
compression,  irreversible  changes  take  place  in  the  initial  media,
altering its state significantly. For example, in powder mixtures, indi-
vidual particles are substantially deformed to fill the voids. The degree
of deformation in the particles is strongly influenced by the differences
in the properties of the constituent particles, the powder morphology,
starting porosity (or void volume), and the shape of voids. Additionally,
the defect substructure within the solid particulates is also substantially

Fig.  6. Schematic  representation  of  the  experiment.  The  disks  are  fixed
together, placed in a recovery cup, and backed by a momentum trap (reprinted
from Bennett et al. [22] with permission from AIP Publishing).

the particle size but also the morphology of Ni powders (spherical and
flake) was varied. These different powders were mixed in a molar ratio
Ni:Al = 3:1. The experimental conditions were almost the same as in
Ref.  [16].  The  calculated  typical  temperature-pressure  distributions
along the sample are presented in Fig. 7, showing that the maximum
temperature should not exceed 583 K.

It was shown that reaction yield strongly depends on the morphology
of the particles used. For example, mixture 4 (Table 2) with flake Ni (45

Table 2
Characteristics of nickel-aluminum powder mixtures [24].

Nickel Powder

Aluminum Powder

Powder mix no. and type

1: Fine-Fine
2: Medium-Medium
3: Coarse-Coarse
4: Flake-Coarse
5: Coarse-Medium

Shape

Spher.
Spher.
Spher.
Flake
Spher.

Size (um)

3–7
10–20
(cid:0) 45 + 20
~44
(cid:0) 45 + 20

Purity (%)

Sourcea

99.9
99.9
99.9
99.9
99.9

(1)
(3)
(5)
(7)
(5)

Shape

Round
Spher.
Spher.
Spher.
Spher.

Size (um)

Purity (%)

Sourcea

1
10–20
~44
~44
5–15

99.9
99.5
99.8
99.8
99.9

(2)
(4)
(6)
(6)
(8)

s source: (1) Aesar-10256; (2) Cerac-A-1183; (3) Cerac-N-1023; (4) Cerac-A-1182; (5) Aesar-10581; (6) Aeasar-11067; (7) Aesar-13788; (8) Cerac-A-1189.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011215

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 7. Typical (a) maximum mean-bulk temperature distribution and (b) maximum peak pressure distribution in powder compacts in the Momma Bear A Comp B
fixture (reprinted from Thadhani et al. [24] with permission from Taylor&Francis).

materials, covering all works in the field to date, was published in 1993
[15].  Here,  we  briefly  list  the  shock-induced  chemical  reactions  that
were discussed: (i) synthesis of complex oxides from the binary oxides
(see references 21, 23, 28, 121 in Ref. [15]), (ii) synthesis of carbides
(Ti–C;  W–C;  Al–C)  first  publication  in  1963  (ref  35  in  Ref.  [15])  and
borides (Ti–B) (ref. 145 in Ref. [15]), (iii) chemical reactions in silicide
systems,  including  Ti–Si,  Ni–Si  (by  Krueger  et  al.,  ref  174–176  in
Ref. [15]) and Mo–Si, Nb–Si, Cu–Si), with a discussion of the influence of
melting of Si on the kinetics of the shock-induced reaction. However, the
most attention was paid to the chemical reactions in the Al–Me (Me: Ni,
Ti, Nb, W) systems, with a comprehensive discussion dedicated to the
Ni–Al system. Let us briefly outline the most critical findings obtained at
that  time  without  reiterating  the  previously  discussed  results.  Specif-
ically,  the  3Ni–Al  stoichiometry  was  investigated  with  relatively  low
exothermicity (see Table l). Such selection was probably determined by
the mechanical properties  of the alloy and  its further potential appli-
cations. It was shown that chemical reactions after shock stimulation are
influenced by:

• The intensity of shock-loading conditions: typical threshold 20–30
GPa, impact velocity above 1 km/s for the formation of the Ni3Al
phase and 1.6 km/s for the formation of the NiAl phase;

The existence of the pressure threshold requires no additional com-
ments.  However,  the  formation  of  different  phases,  specifically  NiAl
following higher pressure impact, is not trivial. In the 3Ni–Al system, the
equilibrium product is the Ni3Al phase. This means that if the complete
reaction is achieved, only the Ni3Al phase should be detected. Higher
impact  velocity  should  allow  a  higher  degree  of  conversion,  i.e.,  the
formation of the Ni3Al phase. The detection of the NiAl phase above 1.6
km/s of impact velocity suggests a significant amount (~2 mol of initial
3 mol) of unreacted nickel. The only logical explanation for the obtained
result  within  the  framework  of  classical  theory  is  that  hot  spots with
temperatures above the melting point of Al (913 K) and below that of Ni
(1728 K) are formed under considered conditions. Some Ni dissolves in
the melt, and rapid cooling leads to the crystallization of the most re-
fractory NiAl phase. The rest of Ni remains unreacted. However, in this
case, it is difficult to explain the formation of the Ni3Al phase at lower
plate velocity. Indeed, the temperatures of the hot spots are much lower
(probably even less than the melting point of Al). Thus, the solid-state
reaction  should  govern  the  process.  According  to  the  phase  diagram

Fig.  8. The  schematic  of  the  conceptual  model  showing  the  progress  of  the
synthesis in three stages; the initial configuration, the transition zone, and the
final compressed configuration, where the critical region in the synthesis event
takes place in the transition zone (adapted from Graham [25]).

changed at the atomic and microscopic levels. The most critical process
that can affect subsequent chemistry during the transition zone is mass
mixing, which occurs due to the turbulent flow of particles in the void
space during pore collapse. This extensive plastic deformation of indi-
vidual  particles  and  their  relative  flow  past  each  other  results  in
cleansing of particle surfaces as well as the introduction of saturation
levels of defects, leading to shock activation. Under these conditions, the
solid-state reactivity is significantly enhanced.

As one can conclude, the CONMAH is a generic conceptual model
that includes all possible essential phenomena but does not provide any
specific arguments on the shock-induced or shock-assisted events.

A  comprehensive  review  on  the  topic  of  the  shock  synthesis  of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011216

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

and  considering  known  diffusion  coefficients,  the  Al3Ni  phase  should
form first. And if we assume rapid cooling conditions, we should detect
this  phase.  It  is  worth  noting  that  overall  analysis  of  the  presented
microstructure  allows  us  to  conclude  that  in  non-reacted  zones,
regardless  of  particles  morphology,  the  temperature  was  below  the
melting point of Al. In contrast, the specific morphology (dendrites) of
the reacted areas suggests that the temperature in this zone was above
the melting point of Al.

• Powder  morphology:  fine  spherical  particles  (~1  μm)  or  flake
(thickness of the flake was below 1 μm) Ni morphology showed a
much higher yield;

The  smaller  size  of  the  most  refractory  component  (Ni)  results  in
higher  yield.  This  conclusion  is  correct  in  the  case  the  reaction  tem-
perature is below the melting point of this component [5,26], which is
the considered condition.

• The porosity of the initial media: absence of voids retards the reac-
tion. For example, it was shown that for flake Ni-Spherical Al powder
mixture,  only  traces  of  the  Ni3Al  phase  were  observed  when  the
initial porosity of the media was below 40%, and complete conver-
sion was achieved with porosity above 50%;

It was suggested that the flake powder morphology and higher media
porosity  contribute  to  enhanced  shock-induced  deformation,  plastic
flow,  and  mixing,  resulting  in  higher  product  yield.  Additionally,  the
hypothesis proposes that the larger pore sizes lead to greater localized
plastic strain, which in turn generates higher temperatures in the voids
during pore collapse, thereby increasing the overall potential for local-
ized interparticle reactions. While the formation of hot spots due to the
collapsing of pores is a possible mechanism for reaction initiation, we
believe that altering porosity from 50% to 40% does not significantly
impact  this  phenomenon.  Increasing  sample  density  results  in  higher
thermal diffusivity of the media, making it more difficult to initiate a
reaction  using  an  otherwise  similar  initiation  source.  Further  experi-
ments are necessary to provide clarity on the matter.

• The composition of the initial mixture also influences the degree of
conversion. For example, it was stated that mixtures with the equi-
volumetric distribution of precursors (i.e., 3Ni–Al and Al) are more
prone to reaction than the 3Al–Ni system;

It is not a surprising result and is probably related to the fact that the
exothermicity of the 3Al–Ni system is much less than that of two other
systems  (see  Table  1).  However,  it  is  interesting  that  Ni  particles  un-
dergo  significantly  higher  deformation  in  compacts  of  Ni-rich  volu-
metric distribution (i.e., 3Ni-AI), as compared to Al-rich system (Ni-A1
and  3Al–Ni),  where  the  Ni  particles  practically  retain  their  rounded
shape after shock compression in a softer Al-rich matrix.

Based on the experimental evidence and discussions above, there is
no doubt that the shock stimulation can initiate the reaction. However,
the  question  of  the  existence  of  ultra-fast  gasless  reactions,  occurring
within the span of 100 nm, remains unanswered. This issue is discussed
in the last part of the review and is dedicated to different types of models
formulated in order to explain the experimental observations. First, it is
clear that the high porosity of the initial media, in cases where the re-
action occurred, completely excluded the occurrence of a solid detona-
tion wave. Second, it was outlined that the fundamental aspects of the
mechanisms  for  the  shock-induced  synthesis  and  the  kinetic  issues
remain poorly understood. Third, it was stated that some experimental
evidence exists, obtained through the analysis of the Hugoniot studies
(as  mentioned  earlier)  and  also  through  time-resolved  radiation  py-
rometer measurements [27], suggesting that ultra-fast gasless reactions
may exist in systems such as Sn–S, Ni–Al, Al–Fe2O3.

The  first  model  to  describe  shock-induced  gasless  synthesis  was

suggested  in  1985  using  the  DYNA2D  hydro  code  [28].  The  experi-
mentally measured Hugoniot for the Ti–B system was used to construct
the constitutive relation. It was considered that the reaction was ignited
by the thermal energy introduced by the shock compression of powders.
The thermal energy is provided as the pores collapse, producing heat at
the  so-called  “hot  spots”,  and  the  surrounding  material  undergoes
visco-plastic heating. Mass mixing was considered as a very rapid type of
diffusion  (hundred  to  thousand  times  greater  than  normal  values).
However, it is worth noting that the relative error in determining re-
action completeness was as much as 30% owing to uncertainties in the
measured Hugoniot and its relative insensitivity to differences between
the equations of state of the reactants and products [27].

Another  model  was  developed  for  the  Ni–Al  system  [29].  The
one-dimensional  WONDY-V  hydro  code  was  used.  Interestingly,  the
following kinetic scheme was utilized,

A + B → (AxB) →A3B

where transient state AxB was assumed to be a non-equilibrium mixture
of precursors formed by mechanisms such as dispersive macromixing of
particles, mixing due to interfacial instabilities, and microscopic diffu-
sion. The schematic of this model is presented in Fig. 9.

For  additional  simplification,  the  researchers  assumed  fluid-like
behavior for chemical reactions, assuming a common temperature and
pressure in an average sense of the overall mixture, and no simultaneous
density change of constituents during chemical reactions. Furthermore,
the reaction rates, including mass mixing, were found to depend on the
concentration  of  elemental  Al  and  Ni  (per  unit  volume),  while  the
growth rate depended on the amount of Ni in the non-equilibrium NixAl
mixture. According to this model, for shock-induced synthesis to pro-
ceed,  the  localized  peak  temperature  should  fall  within  the  range  of
1000–2000 K, and the reaction time should be less than 1 μs. Moreover,
it was demonstrated that if the activation energy of the reaction is as low
as 4 kcal/mol, the reaction may go to completion in approximately 20
μs. Here, we want to argue that, as shown in recent experiments [30],
the concept of an “intermediate mixture” is very fruitful as it allows for
the  consideration  of  solid  solutions  formed  in  the  initial  stages  of
interaction between Ni and Al.

A two-dimensional model was developed to simulate the process of
reactive  shock  compaction  of  inert  diamond  mixed  with  silicon  and
graphite powders [31]. This model can be phenomenologically divided
into three parts: pore compaction, global chemical reactions, and heat
exchange. Mass transport is not considered as the diffusivities of species
in condensed matter are negligible. Additionally, the reactive (Si-gra-
phite) and inert (diamond) species are assumed not to be in thermal but
mechanical  equilibrium.  The  collapse  of  voids  was  described  using
Herman’s pressure-porosity (P-α) model [32]. For the chemical reaction
and mass transport, a single effective Arrhenius equation for first-order

Fig. 9. The powder mixture is represented by a three-layered composite slab,
with a void inserted between two constituent elements (adapted from Horie and
Kipp [29]).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011217

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

reaction  was  considered.  Bulk  heat  transfer  between  the  inert  and
reactive subsystems was described using Newton’s law of heat conduc-
tion. The thermodynamic and phenomenological equations were inte-
grated and applied to the two-dimensional PISCES code [33]. Later, this
Void-Inert-Reactive  (VIR)  constitutive  model  was  implemented  into
DYNA2D hydrocode [34]. In addition, thermomechanical models were
also developed [35–37].

The  more  recent  works  [37,38]  have  provided  a  comprehensive
analysis of shock-induced reactions in the Ni–Al system under various
intensities  of  the  shock  wave.  Fig.  10  illustrates  the  changes  in  the
Hugoniot  as  the  energy  of  stimulation  increases,  transitioning  from
non-reacted  3Ni  + Al  mixture  to  the  Ni3Al  and  NiAl  products.  This
analysis indicates that the conversion to NiAl requires higher pressure
compared to that for Ni3Al product, which is in line with experimental
findings.  However,  the  authors  did  not  offer  an  explaination  for
obtaining the pure NiAl phase in the 3Ni–Al system, as the reported XRD
data did not show the existence of the Ni phase.

to

faster

than  conventional  cases  due

In  1994,  Thadhani  summarized  the  results  of  shock-wave  related
reactions from the previous decade in a concise review [39]. Regarding
the shock-assisted reactions, it was suggested that these reactions could
proceed  much
the
defects-enhanced  solid-state diffusion.  However,  no  measurements  on
the increase of defects in the media after impacts were accomplished,
and the conclusion was solely based on the DTA/DSC data. Nevertheless,
all  observed  effects  can  be  explained  by  two  interrelated  factors:  an
increase  in  the  surface  area  contacts  between  the  reactants  and  a
decrease in the average porosity of the media. Indeed, the impact of a
shock wave compresses the reactive media, leading to these changes in
the microstructural characteristics mentioned above. The higher contact
surface  area  between  the  reactants  results  in  enhanced  kinetics,  as
observed  by  DTA/DSC  studies,  and  the  higher  sample  bulk  density,
owing  to  the  increased  thermal  diffusivity  of  the  media,  leads  to  the
higher velocity of the combustion front propagation [5].

As far as the shock-induced reactions are concerned, in-situ experi-
ments providing evidence of extremely rapid reactions were considered
to correspond to the kinks in shock adiabats. It was noted that two other
approaches,  namely  measurements  of  pressure  and  temperature
changes, are less reliable [39]. Considering the relative error of 30% in
determining reaction completeness due to uncertainties in the Hugoniot
adiabat measurements and its insensitivity to differences between the
equations of state of the reactants and products mentioned in Ref. [27],

Fig. 10. Calculated pressure and specific volume Hugoniot curves for (a) solid
mixture of 3Ni + AI, (b) porous 3Ni + AI mixture, and shock-initiated reaction
products  (c)  solid  Ni3Al  and  (d)  NiAI+2Ni  (adapted  from  Song  and  Thad-
hani [37]).

it is important to critically consider the drawbacks in all experimental
approaches  used  to  investigate  shock-induced  reactions  during  data
analysis.

Furthermore, it was stated that one cannot explain the microsecond
scale processes by conventional diffusion, but an “enhanced solid-state
diffusion” is necessary. Therefore, the following questions were formu-
lated: Is possible that these high-rate chemical reactions occur via solid-
state diffusionless mechanisms involving nonconventional mechanically
induced  nucleation  and  growth  processes?  Can  shock  compression-
induced  plastic  flow  cause  restructuring  of  atomic  arrangements  as
well as alteration of the nature of chemical bonding to induce such high-
rate  chemical  reactions?  Several  possible  mechanisms  were  outlined,
including  thermochemical,  diffusionless,  mechanically-deformational,
and mechanochemical concepts.

The thermomechanical  concept suggests that the  collapsing  of the
pores or the temperature increase resulting from shock wave compres-
sion leads to the formation of localized hot spots, and the reaction ini-
tiates when the ignition criteria is met, i.e., the energy generated by the
chemical  reaction  is  greater  than  the  energy  dissipated  by  thermal
conduction. Below, we provide estimations on the possibility of such a
mechanism, which involves data on the kinetics of chemical reactions in
the combustion wave.

The diffusionless mechanism is assumed to be similar to martensitic
transformations,  where  phase  transformations  in  a  solid  state  occur
without any change in chemical composition. Thus, we may talk about
transformations  such  as  from  graphite  to  diamond  atomic  rearrange-
ment  in  the  shock  wave,  but  not  for  the  transformation  involving  a
chemical  reaction.  However,  the  common  idea  of  the  importance  of
shear stress was used in Ref. [2] to suggest a diffusionless mechanism, as
illustrated  in  Fig.  2.  This  model  can  also  be  regarded  as  a  mechano-
chemical  model,  which  generally  assumes  severe  plastic  deformation
and flow under high-pressure shock wave conditions, causing fluid-like
flow,  mass  mixing,  and  dispersion  of  constituents  that  result  in
shock-induced chemical reactions [39]. The conclusion drawn was that
while  some  evidence  exists  on  chemical  reactions  occurring  during
shock compression in powder mixtures within time scales of mechanical
equilibrium, the fundamental mechanism behind this phenomenon re-
mains inadequately understood.

3.2. Contemporary studies

An  extensive  review  on  combustion  synthesis  in  the  Ni–Al  system
was  published  in  2001  [40].  A  dedicated  section  discussed  shock
(explosive)  compaction,  reiterating  that  the  fundamental  processes
leading to the synthesis of compounds are not fully understood. In 2006,
the  next  stage  of  the  Ni–Al  shock-assisted  saga  began  [41,42].  The
mixture of spherical Al and Ni particles (average diameter:45 μm) with a
1:1  Al:Ni  volume  ratio  (i.e.,  1:1.5  atomic  ratio),  and  initial  relative
density of ~60% was investigated. The impact experiments were con-
ducted using an 80 mm diameter helium-driven single-stage gas gun at
velocities ranging from 250 to 1000 m/s, corresponding to calculated
crush-up pressures from 0.4 GPa to 6 GPa. The conclusion was that the
Hugoniot-based  model  did  not  provide  evidence  of  shock-induced  re-
action. However, post-shock characterization of samples treated at the
highest velocity (~1 km/s) revealed a limited amount of the NiAl3 phase
formed via the dissolution of Ni in Al (Fig. 11).

The  same  authors  reported  the  results  of  time-resolved  Hugoniot
measurements in a mixture of flake Ni (~0.3 mm thick) and spherical Al
particles  mixture  (1:1  vol  ratio)  as  shown  in  Fig.  12  [42].  For  this
experiment, they used a different experimental configuration, particu-
larly a Cu or W flyer against a Cu driver plate 57.2 mm diameter, 5.6 mm
thick, producing a well-defined shock pulse that propagated through a
thin ~2.5 mm thick Ni–Al powder layer. The maximum applied pressure
in  the  shock  was  again  ~6  GPa.  Deviations  between  the  calculated
Hugoniot of inert reactants and data reduced from gauge records were
observed above 3.5 GPa (impact velocity, 1004 m/s; Fig. 12), indicating

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011218

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig.  11. Micrographs revealing  the microstructure  of  specimens  recovered  from  experiments conducted  at  250,  618,  and 998 m/s.  Evidence  of  mixing and  the
formation of the NiAl3 reaction product was observed only at the highest velocity (reprinted from Eakins and Thadhani [41] with permission from AIP Publishing).

Fig. 12. Flake Ni and spherical Al mixture in starting, unmixed condition, and after pressing to the initial density of 45% TMD. The plot of shock velocity and input
stress for the flake mixtures up to 6 GPa. The experimental data (closed circles) follow the calculated inert response (solid line) up to 3.5 GPa. The data at higher
stresses (inset) indicate a deviation toward the calculated reaction product curves (dashed lines), suggesting the occurrence of a shock-induced reaction (reprinted
from Eakins and Thadhani [42] with permission from AIP Publishing).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)1011219

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

that the increase in shock velocity was associated with a shock-induced
chemical  reaction.  Moreover,  the  results  suggested  the  shock-induced
formation of the intermetallic compound, with the predominant phase
being  equi-atomic  NiAl.  Unfortunately,  no  data  was  reported  on  the
structural characterization of the obtained reaction products.

A  key  conclusion  from  the  above  results  is  that  material  behavior
under shock conditions strongly depends on its microstructure. From a
conventional kinetics standpoint, the higher surface contact between the
particles and the smallest diffusion scale (e.g., particle size) results in the
lowest ignition temperature and the highest rate of chemical reaction
[5].

Subsequent research focused on mixtures of metal nanoparticles and
nanostructured  Ni/Al  composite  particles.  The  latter  was  produced
through  short-term  high-energy  ball  milling  (HEBM)  [43–47].  The
detailed sample preparation process is described in detail in the Journal
of Visualized Experiments [48]. Briefly, a mixture of Al and Ni powders of
different initial average sizes ranging from 5 to 45 μm, typically 1:1 mol
ratio, underwent HEBM in planetary ball mills (e.g., PM 100, Retsch,
Germany)
inert  (argon)  atmosphere,  with  various
ball-to-powder ratios (for more details, refer to Ref. [46]). The duration
of the intensive mechanical treatment should not exceed a critical time
to  prevent any chemical interaction  during HEBM. As  a  result of  this
treatment, instead of the mixture of the Ni + Al particles, the composite
Ni/Al  particles  are  formed,  which  involve  both  metals  mixed  on  the
submicron scale (Fig. 13).

in  air  or

The average size of the composite particles varies from 10 to 850 μm,
which depends on the HEBM conditions [47]. Also, the mixing scale may
be varied in the range of ~1 mm–~20 nm (Fig. 14).

Numerous  studies  have  demonstrated  a  significant  increase  in
oxygen-free  (fresh)  contact  surface  area  between  the  reactants,
compared with the point contacts through the protective oxide layer in
the initial mixture. This increase, coupled with a simultaneous decrease
of the characteristic diffusion scales, led to a remarkable enhancement of
the reaction kinetics (cf. [30,47–51]). Specifically, it has been observed
that an effective activation energy of the reaction decreases from ~400
kJ/mol for the powder mixture to ~90 kJ/mol for the composite par-
ticles.  Furthermore,  the  ignition  temperature,  under  similar  heat  loss
conditions, decreases from ~913 K (eutectic temperature for the Ni–Al
system) for the conventional mixture to ~500 K for the Ni/Al particles.
Hence,  such  reactive  media  is  ideal  for  investigating  the  shock-
assisted  reactions,  since  it  may  enable  reaction  at  much  smaller  pa-
rameters (e.g., pressure) of the shock wave. The latter permits the uti-
lization of advanced diagnostics, such as high-speed video recording or a
high-speed  thermo-vision  system,  to  monitor  the  process  of  reaction

propagation during the shock [23,47,52–54]. We should note that these
studies differ significantly from the previous ones in several key aspects:

• The 1:1 Ni:Al mol ratio was used, representing the most exothermic
system (see Table 1), whereas previous studies investigated compo-
sitions of 3:1 or 2:1 Ni:Al mol ratios.

• Thin (~3 mm) in the direction of the shock wave propagation sam-
ples were previously. investigated, while the size of the samples in
this direction was 20 mm in these studies;

• The  characteristic  diffusion  scales  in  the  nanostructured  Ni/Al
composite particles were well below 1 μm. Much larger sizes (0.3–45
μm) of the metal particles were used previously.

• The contact surface area between the reactive layers was two to three
orders of magnitude larger than the conventional powder mixtures.
• In-situ  video  recording  was  employed  as  a  process  diagnostic,  of-

fering valuable insights to the phenomenon.

Reaction  initiation  through  the  mechanical  impact  was  achieved
through  a  combined  compression/shear  experiment  used  previously
with explosives [55]. The selected mixtures were pressed to densities
ranging from 65% to 73% of the theoretical max density (% TMD). The
resulting cuboidal pressed samples measured 20 mm × 20 mm x 2 mm.
These samples were placed in a specially designed reaction chamber and
subjected to impact using the Asay shear impact experiment, illustrated
schematically in Fig. 15.

In summary, a moving piston impacts a plunger, exerting 2-D shear
on the sample’s narrow face. A custom-built 25.4 mm bore light gas gun
accelerates the piston. Piston velocities ranging from 715 m/s to 1070
m/s  were  employed,  resulting  in  muzzle  energies  of  about  6–15  kJ.
High-speed imaging of the impact events was conducted using a Phan-
tom v7.3 high-speed camera (Vision Research). This camera recorded
impacts at 138,000 fps (inter-frame time of 7.25 ms) with an image size
of 64 × 64 pixels. Image analysis, including scaling and determination of
front propagation velocity, was performed using ImageJ software.

Remarkably, some type of Ni/Al composite nanoparticles exhibited
shock-assisted reactions at a threshold as low as 100 m/s (kinetic energy
is ~100 J) [47]. However, samples compacted from the initial mixture
of the Ni + Al powders could not be ignited even at an impact velocity as
high as 1000 m/s (12 kJ). Analysis of video frames (Fig. 16) reveals the
following  sequence  of  the  events:  (i)  at  t  = 0  the  plunger  strikes  the
sample; (ii) after ~30 ms of delay, the first hot spot appears near the
plunger’s
this
high-temperature  area  expands  in  the  form  of  reaction  wave  with  a
propagation velocity of 20 ± 3 cm/s. XRD analysis confirmed AlNi as the

subsequent  ~80  ms,

(iii)  over

surface;

the

Fig. 13. Schematics of fabrication of the reactive composite particles.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112110

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 14. Typical scanning electron microscope (SEM) images for different composite particles: coarse (a,b), and nanolaminated microstructures (c,d) (reprinted from
Manukyan et al. [47] with permission from the American Chemical Society).

VWR) and pressed to the TMD ~65% (Fig. 18).

At the lowest velocity tested (780 m/s; (7.91 kJ), the results were
similar to previous previously described experiments using a lower en-
ergy  gas  gun.  The  plunger  densified  the  media,  but  no  reaction  was
observed initially at the time of impact. After a delay of 28.3 ms, the first
bright zone indicating a reaction between Ni and Al appeared at the face
of the plunger. This discrete ignition zone expanded to form a reaction
wave  that  propagated  through  the  entire  sample  at  a  relatively  low
speed (~8 cm/s).

However, the reaction occurred in a significantly different mode at a
higher piston velocity of (840 m/s, 8.6 kJ). Promptly during the impact
event, an extremely bright zone formed at the upper and lower bound-
aries of the plunger, as seen in Fig. 19. This bright area rapidly (~800 m/
s, which is comparable with the speed of the projectile) propagated a
short distance into the sample and then decayed. These areas remained
bright for several frames, suggesting that the reaction took additional
time to complete. After the initial luminosity decayed, there was a delay
of 9 ms before a reaction was initiated at the center axis of the plunger
face,  where  no  light  was  previously  emitted.  The  reaction  then
continued at low speed mode (ca. 8 cm/s) and consumed the rest of the
media that had  not reacted in the high-speed mode. Post-reaction in-
spection of the samples using XRD analysis indicated that the entirety of
the sample was reacted primarily, forming the NiAl intermetallic phase.
Thus, the observed phenomenon consists of two stages: high-speed, i.e.,
comparable with the speed of the shock wave, and low-speed, compa-
rable with that observed during shock-assisted.

At  even  higher  impact  velocity  (1070  m/s;  14.9  kJ),  the  reaction
occurred  essentially  through  the  high-speed  mode.  Again,  the  high-
temperature  zone  formed  during  the  impact  event,  but  the  reaction
front spanned the entire sample rather than only above and below the
plunger,  consuming  nearly  the  entire  sample  with  the  speed  of  the
projectile  (Fig.  20).  It  was  noted  that  the  first  bright  areas  appeared
above and below the axis of the plunger, at an angle of approximately
◦
45

off the axis, i.e., along the high-share regions [23,47].
To  understand  the  observed  phenomenon  of  shock-induced  high-
speed reactions, we outline another important finding derived from the
comparison  of  the  thermal  and  shock  sensitivities  of  Ni/Al  nano-
composite particles and Ni–Al nanopowder mixtures. On one hand, it
was  shown  that  Ni/Al  nanocomposite  possesses  a  lower  effective

Fig.  15. Schematic  representation  of  the  Asay  shear  impact  experiment.  The
sample is constrained by a windowed plate (not shown) (reprinted from Reeves
et al. [23] with permission from John Wiley and Sons).

main phase in the reacted material. Smaller peaks of Al3Ni2  and AlNi3
phases were also detected, likely attributed to the rapid cooling of the
sample after the reaction.

A  comparison  of  the  microstructures  of  the  initial  (Fig.  17a)  and
shocked (Fig. 17b) samples revealed that the morphology of the particles
(shape and overall size) remained essentially unchanged. The interpar-
ticle  porosity  of  the  sample  decreased  due  to  impact-induced  plastic
deformation,  while  their  internal  porosity  increased  due  to  specific
volume  shrinkage  during  chemical  reactions.  EDS  analysis  indicated
that  the  gray  phase  corresponds  to  the  AlNi  compound,  whereas  the
lighter phase consists of Ni-rich, i.e., Al3Ni2 and AlNi3 phases. Based on
these  observations,  the  authors  concluded  that  the  shock-assisted  re-
actions occurred solely through the solid-state diffusion mechanism in
the considered system. The latter is due to a significant decrease in the
apparent activation energy of Ni dissolution in Al for the HEMB-induced
Ni/Al nanostructures [47].

Another important result was obtained when investigating the me-
chanical stimulation of the mixture of the Ni–Al nanopowders [23]. The
Ni (80–150 nm, Alfa-Aesar) and Al (80 nm, Novacentrix) nanopowders
were  mixed  through  sonication  in  hexanes  (98.5%  hexane  isomers,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112111

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 16. A sequence of high-speed video images from a shear impact test (reprinted from Manukyan et al. [47] with permission from the American Chemical Society).

Fig. 17. SEM microstructure of sample before (a) and after reaction (b) (reprinted from Manukyan et al. [47] with permission from the American Chemical Society).

activation energy and, as a result, a lower ignition temperature (~550
K) compared to the nano-mixture (~820 K). Note that both tempera-
tures were well below eutectic temperature (912 K) in the Ni–Al system,
indicating that the former was thermally more sensitive than the latter.

Additionally, the shock-assisted reaction front propagated faster in the
Ni/Al media (~20 cm/s) than in the nano-mixture (~8 cm/s). On the
other hand, in the investigated range of the shock wave conditions, the
high-speed  shock-induced  mode  was  observed  for  the  Ni  + Al  nano-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112112

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 18. SEM micrographs of pressed Ni and Al nanopowders (a) low-resolution, and (b) high-resolution images (reprinted from Reeves et al. [23] with permission
from John Wiley and Sons).

Fig.  19. The  partial  high-speed  reaction  regime  in  nNi/nAl  system  is  shown  in  this  image  sequence.  Plunger  enters  the  frame  from  right,  and  the  plunger’s
approximate location is outlined. The reaction occurs at a high rate in local regions at an impact velocity of 840 m/s. Inter-frame time is 7.25 ms (reprinted from
Reeves et al. [23] with permission from John Wiley and Sons).

mixture,  while  only  the  shock-assisted  mode  was  detected  for  Ni/Al
nanocomposites, suggesting that the nano-mixture appeared to be more
shock-sensitive.

The microstructure of the compressed samples provides insight into
why  nanopowder  mixtures  exhibited  the  high-speed  mode,  while  the
HEBM  materials  did  not  (compare  Figs.  17  and  18).  Although  both
materials have similar porosity (~35%), the pore size distribution with
respect  to  the  reactive  interfaces  is  significantly  different.  The  nano-
powder compact (Fig. 18) possesses numerous small pores (on the order
of  half  of  metal  particle  diameter,  i.e.,  ~40  nm),  co-located  with  the
reactive interface between Ni and Al. In contrast, since the HEBM par-
ticles  have  a  characteristic  dimension  of  up  to  25  mm,  the  pores  are
much  larger, and  only a few of them are located around the reactive
particles. Also, the Ni/Al particles, involving both Ni and Al, have higher
strength than Al particles. As a result, later undergo more severe plastic
flow in the shock wave and, therefore, may attain a higher temperature
(see also results of simulation in Ref. [56]).

Assuming that collapsing of pores and plastic deformation of metal

particles are the main mechanisms for heating the reactive media during
the  shock,  it  is  logical  to  conclude  that  a  mixture  of  nano-particles
possess a higher “effective”  temperature in the reaction cell [5]. Note
that  the  layer  thickness  of  the  HEBM  particles  is  similar  to  that  of
nanopowders. This implies that the mass diffusion time for the complete
reaction, and thus the reaction time, should be similar for both mate-
rials. However, the surface area contact between the reactants is higher
for an individual HEBM particle. Therefore, when preheated in a similar
manner,  Ni/Al  particles  react  faster  than  the  Ni  + Al  nano-mixture.
However,  the  temperature  conditions  in  the  shock  wave  appeared  to
be very different for this medium, and high-speed mode was observed
only for the system locally preheated to a much higher temperature.

Now that we understand the importance of the “external” preheating
of the reactive media by the shock wave, we may explain the observed
high-speed  reaction  mode based  on the  understanding of  the thermal
explosion phenomenon in heterogeneous media [5,57]. There are two
combustion  reaction  modes,  i.e.,  self-propagating  and  thermal  explo-
sion. In the former case, the reaction locally initiated propagates along

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112113

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 20. The high-speed reaction regime in nNi/nAl system is shown in this image sequence. This reaction was initiated at an impact velocity of 1070 m/s. Plunger
enters the frame from right, and its approximate position is outlined in framed B–H. Inter-frame time is 7.25 ms (reprinted from Reeves et al. [23] with permission
from John Wiley and Sons).

the media in a steady-state manner. It is important to note that in this
mode, the system completely “forgets” about the thermal initiation stage
after traveling some distance from the heating spot. This mode may have
analogies in the shock-induced processes, so-called solid-state detona-
tion wave (cf. [58–60]). The other mode is the thermal explosion (TE)
mode; in which the reaction media is uniformly preheated to a critical
condition,  and  the  reaction  initiates  at  every  point  of  the  preheated
volume. Analysis of the critical TE conditions reveals that TE may occur
in  different  modes.  Under  the  conditions  of  low  heat  losses  and  high
thermal diffusivity of the reaction medium the Biot number approaches
zero,  and  the  particle  is  heated  uniformly.  Consequently,  a  chemical
reaction may occur at every point of the sample with the nearly the same
rate during the entire process, known as the uniform TE mode [61] or
volumetric explosion. In reality, it is experimentally impossible to obtain
such  “ideally  uniform”  heating  conditions.  Temperatures  in  different
areas  of  the  sample  may  be  slightly  different,  leading  to  spatial
non-uniformity in the temperature sensitive chemical reaction rate, and
hence, heat release. In this mode, the maximum temperature and the
degree of conversion will be achieved initially in some local regions and
then may spread over the whole sample. For an external viewer, such
spreading of high-temperature regions appears similar to the propaga-
tion of a conventional combustion wave. However, the important dif-
ference  is  that  in  the  former  case,  the  reactions  in  each  point  of  the
medium proceed essentially independently of heat release in other parts
of  the  sample.  This  aspect  of  the  process  can  be  defined  as  a  virtual
combustion  wave  propagation  [62].  Such  waves  are  characterized  by
low-temperature gradients but very high propagation rates [57].

The  mechanically  stimulated  fast  reaction  mode  discussed  above
does not match the characteristics of a self-sustained detonation [63].
On one hand, the reaction wave can initially travel near the velocity of
the projectile, which for a porous structure could be above the sound
speed.  On  the  other  hand,  instead  of  the  released  chemical  energy
maintaining the steady, high-speed propagation of the reaction wave,
the reaction is tied exclusively to the passage of the stress wave as it
transfers the kinetic energy of the impact into the sample. The intense
heating and structural rearrangement caused by the passage of the stress

wave  induces  a  reaction  in  the  material  independent  of  the  chemical
heat  release,  as  evidenced  by  the  reaction  moving  much  faster  than
simple forward conduction would allow. In other words, the reaction
propagation  front  strongly  depends  on  the  initial  impact  (“initiation
stage”),  and  while  impact  energy  dissipates  and  decreases  to  some
critical value that does not allow initiating the chemical reaction in the
thin shock wave front, the process stagnates. Thus, the heating from the
stress  wave  passage  is  analogous  to  the  external  heating  applied  to
volumetrically reacted samples [57]. Due to this non-self-propagating
behavior,  the  high-speed  reaction  is  referred  to  as  a  mechanical-
ly-induced thermal explosion (MTE).

The  studies  of  the  shock-induced  reactions  in  the  mixture  of  the
particles  formed  by  milling  the  so-called  Ni/Al  nano-laminated  foil
(Fig.  21)  also  demonstrated  the  existence  of  high-speed  reactions
occurring  within  microseconds  [64].  Again,  two  different  reaction
modes, i.e., high-speed and low-speed, were observed (Fig. 22). How-
ever,  the  high-speed  reaction  mode  was  observed  at  a  much  lower
impact velocity of ~250 m/s, as compared to the mixture of the Ni + Al
nanoparticles. The delay between the passage of the compaction wave
and the visible reaction was only 17 μs. The reaction front followed the
compaction wave with a velocity of ~200 cm/s for approximately 1 cm.
At this point, the reaction front decoupled from the compaction wave,
slowing to a propagation rate that is on the order of 20–50 cm/s. The
final product was pure NiAl phase [64].

Let us make several scaling estimates to prove that the reaction may
occur in the nanosecond timeframe. The pore size of the reactive media
is  about  50  nm.  The  shock  wave,  traveling  at  1000  m/s,  passes  the
distance of 50 nm in ~50 ps, causing a local temperature increase. The
(cid:0) 1 cm2/s.
thermal diffusivity (α) of the metal particle is approximately 10
The particle with the size of d = 50 nm is preheated at time tph = d2/α
~0.25 ns. Based on the above, we may conclude that the reaction cell
can be preheated to self-ignition temperature by the shock wave in less
than 1 ns. The maximum reaction front propagation in the Ni–Al system
was reported for the reactive nanofoils with a thickness of the reactive
layers comparable with those considered in these estimations, is U ~10
m/s  (cf.  [65]).  Based  on  classical  estimation  [66],  the  characteristic

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112114

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 21. SEM and STEM images of the nano-laminated (NL) Ni/Al particles (reprinted from Beason et al. [64] with permission from Elsevier).

Fig.  22. NL  powder  reacts  on  the  μs  timescale  before  transitioning  to  a  slow  thermal  propagation  mode  (reprinted  from  Beason  et  al.  [64]  with  permission
from Elsevier).

reaction time is tr ~0.1•α/U2 = 10 ns. Moreover, it is well known that
the reaction may propagate with a degree of conversion of ~10%, which
makes  the  reaction  time  even  shorter  by  nearly  a  factor  of  ten,
approximately.

A different approach was used to investigate the shock-induced re-
actions in the Ni–Al system in recent publications [67,68]. The charac-
teristics  of  the  shock-induced  reactions  in  the  Al  + Ni  system  were
investigated  by  a  two-step  impact  initiation  experiment,  which  was
originally developed by Richard G. Ames [69]. In this case, the cylin-
drical reactive fragments pressed from the Ni–Al-binder mixture (TMD
~94%) assembled in nylon sabots were accelerated by a ballistic gun
into the quasi-sealed test chamber at velocities in the range from 500 to
1600 m/s (Fig. 23).

In  such  a  configuration,  the  details  of  the  actual  reaction  process
cannot be observed directly, but changes in the pressure in the reaction
chamber can be measured (Fig. 24a). Assuming that the mass and energy
fluxes from the chamber can be neglected, the peak value of the quasi-
static  pressure  in  the  test  chamber,  ΔPm,  can  then  be  presented  as  a
function of the energy released in the chamber, ΔQ:

ΔPm =

γa (cid:0) 1
VE

ΔQ

where VE  is the volume of the test chamber, and γa  is the ratio of the
specific heat of the gas in the chamber, which is assumed to be constant
at its standard value, e.g., γa = 1.4.

Next,  assuming  that  the  energy  deposition  in  the  chamber,  ΔQ,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112115

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 23. Schematic of the experimental set-up and real view of the reaction chamber (reprinted from Xiong et al. [67,68] with permission from Elsevier and the
American Chemical Society).

Fig.  24. Experimental  data  on  pressure  vs.  time  and  calculated  values  of  degree  of  conversion  vs.  fragment  velocity  (reprinted  from  Xiong  et  al.  [67,68]  with
permission from Elsevier and the American Chemical Society).

contains only the kinetic energy of the fragments, Ek, and the energy
released  by  chemical  reaction,  Er,  the  reaction  efficiency  of  Al/Ni
composites, y, can be expressed as:

y =

Er
QR

=

ΔQ (cid:0) Ek
QR

where  QR  is  the  chemical  energy  for  a  complete  reaction.  Thus,  the
calculated degree of conversion as a function of the fragment speed is
shown in Fig. 24b. It is worth noting that integration time is about 50 ms,
so  it  is  impossible  to  separate  shock-assisted  and  shock-induced  re-
actions.  Additionally,  it  is  important  that  complete  conversion  was
achieved with a velocity above 1350 m/s.

The reason for discussing these results within the framework of the
reaction mechanism is that the authors modeled the experimental con-
ditions  using  the  Avrami(cid:0) Erofeev  n-dimensional  nuclear/growth
controlled reaction function. The fitting of the y = F(U) data presented in
Fig.  24b  showed  that the  activation energy  of  the  reaction  should  be
about 91 kJ/mol. Although the authors claimed that this value is higher
than that for the “normal” ignition process, we would like to note that it
equals to the activation energy of the reaction for the Ni–Al mixture after
mechanical activation [49].

In  a  recent  series  of  publications,  researchers  investigated  the
behavior  of  equiatomic  Ni–Al  powder  mixtures  by  analyzing  shock
Hugoniots and measuring the variation of sound velocity behind a shock
wave front [70–72]. The experimental setup closely resembled that of
Thadhani [37]: disks with a diameter of 30–40 mm and a thickness of
2–8 mm, made from a compacted Ni–Al powder mixture, were exposed
to a shock wave generated by a plane shock-wave generator. They varied
the velocity of an aluminum flyer (100 mm in diameter) in the range of
1.4–5.1 km/s (corresponding to a pressure range of 9.6–61.4 GPa). Two

different mixtures  were  examined, namely  micro (Ni particles:  20–50
μm; Al plates: 100 μm/2 μm) and nano (Ni: 80 nm; Al: 100 nm). The
following  noteworthy  results  emerged  from  the  study:  (a)  the  final
product consisted of the NiAl intermetallic phase; (b) the constructed
Hugoniots for both mixtures coincided within the experimental error;
(c)  analysis  of  particle  velocity  profiles  did  not  provide  unequivocal
evidence of chemical reactions occurring within the timeframe of the
shock wave. These findings suggest that either there are no significant
chemical  transformations  during  the  shock  loading  time  or  they  are
completed within this period. Additional arguments, primarily based on
the construction of Hugoniots for different scenarios, convince the au-
thors of the former case.

Other recent publications on the mechanical stimulation of the re-
actions  in  the  Ni–Al  system  reported  interesting  results,  primarily
focusing  on  the  influence  of  additives,  but  they  did  not  significantly
contribute to understanding the reaction mechanism [73–76]. However,
it  is  worth  noting  the  insights  drawn  from  the  molecular  dynamics
simulation of the process [77]. Again, unfortunately, we cannot directly
observe these processes in-situ experimentally, but simulations suggest
the following:

• First, after the shock wave spread, drastic flow deformation occurs in

the Al particles to densify the cavity.

• Then, the produced high pressure and temperature tightly join the

particles together.

• The exothermic reaction in the compressed particles is a result of the

atomic inter-diffusion across the Ni/Al contact surface.

• In  the  solid-state  consolidation,  the  reaction  product  is  formed
within  a  thin  amorphous  or  crystalline  layer  at  the  Ni/Al  contact

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112116

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

surface. In contrast, liquid-state consolidation results in intermetallic
phase formation.

Table 3
Congruent melting/dissociation temperatures of reactants and products [84].

In conclusion, we may confidently state that it was proven experi-
mentally, including in situ observation, that reactions in the Ni–Al sys-
tem  may  occur  both  in  shock-assisted  and  shock-induced,  and  mixed
modes. The intrinsic reaction mechanism for shock-induced mode can
be described as a mechanically-induced thermal explosion. This mech-
anism suggests that propagating shock wave preheats the reaction media
through shear plastic deformation and collapsing of the pores, followed
by an extremely fast chemical reaction. Scaling estimates indicate that
the observed chemical reaction rates could be explained based on the
conventional  kinetics  in  the  considered  system.  For  sure,  the  charac-
teristic diffusion scale (i.e., particle size or size of the metal layers) and
pore  size  distribution  are  important  parameters  to  achieve  the  fast-
reaction  mode.  However,  further  studies  are  needed  to  explore  the
role of the mechanical properties of the reactive Ni/Al media (ductility,
crash  strength, etc.). Additionally,  addressing the  question  of the  fast
reactions that may occur solely due to solid-sate diffusion in the Ni–Al
system presents a challenge. Nevertheless, some insights can be gained
by analyzing the displacement reactions in the MeN–B system, as dis-
cussed below.

4. Synthesis of high-pressure phases: Cubic and wurtzitic boron
nitride

Numerous methods, including analyzing of shock Hugoniot curves
and pressure vs. time profiles, conducting direct temperature measure-
ments,  and  employing  in-situ  observation  through  high-speed  video
recording, have been used to provide evidence for the existence of the
ultra-fast shock-induced reactions, as mentioned earlier. A qualitatively
different  approach  involves  synthesizing  and  recovering  a  metastable
phase, which can form only under high-pressure conditions, as recently
demonstrated in the fabrication of cubic phase of boron nitride (c-BN)
[17,18].

Boron nitride is similar in electronic structure to carbon, with the
same number of electrons between adjacent atoms. The hexagonal form
(h-BN, hexagonal boron nitride) is analogous to graphite and is the most
stable and softest among BN polymorphs. The cubic (sphalerite struc-
ture)  phase,  known  as  c-BN,  is  akin  to  diamond,  with  slightly  less
hardness but superior thermal and chemical stabilities. The rare wurtzite
w-BN  modification  is  similar  to  lonsdaleite  and  might  even  exhibit
higher  hardness  than  the  cubic  form  [78].  Being  the  second  hardest
known  material,  cubic  BN  (c-BN)  possesses  superior  chemical  and
thermal stabilities (stable up to 1650 K), as compared to diamond (stable
up to 950 K), and forms only under high-pressure and high-temperature
(high P/T) conditions [78]. Consequently, c-BN does not form below 6
GPa  in  quasi-static  conditions  [79],  and  under  shock  loading,  its  for-
mation is not expected below 12 GPa [80].

The  typical  production  of  boron  nitride  involves  the  combustion
synthesis  method,  where  direct  self-sustained  reaction  in  a  boron-
nitrogen system requires high pressure (>10 MPa) of gaseous nitrogen
[81–83]. However, for studying shock-induced reactions, this system is
not  suitable.  Alternatively,  boron  nitride  can  be  synthesized  using
metathesis reactions, where the nitrogen source exists in solid form (e.g.,
metal  nitride).  An  interesting  example  of  such  a  reaction  is  the
exothermic  reaction  between  titanium  nitride  (TiN)  and  boron  (B),
which enables the fabrication a refractory BN-TiB2 composite ceramic in
a single displacement reaction:

TiN(s)  + 3B(s)  → TiB2(s)  + BN(s)  + 192 kJ/mol

Thermodynamic analysis of this reaction indicates that the adiabatic
reaction temperature (Tad) or the maximum attainable temperature for a
complete reaction in a thermally isolated system at an initial tempera-
ture  of  300  K  and  1  atm  is  1905  K.  Comparing  the  thermodynamic

Species

1: TiN
2: B
3: TiB2
4: BN

T (K)

3550
2350
3500
3400

Transformation

Melting
Melting
Melting
Dissociation

analysis  with  known  dissociation  and  melting  temperatures  of  all
possible phases (Table 3) involved in the reaction, it can be inferred that
Tad  is lower than any phase transformation temperature in the Ti–B–N
ternary system [84]. Therefore, if conducted in an inert atmosphere, this
reaction may be considered as solid flame type of reaction [85,86]. A
solid flame is defined as any self-sustaining reaction that is not catalyzed
by the presence of impurities and does not produce a liquid or gaseous
phase at any step of the process.

However, it was demonstrated that this reaction is not exothermic
enough to form a self-sustained propagation itself, and requires chemi-
cal  activation.  For  instance,  the  addition  of  pure  Ti  to  the  system  or
conducting  the  reaction  in  a  nitrogen  atmosphere  with  excess  boron,
both of which increase the total heat release either due to the reaction of
Ti with excess B to form TiB2 or due to N2 gas reacting with B to form BN
[87,88].  Nevertheless,  the  HEMB  method  allowed  the  fabrication  of
TiN/B composite particles mixed on a sub-micron level. Samples pressed
from such particles could be ignited at a temperature of ~1350 K, where
the self-propagating front traveled with a velocity of ~4 mm/s [84].

Such reactive nanostructured composite particles were loaded into a
recovery capsule (Fig. 25) at a relative density in the range of 50–55%
and  were  shocked  using  approximately  25  g  of  PrimaSheet  1000  (a
pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) based plastic explosive) to drive an
outer copper shell at high velocity into a concentric copper tube that
contained the powder [17].

The transmission electron microscope (TEM) analysis of the shocked
samples revealed the presence of some c-BN phase material (Fig. 26). It
is  important  to  note  that  the  recovered  powder,  despite  being  com-
pacted,  maintained  the  overall  morphology  of  the  initial  powder  and
showed  no  signs  of  melt  zones.  A  thorough  analysis  of  the  results
allowed  concluding  that  HEBM  nanostructured  composite  reactive
particles facilitate ultra-fast chemical reactions, occurring on the time-
scale of several microseconds (0.1–5 μs), leading to the formation of a
high-pressure polymorph (c-BN).

Furthermore, studies of the reaction mechanism in the TiN–B system
revealed a three-stage process: (i) solid-state diffusion of B into nitrogen
deficient  TiNx;  (ii)  decomposition  of  TiN  with  the  release  of  gaseous
nitrogen; (iii) reaction of B with gas-phase nitrogen [84]. This finding
led to the investigation of shock-induced or shock-assisted reactions in
gasless boron (B) – metal nitride (MeN: Me = Ga, Cr) reactive systems
[18]. The selection of Cr2N (2170 K) and GaN (1060 K) was based on
their  low  dissociation  temperatures  compared  to  TiN  (3560  K).  The
preparation  of  the  reactive  nanostructured  composite  particles  and
shock  experiments  were  conducted  in  a  similar  manner  to  those
described above for the TiN–B system.

◦

. The peaks at ~40.6

The XRD analysis of the shock-loaded reaction products of the GaN
◦
+ B system (Fig. 27a) revealed new peaks spanning from ~40 to 47
and
at ~50
match with the reflections of
and ~46.2
(100)  and  (101)  planes  of  w-BN,  respectively,  while  the  peaks  at
◦
~43.40
match with the reflections of (111) and (200) planes
of c-BN, respectively.

◦
and 50.5

◦

◦

Additional synchrotron powder XRD studies were conducted on the
reaction products of the GaN + B system to enhance the signal-to-noise
ratio and resolution of the XRD pattern. Weak low-angle reflections were
observed, as shown in (Fig. 27b), which are consistent with β-B. How-
◦
ever, he stronger peaks between 5.5 and 6.2
(1.94 Å, 2.15 Å) suggest
the  presence  of  a  mixture  of  both the  wurtzite  and  sphalerite  (cubic)
phases of BN.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112117

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 25. Concentric cylinder powder compaction experiment and an image of the capsule before and after shock (reprinted from Beason et al. [17] with permission
from AIP Publishing).

Fig. 26. (a) TEM images of typical particles formed
in  the  Ti–B–N  system  after  shock.  Relatively  large
TiB2  and  h-BN  crystallites  are  dominant  within  the
field of view. The inset shows a magnified TEM image
of  the  surface  area  of  the  large  TiB2  crystallite
(70–100 nm in diameter) that has a thin layer of the
c-BN  phase.  (b)  Magnified  area  of  the  c-BN  crystal
phase  at  the  interface  with  the  TiB2  crystalline  par-
ticle (c) Intensity distribution on the magnified frag-
ment  of  the  HRTEM  image  of  the  c-BN  phase,
showing that d-spacing is close to 0.18 nm, which fits
the  c-BN  crystal  structure  (reprinted  from  Beason
et al. [17] with permission from AIP Publishing).

The presence of high pressure and metastable wurtzite phase of BN in
the shocked GaN + B system indicates that a condensed-state reaction
occurred, and BN was formed while the high-pressure shock was still
present.  This  provides  direct  evidence  that  the  reaction  took  place
within microseconds, classifying GaN and B reaction as a shock-induced
reaction. Unlike other boride-producing reactions, the reaction mecha-
nism for GaN and B, which produces only BN and Ga, must rely solely on
the dissociation of MeN. This represents a new type of reaction that can
undergo  shock-induced  reactions  and  could  open  avenues  for

synthesizing other advanced ceramics.

In  the  case  of  the  considered  low  exothermic  systems,  reactions
primarily occurred in the shock-assisted mode. However, in some “hot”
spots, the formation of the metastable phases took place, which can only
exist under high-pressure conditions. This provides direct proof of the
occurrence of the ultra-fast shock-induced reactions in these hot spots.
Moreover, in the considered MeN–B systems, the reaction mechanism
does  not  involve  the  melting  of  the  reagents  and  products.  Further
studies are necessary to optimize synthesis conditions for achieving a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112118

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

Fig. 27. (a) Powder XRD patterns of shocked loaded reaction products of GaN + B system; (b) Synchrotron powder XRD pattern of GaN + 3B system reaction product
and LeBail whole pattern fitting to the diffraction pattern. The background and difference curve are indicated using green and blue lines, respectively (reprinted from
Chapman et al. [18] with permission from Elsevier).

high yield output of the desired phases.

5. Challenges and future prospects

Based on the above, several important issues should be addressed to
gain  a deeper understanding of the phenomenon. While some experi-
mental  data  are  available  in  the  studies  listed  below,  the  following
detailed investigations should be pursued:

• The influence of the pore structure (TMD, size and distribution) on
mechanically  stimulated reactions. Specifically,  can shock-induced
reaction occur in the pore-free media, or is porosity a vital charac-
teristic to achieve self-ignition similar to many high explosives?
• The  contribution  of  shear  to  the  ignition  phenomenon.  The  Asay
shear impact experiment (Fig. 15) allows the use of the plungers with
different front edge geometries. Detailed studies of the ignition en-
ergy limit as a function of the geometry may address this issue.
• The influence of defects on the considered phenomenon. It is worth
noting  that  the  high energy  ball milling  allows  the  preparation  of
reactive media with different levels of defects and induced strain.
• Determining  the  optimal  conditions  to  increase  the  output  of  the
high-pressure  phases.  We  suggest  that  optimization  of  the  pore
structure, e.g. using mixtures of the nano powders instead of com-
posite particles.

Another aspect worth recalling is that observed phenomena cannot
be considered solid-state detonation. It appears that high-temperature
reaction  in  the  Ni–Al system  cannot  provide a  self-sustained  mode  of
shock-wave  propagation.  The  only  mechanism  that  can  work  is  the
extremely rapid expansion of the reaction media. While the temperature
rises fast enough, it does not lead to media expansion. Let us make some
estimations.

The theoretical density of pore-free 1:1 Ni/Al composite particle is
5.24 g/cm3, while the density of the final product NiAl is ~6 g/cm3. An
increase in density leads to the contraction of the particle, and its radius
√
slightly  decreases  as  rNiAl = rNi/Al
= 0.956rNi/Al.  However,  we

3

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρNi/Al
ρNiAl

should also account thermal expansion of the particle. The coefficient of
(cid:0) 1;  thus,  we  can
thermal  expansion  (CTE)  for  NiAl  is  ~12.5  •10
roughly,  ΔrNiAl =
expect
radius,
of
rNiAl CTE • T ∼ 0.02 • rNiAl, which is not enough to compensate for the

increase

(cid:0) 6  K

slight

a

contraction due to the change of phase composition of a particle.

The TiN+3B system is different. The initial density of pore-free TiN/
3B composite particle is 3.77 g/cm3, while after the reaction for TiB2/BN
particle, it is 3.47 g/cm3. So, the expansion of particles occurs during the
reaction in this system, even without accounting for thermal expansion.
Thus,  3B  + TiN  is  a  good  candidate  to  possibly  observe  solid-state
detonation. However, for investigated mixtures [17], only 5% conver-
sion occurred in the shock-wave front, which is insufficient to support
the  solid-state  detonation.  Some  optimization  work  could  be  done  to
achieve  the  desired  reaction  mode,  and  exchange-type  reactions  that
proceed with expansion are the best candidates.

6. Concluding remarks

The above experiments, including in situ observations and synthesis
of high-pressure phases, unequivocally demonstrate the existence of the
shock-induced  chemical  reactions  that  occur  on  the  time  scale  of  the
propagated  shock  wave.  The  so-called  mechanically  induced  thermal
explosion mechanism accurately describes these phenomena. While the
thermal  nature  of  the  observed  propagation  of  the  reaction  wave  is
beyond  doubt,  the  question  remains:  can  we  explain  the  observed
extremely  high  rates  based  on  the  conventional  kinetics  or  do  some
special conditions occur in the shock wave providing such exceptional
rapid mass transfer that cannot be reached in a conventional combustion
wave?  Here,  we argue  that extremely high  rates can be  explained by
conventional kinetics.

Indeed, all recently observed confirmations of shock-induced reac-
tion  involve  the  heterogeneous  media  with  characteristic  diffusion
scales on the order of tens of nanometers. Such systems were also used
for conventional thermal-initiated reaction fronts. A prime example is
the  combustion  wave  propagation  along  the  nano-scaled  multi-layer
foils. In such foils, the reactants are essentially “mixed” homogeneously;
allowing  estimations  using  combustion  theory  for  homogeneous  solid
media [66]. The theory suggests that the characteristic time of chemical
reaction in the front can be estimated as follows: tr ~ γ•α/U2; where γ =
RT2/E(Tad-To); α - thermal diffusivity of the media; U – velocity of the
combustion wave. Typical values of thermal diffusivity for metals range
(cid:0) 5  m2/s; for narrow reaction zones, γ«1, and observed
from 10
combustion velocity is ~10 m/s [65]. Accounting for these values, the
(cid:0) 8 s; i.e., less
estimation of tr gives us values in the range of 10
than a microsecond. This means that if one has a high contact surface

(cid:0) 4  to 10

(cid:0) 7 to 10

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112119

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

area  between  reactants  (e.g.,  nano-scaled  multi-layer  foils  or  in  the
volume of the composite reactive particles), the tr  time may be small
enough to proceed within the time span of the shock-wave.

(cid:0) 9-10

Another estimate can be made based on known diffusion coefficients.
The diffusion coefficient of Ni to Al at temperatures ~1000–1900 K is in
(cid:0) 11 m2/s (109-107 nm2/s) [89]. Taking a characteristic
the range 10
time of ~1 μs, the diffusion length is 3–30 nm. With diffusion scales of
the metal layers ~20 nm, one can reasonably expect a degree of con-
version in 30–100% range. Thus, if the shock front provides good con-
tact between reactants (plastic flow) and a high enough temperature (e.
g.,  through  collapsing  of  pores),  the  reactions  may  proceed  with
observed high rates without any additional assumptions on the reaction
kinetics.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

Acknowledgments

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Department  of  Energy,  National
Nuclear Security Administration, under Award No. DE-NA0002377 as
part of the Predictive Science Academic Alliance Program II.

References

[1] Batsanov SS. The physics and chemistry of impulsive pressures (review). J. Eng.

Phys. 1967;12:59–68. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00829422.

[2] Dremin AN, Breusov ON. Processes occurring in solids under the action of powerful

shock waves. https://doi.org/10.1070/rc1968v037n05abeh001643; 1968.

[3] Teller E. On the speed of reactions at high pressures. J Chem Phys 1962;36:901–3.

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1732687.

[4] Bridgman PW. Effects of high shearing stress combined with high hydrostatic

pressure. Phys Rev 1935;48:825–47.

[5] Rogachev AS, Mukasyan AS. Combustion for material synthesis. CRC Press; 2014.

https://doi.org/10.1201/b17842.

[6] Breusov ON. Physical-Chemical transformations of inorganic substances under

shock compression, Proc. IV All-Union Symp. Combust. Explos. 1977:61–72.
[7] Riabinin YN. Certain experiments on dynamic compression of substances. Sov Phys

Tech Phys 1956;1:2575–9.

[8] Bancroft D, Peterson EL, Minshall S. Polymorphism of iron at high pressure. J Appl

Phys 1956;27:291–8. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1722359.

[9] Decarli PS, Jamieson JC. Formation of diamond by explosive shock. Science 1961;

133:1821–2. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.133.3467.1821. 80-.
[10] Adadurov GA. Experimental study of chemical processes under dynamic

compression conditions. Russ Chem Rev 1986;55:282–96. https://doi.org/
10.1070/rc1986v055n04abeh003190.

[11] Adadurov GA, Goldanskii VI. Shock wave compression of mixtures of powders with

liquefied gases. J Phys Chem 1990;94:1110–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/
j100366a018.

[12] Batsanov SS, Doronin GS, Klochkov SV, Teut AI. Synthesis reactions behind shock

fronts. Combust Explos Shock Waves 1986;22:765–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00751890.

[13] Al’tshuler LV. Use of shock waves in high-pressure physics. Usp Fiz Nauk 1965;85:

199–258. https://doi.org/10.3367/ufnr.0085.196502a.0199.

[14] Eakins DE, Thadhani NN. Shock compression of reactive powder mixtures. Int

Mater Rev 2009;54:181–213. https://doi.org/10.1179/174328009X461050.
[15] Thadhani NN. Shock-induced chemical reactions and synthesis of materials. Prog

Mater Sci 1993;37:117–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/0079-6425(93)90002-3.
[16] Horie Y, Graham RA, Simonsen IK. Synthesis of nickel aluminides under high-

pressure shock loading. Mater Lett 1985;3:354–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-
577X(85)90075-8.

[17] Beason MT, Pauls JM, Gunduz IE, Rouvimov S, Manukyan KV, Matouˇs K, Son SF,
Mukasyan A. Shock-induced reaction synthesis of cubic boron nitride. Appl Phys
Lett 2018;112:171903. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5017836.

 ̈
Ornek M, Pauls JM, Zhukovskyi M, Son SF, Mukasyan AS. Shock-

[18] Chapman WW,

induced reactions in metal nitride – boron nanostructured composites. Scripta
Mater 2020;189:58–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2020.07.063.

[19] Varma A, Mukasyan AS. Combustion synthesis of intermetallic compounds. In:
Borisov A, DeLuca L, Merzhanov A, editors. Self-propagating high-temperature
synthesis of materials. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2002. p. 1–34.

[20] Graham RA, Morosin B, Horie Y, Venturini EL, Boslough M, Carr MJ,

Williamson DL. In: Gupta YM, editor. Chemical synthesis under high pressure
shock loading, in: shock waves condens. Matter. Boston, MA: Springer US; 1986.
p. 693–711. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-2207-8_102.

[21] Thadhani NN. Shock compression processing of powders. Adv. Mater. Manuf.
Process. 1988;3:493–549. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426918808953217.
[22] Bennett LS, Sorrell FY, Simonsen IK, Horie Y, Iyer KR. Ultrafast chemical reactions
between nickel and aluminum powders during shock loading. Appl Phys Lett 1992;
61:520–1. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.107874.

[23] Reeves RV, Mukasyan AS, Son SF. Transition from impact-induced thermal

runaway to prompt mechanochemical explosion in nanoscaled Ni/Al reactive
systems, Propellants, Explos. Pyrotech 2013;38:611–21. https://doi.org/10.1002/
prep.201200193.

[24] Graham RA, Hammetter WF. Shock-induced reaction synthesis (SRS) of nickel

aluminides. J Mater Res 1992;7:1063–75. https://doi.org/10.1557/
JMR.1992.1063.

[25] Graham RA. Issues in shock-induced solid state chemistry. In: Proc. 3rd int. Symp.

High dyn. Press.; 1989. p. 175. La Grande Motte, France, June 5-9.

[26] Merzhanov AG, Mukasyan AS. Tverdoplamennoe gorenie (Solid-Flame

combustion) (in Russian). Nauka, Moscow: Torus Press; 2007. p. 280p. 978-5-
94588-053-5.

[27] Boslough MB. Shock-induced chemical reactions in nickel-aluminum powder

mixtures: radiation pyrometer measurements. Chem Phys Lett 1989;160:618–22.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2614(89)80074-0.

[28] Maiden D, E D, Bianchini G, Holt B, Hornig H, Kingsman Chemical. Shock synthesis

of TiB2. In: Mater. Process. By high-temperature synth. Mater. (SHS), DARPA/
ARMY SHS symp. Florida: Proc., Daytona Beach; 1985. p. 359–77.

[29] Horie Y, Kipp ME. Modeling of shock-induced chemical reactions in powder
mixtures. J Appl Phys 1988;63:5718–27. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.340309.

[30] Rogachev AS, Shkodich NF, Vadchenko SG, Baras F, Kovalev DY, Rouvimov S,

Nepapushev AA, Mukasyan AS. Influence of the high energy ball milling on
structure and reactivity of the Ni + Al powder mixture. J Alloys Compd 2013;577:
600–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.06.114.

[31] Kunishige H, Horie Y, Sawaoka AB. Shock compaction of diamond powder in
reactive mixtures, Shock. High-Strain-Rate Phenom. Mater. 1992;235:353–9.
[32] Herrmann W. Constitutive equation for the dynamic compaction of ductile porous
materials. J Appl Phys 1969;40:2490–9. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1658021.
[33] Anderson CE. An overview of the theory of hydrocodes. Int J Impact Eng 1987;5:

33–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/0734-743X(87)90029-7.

[34] Hwang M, Horde Y, You S. Modeling of shock-induced chemical reactions in
powder mixtures I: the VIR model. In: Schmidt SC, Dick RD, Forbes JW, T.-S.
C DGB, Tasker CM, editors. Shock compression condens. Matter. Amsterdam:
Elsevier; 1991. p. 597–600. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-444-89732-9.50137-
0. 1992.

[35] Boslough MB. A thermochemical model for shock-induced reactions (heat

detonations) in solids. J Chem Phys 1990;92:1839–48. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.458066.

[36] Yu LH, Meyers MA. Shock synthesis and synthesis-assisted shock consolidation of
suicides. J Mater Sci 1991;26:601–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00588294.

[37] Song I, Thadhani NN. Shock-induced chemical reactions and synthesis of nickel

aluminides. Metall Trans A 1992;23:41–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02660849.
[38] Dunbar E, Thadhani NN, Graham RA. High-pressure shock activation and mixing of
nickel-aluminium powder mixtures. 1993. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00354693.
[39] Thadhani NN. Shock-induced and shock-assisted solid-state chemical reactions in
powder mixtures. J Appl Phys 1994;76:2129–38. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.357624.

[40] Morsi K. Review: reaction synthesis processing of Ni-Al intermetallic materials.

Mater Sci Eng 2001;299:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-5093(00)01407-6.

[41] Eakins DE, Thadhani NN. Investigation of shock-induced reactions in a Ni+Al
powder mixture. AIP Conf Proc 2006:1153–6. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.2263528.

[42] Eakins D, Thadhani NN. Shock-induced reaction in a flake nickel + spherical
aluminum powder mixture. J Appl Phys 2006;100. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.2396797.

[43] Rogachev AS, Kochetov NA, Kurbatkina VV, Levashov EA, Grinchuk PS,

Rabinovich OS, Sachkova NV, Bernard F. Microstructural aspects of gasless
combustion of mechanically activated mixtures. I. High-speed
microvideorecording of the Ni-Al composition. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2006;
42:421–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10573-006-0071-1.

[44] White JDE, Reeves RV, Son SF, Mukasyan AS. Thermal explosion in Ni-Al system:
influence of mechanical activation. J Phys Chem A 2009;113:13541–7. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp905175c.

[45] Mukasyan AS, White JDE, Kovalev DY, Kochetov NA, Ponomarev VI, Son SF.

Dynamics of phase transformation during thermal explosion in the Al-Ni system:
influence of mechanical activation. Phys B Condens Matter 2010;405:778–84.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physb.2009.10.001.

[46] Rogachev AS, Mukasyan AS. Combustion of heterogeneous nanostructural systems.
Combust Explos Shock Waves 2010;46:243–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10573-
010-0036-2 (review).

[47] Manukyan KV, Mason BA, Groven LJ, Lin YC, Cherukara M, Son SF, Strachan A,
Mukasyan AS. Tailored reactivity of Ni+Al nanocomposites: microstructural
correlations. J Phys Chem C 2012;116:21027–38. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp303407e.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112120

A.S. Mukasyan et al.

[48] Manukyan KV, Shuck CE, Rogachev AS, Mukasyan AS. Preparation and reactivity
of gasless nanostructured energetic materials. J Vis Exp 2015;2015:1–11. https://
doi.org/10.3791/52624.

[49] Shteinberg AS, Lin YC, Son SF, Mukasyan AS. Kinetics of high temperature reaction

in Ni-Al system: influence of mechanical activation. J Phys Chem A 2010;114:
6111–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp1018586.

[50] Mukasyan AS, Khina BB, Reeves RV, Son SF. Mechanical activation and gasless

explosion: nanostructural aspects. Chem Eng J 2011;174:677–86. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2011.09.028.

[51] Shuck CE, Pauls JM, Mukasyan AS. Ni/Al energetic nanocomposites and the solid
flame phenomenon. J Phys Chem C 2016;120:27066–78. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.jpcc.6b09754.

[52] Reeves RV, White JDE, Mukasyan AM, Son SF. Comparison of mechanical and
thermal ignition characteristics for reactivity enhanced Ni/Al powders. In: AIP
conf. Proc. American Institute of Physics; 2009. p. 466–9. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.3295175.

[53] Reeves RV, Mukasyan AS, Son SF. Thermal and impact reaction initiation in Ni/Al
heterogeneous reactive systems. J Phys Chem C 2010;114:14772–80. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp104686z.

[54] Reeves RV, Mukasyan AS, Son SF. Microstructural effects on ignition sensitivity in

NI/AL systems subjected to high strain rate impacts. AIP Conf Proc 2012;1426:
539–42. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3686335.

[55] Asay BW, Henson BF, Dickson PM, Fugard CS, Funk DJ. Direct measurement of
strain field evolution during dynamic deformation of an energetic material, vol.
567; 2008. p. 567–70. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.55702.

[56] Xiong Y, Li X, Xiao S, Deng H, Huang B, Zhu W, Hu W. Molecular dynamics

simulations of shock loading of nearly fully dense granular Ni-Al composites. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2019;21:20252–61. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9cp02920f.

bonding. Mater Des 2017;116:591–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matdes.2016.12.002.

[74] Ren K, Chen R, Lin Y, Li S, Zhang X, Dong J. Probing the impact energy release
behavior of Al/Ni-based reactive metals with experimental and numerical
methods. Metals 2019;9:499. https://doi.org/10.3390/met9050499.

[75] Smith GD, Bardenhagen S, Nairn JA, Zahrah T, Hooper JP, Kline J, Kleiser G.

Insight into the role of interfaces on mechanical properties of low-porosity Al/Ni
compacts: comparison of experiment and simulation. J Appl Phys 2021;130:
105104. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0057074.

[76] Feng G, Hu B, Wei Y, Hu T, Li Z, He P, Wang Y, Deng D, Yang X. Nanostructured
Al/Ni energetic composites: processing, reaction properties and activation energy.
J Mater Res Technol 2022;19:3994–4002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmrt.2022.06.144.

[77] Feng J, Liu R, Guo B, Gao F, Zhou Q, Yang R, Chen P. Shock consolidation of Ni/Al

nanoparticles: a molecular dynamics simulation. J Mater Eng Perform 2022;31:
3716–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11665-021-06468-8.

[78] Wentorf RH. Cubic form of boron nitride. J Chem Phys 1957;26:956. https://doi.

org/10.1063/1.1745964.

[79] Vel L, Demazeau G, Etourneau J. Cubic boron nitride: synthesis, physicochemical

properties and applications. Mater Sci Eng B 1991;10:149–64. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0921-5107(91)90121-B.

[80] Duvall GE, Graham RA. Phase transitions under shock-wave loading. Rev Mod Phys

1977;49:523–79. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.49.523.

[81] Mukasyan AS. Combustion synthesis of boron nitride ceramics: fundamentals and
applications. Nitride Ceram. Combust. Synth. Prop. Appl. 2014:49–74. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9783527684533.ch2.

[82] Mukasyan AS, Borovinskaya IP. Structure formation in SHS nitrides. Int J Self-

Propag High-Temp Synth 1992;1:55–63.

[57] Rogachev AS, Mukasyan AS, Varma A. Volume combustion modes in

[83] Mukasyan A. Combustion synthesis of nitrides: mechanistic studies. Proc Combust

heterogeneous reaction systems. J Mater Synth Process 2002;10:31–6. https://doi.
org/10.1023/A:1021096812808.

[58] Batsanov SS. An additive method for calculation of the sound velocity in porous

materials. Inorg Mater 2007;43:1070–2. https://doi.org/10.1134/
S0020168507100081.

[59] Batsanov SS, Gordopolov YA. Solid-state detonation velocity limits. 2007. https://

doi.org/10.1007/s10573-007-0079-1.

[60] Bolkhovitinov LG, Batsanov SS. Theory of solid-state detonation. 2007. https://doi.

org/10.1007/s10573-007-0030-5.

[61] Merzhanov AG, Barzykin VV, Abramov VG. The theory of thermal explosion: from

N.N.Semenov to present day. Chem. Phys. Reports. 1996;15:793–837.

[62] Merzhanov AG, Ozerkovskaya NI, Shkadinskii KG. On flow of thermal explosion in
post inductive period. In: Dokl. Akad. Nauk, mezhdunarodnaya kniga 39. Moscow,
Russia: Dimitrova UL.; 1998. p. 60–4. 113095.

[63] Gordopolov YA, Trofimov VS, Merzhanov AG. On the possibility of gasless

detonation in condensed systems. In: Dokl. Akad. Nauk. Russian Academy of
Sciences; 1995. p. 327–9.

[64] Beason MT, Gunduz IE, Son SF. The role of fracture in the impact initiation of Ni-Al
intermetallic composite reactives during dynamic loading. Acta Mater 2017;133:
247–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2017.05.042.

[65] Rogachev AS, Vadchenko SG, Baras F, Politano O, Rouvimov S, Sachkova NV,
Grapes MD, Weihs TP, Mukasyan AS. Combustion in reactive multilayer Ni/Al
nanofoils: experiments and molecular dynamic simulation. Combust Flame 2016;
166:158–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.01.014.

[66] Merzhanov AG, Khaikin BI. Theory of combustion waves in homogeneous media.
Prog Energy Combust Sci 1988;14:1–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(88)
90006-8.

[67] Xiong W, Zhang X, Wu Y, He Y, Wang C, Guo L. Influence of additives on

microstructures, mechanical properties and shock-induced reaction characteristics
of Al/Ni composites. J Alloys Compd 2015;648:540–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jallcom.2015.07.004.

[68] Xiong W, Zhang X, Tan M, Liu C, Wu X. The energy release characteristics of shock-
induced chemical reaction of Al/Ni composites. J Phys Chem C 2016;120:24551–9.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b06530.

[69] Ames RG. Vented chamber calorimetry for impact-initiated energetic materials. In:
43rd AIAA aerosp. sci. Meet. Exhib. - Meet. Pap.; 2005. p. 15391–403. https://doi.
org/10.2514/6.2005-279.

[70] Yakushev VV, Ananev SY, Utkin AV, Zhukov AN, Dolgoborodov AY. Shock
compressibility of mixtures of micro- and nano-sized nickel and aluminum
powders. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2018;54:552–7. https://doi.org/10.1134/
S0010508218050064.

[71] Zhukov AN, Yakushev VA, Ananev SY, Dobrygin VV, Dolgoborodov AY.

Investigation of nickel aluminide formed due to shock loading of aluminum–nickel
mixtures in flat recovery ampoules. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2018;54:64–71.
https://doi.org/10.1134/S0010508218010100.

[72] Yakushev VV, Anan’ev SY, Utkin AV, Zhukov AN, Dolgoborodov AY. Sound

velocity in shock-compressed samples from a mixture of micro- and nanodispersed
nickel and aluminum powders. Combust Explos Shock Waves 2019;55:732–8.
https://doi.org/10.1134/S0010508219060157.

[73] Ji C, He Y, Wang CT, He Y, Pan X, Jiao J, Guo L. Investigation on shock-induced

reaction characteristics of an Al/Ni composite processed via accumulative roll-

Inst 2005;30:2529–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.240.

[84] Pauls JM, Shkodich NF, Mukasyan AS. Mechanisms of self-sustained reaction in

mechanically induced nanocomposites: titanium nitride and boron. J Phys Chem C
2019;123:11273–83. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b01521.

[85] Merzhanov AG. Fundamentals, achievements, and perspectives for development of
solid-flame combustion. Russ Chem Bull 1997;46:1–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02495340.

[86] Mukasyan AS, Shuck CE, Pauls JM, Manukyan KV, Moskovskikh DO, Rogachev AS.
The solid flame phenomenon: a novel perspective. Adv Eng Mater 2018;20:
1701065. https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.201701065.

[87] Matsudaira T, Itoh H, Naka S, Hamamoto H, Obayashi M. Synthesis of TiB2 powder
from a mixture of TiN and amorphous boron. J Mater Sci 1988;23:288–92. https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF01174067.

[88] Bilyan TS, V Manukyan K, Kharatyan SL, Puszynski JA. Mechanochemically and

thermally activated combustion of the B-TiN system. Int J Self-Propag High-Temp
Synth 2006;15:235–45.

[89] Pauls JM, Shuck CE, Genç A, Rouvimov S, Mukasyan AS. In-situ transmission

electron microscopy determination of solid-state diffusion in the aluminum-nickel
system. J Solid State Chem 2019;276:114–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jssc.2019.04.024.

Dr. Alexander S. Mukasyan is Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the
Notre  Dame  University,  USA.  He  received  his  B.S.  from  Moscow  Physical  Engineering
Institute, Russia, Ph.D. from The Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics (Institute of
Chemical  Physics),Russia,  and  DSc.  from  the  Institute  of  Structural  Macrokinetics  and
Materials Science, Russia. Dr. Mukasyan is the author of three books, six invited reviews,
and more than 180 research publications in archive journals and patent letters in the fields
of engineering of advanced materials and heterogeneous combustion. His current scientific
interests are primarily related to nanotechnology, high energy density materials, joining of
refractory and dissimilar materials, and catalysis.

 ̈
Dr. Metin
Ornek is a research scientist at the School of Mechanical Engineering at Purdue
University,  Indiana.  He  holds  a  B.S.  in  Metallurgical  and  Materials  Engineering  from
Marmara  University,  Turkey,  and  earned  his  M.S.  and  Ph.D.  in  Materials  Science  and
 ̈
Engineering  from  Rutgers  University,  USA.  Dr.
Ornek  is  a  materials  scientist  with
specialized  expertise  in  synthesizing  boron  nitride  under  high-pressure  and  high-
temperature  conditions,  as  well  as  analytical  characterization  of  materials.  His  current
research  encompasses  a  wide  range  of  topics,  including  the  thermal  decomposition  of
energetic  materials,  combustion,  kinetic  analysis,  high-pressure  and  high-temperature
synthesis of materials, and piezo-energetics.

Dr. Steven F. Son is Alfred J. McAllister Professor of Mechanical Engineering and professor
of Aeronautics and Astronautics by courtesy at Purdue University. He received his B.S. and
M.S.  from  Brigham  Young  University  and  his  Ph.D.  from  the  University  of  Illinois  at
Urbana-Champaign.  Dr.  Son  is  a  nationally  recognized  expert  in  the  field  of  energetic
materials with research interests including but not limited to multiphase combustion of
propellants,  explosives  and  pyrotechnics,  nanoscale  composite  energetic  materials,
advanced energetic materials, and microscale combustion.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience99(2023)10112121
