Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Laser sensors for energy systems and process industries: Perspectives 
and directions 

Aamir Farooq a,*, Awad B.S. Alquaity b, Mohsin Raza c, Ehson F. Nasir a, Shunchun Yao d, 
Wei Ren c 
a Clean Combustion Research Center, Physical Sciences and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 6900, Thuwal 23955, 
Saudi Arabia 
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia 
c Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, and Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region, China 
d School of Electric Power, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Laser sensor 
Energy system 
Process industry 
Absorption 
Laser-induced fluorescence 
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy 
Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 

Sensors are perhaps the most important and integral components of our modern society. With global warming 
and environmental pollution garnering ever-increasing attention, as well as solutions for sustainabile and smart 
cities, the optimized performance of current and future energy systems and process industries is paramount. The 
accurate sensing and quantification of key parameters of such systems are essential for monitoring, controlling, 
and optimization efforts. In situ laser-based optical sensors are most suitable for achieving the desired charac-
teristics of accuracy, sensitivity, selectivity, portability, speed, safety, and intelligence. In recent decades, sig-
nificant progress has been made in the development and deployment of laser-based sensing solutions, although 
new challenges and opportunities continue to emerge rapidly. In this review paper, we focus on laser absorption 
spectroscopy  (LAS)-based  sensors  owing to  their  simple  architecture,  easy  implementation,  and  market  pene-
tration. We detail recent advancements made in LAS variants using new laser sources and techniques. A brief 
discussion on other laser-based sensing techniques, namely, photoacoustic spectroscopy, laser-induced fluores-
cence,  coherent  anti-Stokes  Raman  spectroscopy,  and  laser-induced  breakdown  spectroscopy,  is  provided  to 
compare these strategies with LAS. The applications of laser-based sensors in various energy systemsincluding 
engines,  turbines,  power  plants,  furnaces,  and  boilers—as  well  as  process  industriessuch  as  petrochemical, 
semiconductor, natural gas leak detection, and corrosion detectionare presented, illustrating their many benefits 
and possible uses. A distinguishing aspect of this review paper is that we present the comparison of previous 
studies  in  tabular  formats,  making  it  easy  to  appreciate  the  recent  progress  in  laser-based  sensing  solutions. 
Finally,  suggestions  on  future  directions  and  emerging  technologies  to  pursue  for  the  further  enhancement, 
development, and deployment of laser-based sensors are proposed.   

1. Introduction 

The  intricate  coupling  of  increasing  energy  demand  and  deterio-
rating global warming trends has placed a strong focus on renewable 
zero-carbon  energy  systems  and  an  optimized  current  energy  infra-
structure. The performance enhancement of energy systems and process 
industries strongly relies on the accurate sensing and quantification of 
numerous key physical and chemical parameters. Such systems include 
small-scale units, such as boilers, furnaces, engines, and turbines, and 
large-scale  process  industries,  such  as  power  plants,  steel  mills, 

incinerators,  and  petrochemical,  semiconductor,  and  pharmaceutical 
industries. The development and application of sensors in such complex 
systems  are  nontrivial.  Although  a  vast  array  of  sensor  solutions  has 
been proposed in recent years, laser-based sensors provide unmatched 
benefits  in  terms  of  their  sensitivity,  selectivity,  portability,  and 
response time [1]. 

Various laser-based sensing techniques are available, each with their 
own  capabilities  and  limitations.  These  techniques  are  distinguished 
based  on  their  physical  principles,  implementation  strategies,  and 
hardware requirements. Governed by the laws of quantum mechanics, 
the interaction between a photon and matter at the microscopic level 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: Aamir.farooq@kaust.edu.sa (A. Farooq).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.100997 
Received 2 March 2021; Received in revised form 17 February 2022; Accepted 4 March 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)100997Availableonline7April20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Nomenclature 

cantilever-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy 

artificial neural network 
algebraic reconstruction technique 
effective spontaneous emission rate 
Einstein absorption coefficient 

basic oxygen furnace 
back-propagation neural network 
speed of light 
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering 
cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy 

AM-PAS  amplitude-modulation photoacoustic spectroscopy 
ANN 
ART 
A 
B 
BRR-SAC blackbody radiation referenced self-absorption correction 
BOF 
BPNN 
c 
CARS 
CEAS 
CE-PAS  cavity-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy 
CL-PAS 
CF-LIBS  calibration-free laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
convolutional neural network 
CNN 
carbonyl sulfide 
COS 
chirped probe pulse 
CPP 
cavity ring-down spectroscopy 
CRDS 
chemical vapor deposition 
CVD 
continuous wave 
CW 
dual-comb spectroscopy 
DCS 
distributed feedback 
DFB 
difference-frequency generation 
DFG 
diode-pumped solid-state 
DPSS 
electric arc furnace 
EAF 
erbium-doped fiber amplifier 
EDFA 
exhaust gas temperature 
EGT 
′′
E
lower energy state 
Ep 
laser pulse energy 
collection efficiency of the optical system 
F 
frequency-agile tomographic 
FAT 
fluidized bed combustion 
FBC 
Fourier-domain mode-locked lasers 
FDML 
frequency modulation spectroscopy 
FMS 
Faraday rotation spectroscopy 
FRS 
free spectral range 
FSR 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 
FTIR 
full width at half maximum 
FWHM 
f0 
resonant frequency of the acoustic resonator 
genetic algorithm 
GA 
g 
spectral overlap integral 
HC-PCF  hollow-core photonic crystal fiber 
HCC 
HAT 
h 
HHG 
IC 
ICCD 
ICOS 
ICL 
I-QEPAS  intracavity quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy 
Ii 
laser intensity 
Io 
incident light intensity 
transmitted light intensity 
It 
Boltzmann constant 
k 
kν 
absorption coefficient of the target gas 
path length of laser beam 
L 
laser absorption spectroscopy 
LAS 
laser absorption tomography 
LAT 
laser-induced fluorescence 
LIF 
LIBS 
laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
LA-ICP-MS laser-ablation inductively coupled plasma mass 

hollow corner cube 
hyperspectral absorption tomography 
Planck’s constant 
high-harmonic generation 
internal combustion 
intensified charge-coupled device 
integrated cavity output spectroscopy 
interband cascade laser 

spectrometry 

mid-infrared 

length of the laser beam intersection region in CARS 
molecular weight of the absorbing species. 

l 
M 
MOPA  master oscillator power amplifier 
MIR 
MP-PAS  multipass-assisted photoacoustic spectroscopy 
machine learning 
ML 
multivariate linear regression 
MLR 
total number density of the gas 
n 
refractive index of the medium within the cavity 
nr 
N 
temperature exponent 
NELIBS  nanoparticle enhanced scheme 
NIR 
NIRS 
NICE-OHMS noise-immune cavity enhanced optical heterodyne 

near infrared 
near-infrared reflectance spectroscopy 

spectroscopy 
nuclear magnetic resonance 
normalized noise equivalent absorption 
total pressure of the gas 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
photoacoustic spectroscopy 
pound–Drever–Hall 
partial least squares 
planar laser-induced fluorescence 
particle swarm optimization 
presence of a helical vortex 
optical parametric oscillator 
optical parametric amplifier 
partition function of the molecule 
quality factor of the acoustic transducer 
sum of collisional quenching rates 
quantum cascade laser 
quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy 
quartz tuning fork 
mirror reflectivity 
residual amplitude modulation 
rapid compression machine 
Raman scattering 
line-strength 
selective catalytic reduction 
selective non-catalytic reduction 
second-harmonic generation 
signal-to-noise ratio 
photoacoustic signal 
tunable diode laser 
tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy 
terahertz 
reference temperature 
gas (or plasma) temperature 
mean bulk flow velocity 
unburned carbon 
ultraviolet 
unmanned aerial system 
sample volume 
vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser 
volumetric laser-induced fluorescence 
wavelength-modulation spectroscopy 

NMR 
NNEA 
P 
PAH 
PAS 
PDH 
PLS 
PLIF 
PSO 
PVC 
OPO 
OPA 
Q 
Qf 
Qu 
QCL 
QEPAS 
QTF 
R 
RAM 
RCM 
RS 
S 
SCR 
SNCR 
SHG 
SNR 
SPAS 
TDL 
TDLAS 
THz 
T0 
T 
U 
UC 
UV 
UAS 
V 
VCSEL 
VLIF 
WMS 
WM-PAS wavelength-modulation photoacoustic spectroscopy 
X 
α 
αSP 
β 
τ 
ν0 
Δν 
Δνc 

mole fraction of the absorbing species 
absorbance 
single-pass absorbance 
proportionality constant 
photon residence time 
center frequency of the absorption line 
doppler shift 
collisional broadening full width at half maximum 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009972A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

ΔνD 
ΔνL 
ϕν 
σν 
γij 
Xj 
σl 
fj
′′(T) 

η 
ni 
χCARS 
II
ji 
nI 

doppler-broadening full width at half maximum 
laser linewidth 
lineshape function 
frequency-dependent absorption cross section 
collisional broadening coefficient 
mole fraction of every j-th component within a gas mixture 
cross-sectional area of a laser sheet 
Boltzmann percentage of absorption state at quantum 
number j 
efficiency of an optical detection system 
refractive index for frequencies of individual fields 
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering susceptibility 
integrated line intensity of an atomic line 
number density of an atom 

AI
ji 

gI
j 
UI(T) 
EI
j 
SLIF 
γik 

χk 

fj

′′(T) 

Einstein coefficient for the transition from upper level j to 

lower level i 
statistical weight of upper level j 
partition function 
energy of the upper level j 
laser induced fluorescence signal 
collisional broadening coefficient of the i-th absorbing 
species with respect to the k-th component 
mole fraction of every k-th component within the gas 
mixture 
Boltzmann percentage of the absorption state at quantum 
number j  

may  induce  the  transmission,  absorption,  or  scattering  of  photons. 
Photon absorption may propel the matter particle to a high energy state 
(electronic, vibrational, and rotational), cause it to disintegrate (e.g., a 
diatomic molecule dissociating into two forming atoms), or ionize the 
matter by providing sufficient energy for electron loss. Photon absorp-
tion sensing can be achieved either by the measuring the decrease in 
transmitted  laser  intensity  (absorption  spectroscopy)  or  using  pressure 
waves  generated  by  matter  heating  (photoacoustic  spectroscopy,  PAS). 
Photon absorption may be followed by spontaneous photon emission, 
also known as laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) or phosphorescence, where 
the  emitted  photon  possesses  the  same  or  decreased  energy.  Photon 
scattering  can be either elastic or inelastic,  corresponding to Rayleigh 
and  Raman  scattering  techniques,  respectively.  Photon  absorption  can 
even  generate  ionized  species  to  facilitate  elemental  analysis  (laser- 
induced breakdown spectroscopy). 

Absorption  spectroscopy  is  perhaps  the  simplest,  oldest,  and  most 
popular  laser-based  sensing  technique.  It  involves  a  stronger  optical 
interaction  (by  several  orders  of  magnitude  in  terms  of  optical  cross 
sections)  compared  to  other  spectroscopic  techniques  (i.e.,  LIF  or 
Raman) and can thus be employed using low-power lasers. Absorption 
spectroscopy is a line-of-sight technique and can simply be performed 
using a light source (e.g., laser) and a photodetector. Although emission 
and  absorption  spectroscopy  date  back  to  the  17th  century  [2],  with 
significant advancements made in the 19th [3,4] and 20th [5,6] cen-
turies,  they  underwent  revolutionization  after  the  invention  of  a 
monochromatic light source (laser) in 1958–1960 [7]. The development 
of  monochromatic  light  sources  enabled  spectrally  resolved  measure-
ments  without  any  high-resolution  monochromator  or  spectrometer. 
The development of dye lasers in 1966 [8] facilitated tunable laser ab-
sorption, before which only single-wavelength measurements could be 
performed. Some early studies used CO2  gas [9,10] and helium–neon 
[11] lasers to study the absorption spectra of CO2 and Br2, respectively. 
These  fundamental  studies  soon  inspired  the  application  of  laser  ab-
sorption  spectroscopy  (LAS)  to  practical sensing  applications, such  as 
atmospheric pollution [12], automobile exhaust [13], combustion [14], 
and shock tubes [15]. Some early progress was hampered because of the 
limited number of accessible wavelengths of the available lasers, cryo-
genic operation of infrared (IR) lasers (e.g., lead–salt diode lasers [16]) 
and photodetectors, and multimode emission of some laser sources. The 
invention  of  room-temperature  near-IR  (NIR)  lasers  for  telecommuni-
cation  applications  in  the  mid-1980s  [17]  proved  to  be  the  next  big 
advancement in the field of laser-based sensing, facilitating the porta-
bility, compactness, and field application of laser absorption sensors. In 
the first decade of the 21st century, the wavelength accessibility in the 
IR  region  was  enhanced  significantly using extended  NIR lasers [18], 
interband cascade lasers (ICLs) [19], and quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) 
[20].  In  conjunction  with  advancements  in  laser  and  photodetector 
technology,  spectroscopists  and  physicists  significantly  contributed  to 
the  theoretical  understanding  of  absorption  lineshapes  and  improved 

sensing  strategies.  The  progress  in  various  areas  of  laser  absorption 
sensors has been documented in excellent reviews by Feh´er and Martin 
[21], Werle [22], Allen [23], Werle et al. [24], Willer et al. [25], Lackner 
[26], Hanson [1], Hodgkinson and Tatam [27], Zhang et al. [28], Bol-
shov et al. [29], and most recently by Goldenstein et al. [30]. 

Since the discovery of the photoacoustic effect in the 19th century, 
significant advancements have been made in PAS with the availability of 
new  tunable  lasers,  acoustic  elements,  and  photoacoustic  cells,  thus 
rendering PAS a powerful diagnostic tool for trace-gas sensing. PAS is a 
technique for detecting gases/liquids/solids using an indirect laser ab-
sorption measurement. When modulated laser photons are absorbed by 
gas  molecules,  a  nonradiative  relaxation  process  causes  the  periodic 
heating  of  the  gas  medium.  An  acoustic  signal  related  to  the  laser 
modulation  frequency  is  produced,  which  can  be  detected  with  high 
sensitivity using a microphone. In addition to the advantages of being 
fast, highly sensitive, and free of background, PAS can be employed in 
any  spectral  range  because  it  does  not  depend  on  the  availability  of 
photodetectors. The recent availability of mid-IR (MIR) semiconductor 
lasers and miniature acoustic resonators has enabled the development of 
portable photoacoustic gas sensors. Earlier reviews on the progress and 
application of PAS include Tam et al. [31], Schmid et al. [32], Haisch 
et al. [33], Li et al. [34], Patimisco et al. [35], Srirang et al. [36], and 
most recently by Tianhe et al. [37]. 

Laser induced fluorescence (LIF) is another important laser sensing 
technique that offers many benefits, including good species selectivity, 
high sensitivity, and high spatial resolution [38]. This technique exploits 
the spontaneous emission of light (fluorescence signal) induced by the 
excitation  of  an  atom  or  molecule  to  a  higher  energy  level  by  laser 
photon absorption (generally ultraviolet light). The spontaneous emis-
sion  usually  occurs  at  a  wavelength  higher  than the  excitation  wave-
length,  and  a  small  delay  time  exists  between  the  excitation  and 
emission signals. These two factors help identify and quantify molecules 
in several applications. A great contribution to the development of LIF 
was made by the group of Richard Zare [39] in 1968 for the detection of 
atoms and molecules in the gaseous phase. Since then, LIF has been used 
as a powerful tool for studying diverse areas of chemistry by analyzing 
various species (particularly radicals) in chemical reactions. The flexi-
bility of LIF in detecting fluorescence emitted in various directions can 
facilitate  two-dimensional  (2D)  and  three-dimensional  (3D)  image 
capturing. Over the years, with the advancement of ultrafast pulsed la-
sers and spectroscopic strategies, LIF has become one of the most widely 
used  techniques  for  the  2D/3D  spatial  imaging  of  flowfields.  Various 
aspects and progress of LIF have been well documented in earlier  re-
views, such as those by Smyth et al. [40], D¨obele et al. [41], and Ruan 
et al. [42]. 

Raman  spectroscopy  is  a  noninvasive  technique  employed  for  the 
thermometry  and  species  concentration  measurements  of  gas-phase 
flows [43], as well as for material characterization [44] and chemical 
analysis [45]. In 1965, Terhune and Maker presented the initial idea of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009973A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS) as a three-wave mix-
ing process and studied the nonlinear phenomena of crystal structures 
using  a  giant  pulsed  ruby  laser  [46].  With  the  availability  of  a 
high-peak-power  pulsed  dye  laser,  Raman  spectroscopy  garnered 
considerable research attention because it enabled the nondestructive in 
situ  measurement  of  temperature  and  species  concentration  in  flames 
[47,48]. Over time, it has become an important technique for propellant 
burners,  gas  turbine  combustors,  internal  combustion  (IC)  engines, 
natural  gas  engines,  and  industrial  furnaces.  The  use  of  Raman  spec-
troscopy was further expanded to different applications in energy sys-
tems  with  the  provision  of  nanosecond  (ns)-,  picosecond  (ps)-,  and 
femtosecond  (fs)-pulsed 
lasers.  Excellent  reviews  covering  the 
advancement  of  Raman  techniques  and  its  various  applications  have 
been reported by Roy et al. [47], Das et al. [48], Kiefer et al. [49], and 
Walter et al. [50]. 

If a laser pulse focusing on a sample (gas, liquid, or solid) exceeds the 
breakdown threshold, microplasma can be produced, generating strong 
emission spectra owing to the transition of ions, atoms, and molecules at 
different energy levels. The emission intensity of the ionized species can 
be used to analyze the elemental composition of the sample, facilitating 
the foundation of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). LIBS is 
a well-established analytical technique for obtaining the qualitative and 
quantitative information of a sample with minimal sample preparation 
requirements. LIBS instruments became commercially available in the 
early 1990s, and the main components of any LIBS-based instrument can 
be  tailored  based  on  specific  applications  [51,52].  In  addition  to  the 
advancements in LIBS setups, significant progress has been made in the 
development  of  field-portable  and  handheld  LIBS  instruments,  which 
can be employed in diverse research and industrial environments [53, 
54]. Comprehensive reviews on the advancements and applications of 
LIBS have been reported by Lee et al. [55], Hahn et al. [56], Singh et al. 
[57], Hahn et al. [58], Galb´acs et al. [59], and most recently by Hussain 
et al. [60] as well as Senesi et al. [61]. 

Numerous other laser-based sensing and diagnostic techniques are 
available that are not covered in this review. In particular, several useful 
techniques for flowfield measurements include, but are not limited to, 
laser Doppler velocimetry [62], phase Doppler anemometry [63], par-
ticle imaging velocimetry [64], laser-induced grating spectroscopy [65], 
laser dispersion spectroscopy [66], and holography [67]. In this review, 
we  primarily  focus  on  LAS  because  it  is  frequently  used  in  practical 
applications, such as energy systems and process industries. Four other 
techniques (PAS, LIF, CARS, and LIBS) selected for performance com-
parison are among those that have been utilized for species (and tem-
perature)  studies  in  laboratory  and  practical environments.  Note  that 
most  LAS  examples  included  in  this  review  belong  to  the  IR  region. 
Although the UV region has been extensively used for LAS, such systems 
are  mostly  limited  to  laboratory  environments  because  of  the  large 
footprint  (size,  cost)  of  UV  lasers.  The  terahertz  (THz)  region  has 
recently  gained  attention  owing  to  the  availability  of  THz  QCLs.  The 
reader is referred to a recent review on these lasers [68]. 

For  sustainable  energy  systems,  various  subsystems  must  be  opti-
mized in terms of their efficiency and performance. This necessitates in- 
depth  knowledge  of  the  underlying  physical  and  chemical  processes. 
Sensors provide the most effective means for understanding and opti-
mizing  processes  and  systems.  Future  sensors  must  exhibit  improved 
accuracy,  sensitivity,  selectivity,  safety,  speed,  and  portability  while 
being further lightweight, small, and user friendly; moreover, they must 
show  enhanced  self-learning  abilities,  consume  low  power,  facilitate 
multiparameter measurements, and realize improved wireless commu-
nication. Such sensors must show the ability of easy integration with the 
target system and other sensors. The applications of such sensors will 
facilitate easier, cheaper, and more efficient predictive maintenance and 
optimization of various machines and devices, as well as enable their 
safe operation. Many desired sensor features can be realized using laser- 
based  sensing  technologies. Although  these  sensors  have  mostly  been 
used  in  laboratory  environments  previously,  the  use  of  laser-based 

sensor in field applications is increasing considerably. The selection of 
a specific laser-sensing technology is based on the distinct requirements 
of the intended application. 

This  review  summarizes  the  basic  concepts  of  various  laser-based 
sensing  technologies,  details  recent  advancements  in  laser  absorption 
sensors, compares laser absorption sensors with those based on PAS, LIF, 
CARS,  and  LIBS,  presents  the  applications  of  laser-based  sensors  to 
various  energy  systems  and  process  industry  segments,  and  provides 
recommendations for the  future research, development, and  commer-
cialization of laser-based sensors. This review focuses on laser absorp-
tion  sensors  owing  to  their  simplicity  and  ease  of  application  in 
industrial environments. Furthermore, a discussion of and a comparison 
with other popular laser sensing technologies are presented to enable 
the reader to assess the advantages and disadvantages of various sensing 
techniques  and  select  the  optimal  one  based  on  their  requirements. 
Instead  of  providing  a  lengthy  review  of  the  previously  published 
literature, we summarize considerable information in a tabular format 
and listing, allowing an easy comparison among previous studies. When 
detailing a specific sensing application, we present examples from the 
recent literature (approximately last 5–10 years). Wherever appropriate, 
we  provide  examples  of  commercially  available  sensors.  This  review 
provides the state-of-the-art in laser-based sensing techniques and will 
guide  researchers  to  realize  smart  sensor–based  sustainable  energy 
systems. 

2. Absorption spectroscopy 

Diagnostics based on LAS employ the Beer–Lambert law, which re-
flects the mathematical relation between the fractional transmission of 
spectrally narrow radiation through gas and the thermodynamic prop-
erties of the gas. The quantized nature of the molecular motion (elec-
tronic,  vibrational,  and  rotational)  affords  discrete  energy  states  of  a 
particular molecule. Photons with energy equivalent to the energy gap 
between two states may undergo adsorption, thus shifting the molecule 
to  a  higher  energy  state.  Alternatively,  they  may  be  emitted  by  a 
molecule,  transitioning  from  a  higher  energy  state  to  a  lower  energy 
state.  In  this  review,  we  mainly  focus  on  the  IR  spectrum  of  light, 
although the general principles are applicable to visible and UV regions. 
The absorbance α can be defined as 

It
I0

= exp((cid:0) α),

(1)  

where I0 and It  represent the incident and transmitted light intensities, 
respectively. The radiation is assumed to be spectrally narrow, i.e., it 
exhibits a negligibly small full width at half maximum (FWHM) value 
compared  with  that  of  the  absorption  profile.  Based  on  the  Beer-
–Lambert law, the absorbance at a spectral frequency ν can be expressed 
as a simple function of the properties of the gas species: 

α = SϕvPXL,

(2)  

where  L  denotes  the  length  travelled  by  the  radiation  within  the  gas 
mixture, P represents the total pressure of the gas, and X represents the 
mole  fraction  of  the  absorbing  species.  Eq.  (2)  is  valid  for  a  single 
absorbing molecular species in a gas mixture; if multispecies present in 
the gas mixture undergo absorption, the corresponding absorbances can 
simply  be  summed  to  yield  the  total  absorbance.  S  and  ϕν  represent 
linestrength and lineshape functions, respectively, and are specific to a 
particular  molecular  transition.  The  linestrength  corresponds  to  the 
transition probability and population of molecules in the ground energy 
state.  The  molecular  population  is  determined  using  the  Boltzmann 
population  distribution,  thus  resulting  in  the  dependence  of  the  line-
strength on the temperature of the gas. The temperature dependence of 
the linestrength can be expressed as 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009974A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

S(T) = S(T0)

[

exp

Q(T0)
Q(T)
(

′ ′

T0
T

(cid:0)

hcE
k

1
T

(cid:0)

1
T0

)][

(

1 (cid:0) exp

(cid:0)

)][

(

1 (cid:0) exp

(cid:0)

hcν
kT

)](cid:0) 1

hcν
kT0

∫+∞

ϕ(ν)dν = 1.

,

(3)  

(cid:0) ∞

(7) 

where T0 and T represent the reference temperature (usually 296 K) and 
target gas temperature, respectively; Q represents the molecular parti-
′′
tion function; E
represents the lower energy state; h, c, and k represent 
physical  constants  (Planck’s  constant,  speed  of  light,  and  Boltzmann 
constant, respectively). 

The  lineshape  function  ϕν  is  attributed  to  the  broadening  of  the 
molecular transition around the center frequency owing to the relative 
motion  of  molecules  (Doppler  broadening)  and  collision-induced  per-
turbations (collisional broadening). The Doppler linewidth ΔνD  can be 
expressed as 

(cid:0)

ΔνD = ν0

7.1623 × 10(cid:0) 7

)1/2(cid:0)

)

(

T
M

)
,

cm(cid:0) 1

(4)  

where T is the temperature of the gas and M is the molecular weight of 
the absorbing species. Thus, the Doppler linewidth is independent of the 
gas pressure and follows a Gaussian lineshape function. However, the 
collisional linewidth ΔνC is a strong function of the gas pressure: 

∑

ΔνC = 2P

χkγk(T).

(5)  

k

where Xk represents the mole fraction of every kth component within the 
gas mixture and γik denotes the collisional broadening coefficient of the 
ith absorbing species with respect to the jth component. Thus, the total 
collisional linewidth of the ith absorbing species is the weighted sum of 
the mole fraction of the individual broadening linewidths induced by 
every kth component in the gas mixture. The collisional linewidth fol-
lows a Lorentzian lineshape function. The temperature dependence of 
the collisional broadening coefficient may be expressed using the power 
law: 

(

γ(T) = γ(T0)⋅

)N

,

T0
T

(6)  

where N represents a temperature exponent. A single value of N may not 
adequately  describe  the  variation  in  γ  in  a  wide  temperature  range. 
Therefore,  a  value  of  N  outside  the  temperature  measurement  range 
should be avoided. Occasionally, γ and N values are available in spectral 
databases (e.g., HITRAN) for common colliding species (e.g., N2 or air); 
accurate  values  of  these  parameters  are  usually  obtained  via  experi-
mental measurements. 

The  actual  lineshape  function  for  the  absorption  transition  is  a 
convolution of Lorentzian and Gaussian lineshapes, known as the Voigt 
profile.  Under  high-pressure  conditions  (>10  bar)  found  in  practical 
combustion systems, the Lorentzian lineshape is expected to dominate 
because of the strong gas pressure dependence of the collisional line-
width  and  the  smaller  magnitude  of  the  Doppler  linewidth.  As  an 
(cid:0) 1 at 
example, the Doppler linewidth of a CO line centered near 2200 cm
(cid:0) 1,  while  the  collisional  broadening 
1000  K  and  10  atm is  0.0094 cm
(cid:0) 1. Under near ambient con-
linewidth of this CO line in air is 0.46 cm
ditions  (296  K  and  1  atm),  certain  narrowing  effects  can  reduce  the 
overall FWHM of the absorption line, requiring more detailed lineshape 
models. Similarly, high-pressure conditions induce certain effects, such 
as the breakdown of the impact approximation and line mixing [69], 
thus  necessitating  more  sophisticated  lineshape  models.  For  further 
discussion on lineshape models, the reader is directed to a previous re-
view article [30] and a book Hanson et al [70].. 

The lineshape function is normalized such that its integral over the 

frequency domain is unity: 

Thus, integrating Eq. (2) results in the elimination of ϕ, yielding an 

expression for the absorption line area: 

A = SPXL.

(8) 

The aforementioned equations lay the groundwork for applying laser 
absorption to gas sensing. The applications of laser absorption in gas- 
phase  combustion  systems  usually  involve  the  determination  of  three 
quantities: species concentration, temperature, and flow velocity. 

2.1. Species concentration 

Using Eqs. (1) and (2), the mole fraction of a particular species in a 
gas  mixture  can  be  determined  by  measuring  the  fractional  intensity 
transmission  in  a  homogeneous  environment  where  the  pressure  and 
temperature  are  uniform  and  determined  using  some  methods  (e.g., 
pressure transducer and thermocouple or the conversion of pressure to 
temperature via isentropic or normal shock relations). The requirement 
of a homogeneous environment stems from the path-averaged nature of 
the measurement. Another requirement when using Eq. (2) is the a priori 
determination  of  individual  absorption  line  parameters  (linestrength 
and collisional broadening coefficient). Thus, Eq. (2) can be practically 
applied employed only in the case of small molecules (e.g., CO, H2O, and 
CH4) at low pressures and with sufficiently isolated absorption lines in 
the frequency domain. In the case where the absorption spectrum of a 
molecule is too broad to facilitate the application of Eq. (2), a modified 
form of the same equation can be used: 

α = σνnXL.

(9) 

The  product  SϕνP  in  Eq.  (2)  is  replaced  with  the  product  of  the 
frequency-dependent absorption cross section (σν) and the total number 
density of the gas (n). This considerably simplifies concentration mea-
surements because only the absorption cross section must be determined 
a priori at a single wavelength. However, the drawback of this approach 
is that the cross section must be measured in the entire range of tem-
perature and pressure to be used in an actual experiment because the 
cross section is a function of both the temperature and pressure. More-
over,  cross-section  calibration  measurements  are  useful  only  for  very 
dilute mixtures of the absorbing gas because the cross section is a weak 
function of the mole fraction owing to self-broadening. Generally, ab-
sorption cross sections are presented in the literature as functions of both 
the  temperature  and  pressure  for  a  given  wavelength  [71].  Another 
limitation of this fixed-wavelength approach is that the interference or 
crosstalk  from  other  absorbing  species  can  severely  affect  the  mea-
surement accuracy. 

For  a  gas  at  a  given  temperature,  pressure,  and  composition,  the 
absorbance and consequently the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) cannot be 
maximized using Eqs. (8) or (9). Initially, a wavelength region is selected 
that contains absorption lines of the given molecule with the maximum 
linestrength and hence the largest absorption cross sections. However, 
even such regions may not suffice for dilute gas mixtures, which would 
necessitate increasing the laser path length. In later sections, we discuss 
strategies for increasing the laser path length using optical cavities. 

2.2. Temperature 

Laser absorption can be used to determine the temperature based on 
the established two-line thermometric technique. Consider two separate 
molecular transitions probed at center frequencies ν1 and ν2. The ratio of 
the integrated areas equals that of the respective linestrengths and thus 
is a function of only the temperature: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009975A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

R =

A1
A2

=

S1(T)
.
S2(T)

(10) 

Using this ratio in conjunction with Eq. (3) and ignoring the stimu-
lated emission, the following expression for the gas temperature can be 
derived [70]: 
(cid:0)

).

(11) 

T =

E′′
2 (cid:0) E′′
hc
k
lnR + ln S2(T0)
S1(T0) + hc

1

k

E′′
2

(cid:0) E′′
1
T0

)
(

The sensitivity of the measurement is determined by differentiating 
Eq.  (11)  with  respect  to  T  and  obtaining  the  following  approximate 
expression [70]: 

dR/R
dT/T

=

(cid:0)

hc
k

)

.

2 (cid:0) E′′
E′′
T

1

(12) 

Based on Eq. (12), a large difference in the lower-state energies of 
two transitions used for the temperature measurement affords a small 
change  in  temperature  that  can  be  measured.  Similar  to  the  case  of 
concentration  measurements, laser absorption-based temperature sen-
sors are path-averaged and prone to large uncertainties if temperature 
gradients exist within the beam path. Note that while the difference in 
lower-state  energies  determines the  theoretical sensitivity of the  tem-
perature  measurement,  the  two-line  thermometric  technique  is  still 
constrained  by  the SNR  of  the  measured absorbances,  similar to  con-
centration measurements. 

2.3. Flow velocity 

Similar  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Doppler  broadening  of  the  ab-
sorption  lines  by  molecular  motions,  the  Doppler  shift  of  the  center 
wavelength of absorption lines occurs when the gas being probed ex-
hibits a bulk velocity relative to the laser source. If the laser beam is 
propagating perpendicular to the bulk velocity, no Doppler shift in the 
center wavelength is observed. Alternatively, if the beam propagates at 
an angle θ  relative to the bulk velocity [72], the Doppler shift can be 
calculated as 

Δν =

U
c

ν0cosθ,

(13)  

where  U  represents  the  mean  bulk  flow  velocity  and  ν0  denotes  the 
center frequency of the absorption line. Because of the division by c in 
Eq. (13), the Doppler shift value of the absorption line is very small, even 
for velocities close to the speed of sound in ambient air. For example, a 
bulk  velocity  of  300  m/s  (approximately  the  speed  of  sound  in  air) 
(cid:0) 1 for an absorption 
would yield the maximum Doppler shift of 0.003 cm
(cid:0) 1.  Because  these  measurements  are  per-
line  centered  near  3000  cm
formed in the frequency domain instead of the intensity domain used for 
absorbance  measurements,  relatively  high  accuracy  can  be  achieved 
using  frequency  modulation  techniques  [73,74].  Recent  advances  in 
extremely  precise  frequency  shift  measurement  techniques  with  fre-
quency  combs  may  afford  considerably  high-precision  velocity  mea-
surements in the future [75]. 

2.4. Laser tuning modes for absorption spectroscopy 

The  aforementioned  laser  types  are  all  “Turnkey”  owing  to  their 
electronic hardware. In a typical laser operation, an injection current is 
employed and the laser temperature is maintained using a thermoelec-
tric cooler. Currently available hardware enables excellent stability of 
laser  intensity  over  long  periods  of  operation.  Based  on  the  type  of 
current  signal  injected,  different  laser  emission  characteristics  can  be 
obtained. The laser operation can be broadly classified into three cate-
gories: continuous wave (cw) operation, scanned wavelength operation, 
and pulsed operation. 

2.4.1. Continuous wave operation 

Cw  operation  involves  injecting  a  constant  current  into  a  laser, 
affording a constant intensity and emission wavelength of a very narrow 
(cid:0) 1). Considering that this is the simplest mode of 
linewidth (<0.0001 cm
operation and facilitates the highest measurement bandwidth, cw lasers 
have been widely employed in small-time-scale combustion experiments 
in shock tubes [76]. However, two main drawbacks are associated with 
the use of lasers in the cw mode. First, wavelength identification and 
drift:  the  laser  wavelength  must  be  continuously  monitored  using  a 
wavemeter  to  ensure  the  probing  of  the  target  wavelength.  Second, 
beam steering noise is susceptible to undesired intensity fluctuations in 
optically complex environments owing to the mechanical vibration of 
optics and density gradients in the gas. Although beam steering noise 
affects most laser-based diagnostic strategies, it may be offset in certain 
implementations, such as the normalization of absorption lines by the 
baseline in scanned wavelength absorption and the normalization of the 
second  harmonic  signal  by  the  first  harmonic  signal  in  wavelength 
modulation spectroscopy (WMS). 

2.4.2. Scanned wavelength operation 

Scanned wavelength operation involves injecting (in most cases) a 
sinusoidal or triangular current waveform into the laser. The laser in-
tensity  and  relative wavelength  are  approximately linear  functions  of 
the injection current waveform [77], thus providing sufficient current 
modulation such that the complete molecular absorption lineshape can 
be recovered from a single scan. The amount of calibration required for 
for 
is  greater 
cw-mode  measurements 
wavelength-scanning-mode measurements. As shown in Eqs. (7) and (8), 
scanning  across  the  lineshape  eliminates  the  need  for  the  a  priori 
determination  of  broadening  coefficients.  The  wavelength-scanning 
mode  can  also  be  used  to  obtain  spectroscopic  parameters,  such  as 
linestrength  and  broadening  coefficients  for  subsequent  use  in  the 
cw-mode operation. 

required 

than 

that 

WMS is a subset of the scanned wavelength operation, in which very 
fast sinusoidal scanning is applied to the laser and the frequency lock-in 
technique is applied to the measured laser signal to obtain Fourier co-
efficients.  The  modulation  frequency  determines  the  bandwidth  of  a 
WMS sensor and is typically at least an order of magnitude lower than 
the bandwidth of the cw operation. Compared with the cw operation, 
WMS is more susceptible to signal deterioration because of errant etalon 
fringes in the signal. In a review by Hodgkinson and Tatam [27], it was 
argued that there is a significant overlap in the minimum detection limit 
between  the  cw  operation  and  WMS.  This  comparison  overlooks  im-
provements in the SNR because of the elimination of beam steering noise 
in WMS relative to the cw operation. 

The  advent  of  tunable  diode  lasers  in  the  NIR  wavelength  region 
(0.8–3.0 µm), QCLs in the MIR region (4.0–14.0 µm), and most recently, 
ICLs  bridging  the  gap  between  these  two  regions  (3.0–4.0  µm)  has 
resulted  in  the  comprehensive  coverage  of  the  so-called  “fingerprint” 
region in molecular spectroscopy. Unlike in the UV region, the absorp-
tion lines in the IR region tend to be relatively isolated for small mole-
cules  such  that  individual  lines  can  be  easily  spectrally-resolved  at 
atmospheric pressure. The line strength tends to increase from NIR to 
MIR in the case of several small molecules in combustion and environ-
mental studies, such as carbon dioxide, methane, and ammonia. 

2.4.3. Pulsed operation 

The  third  method  of  operating  semiconductor  lasers  involves  the 
application of a square pulse train to the laser injection current. Based on 
the duty cycle (pulse duration as a fraction of the repetition rate), pulsed 
lasers can be used to probe a single wavelength, albeit with a signifi-
cantly greater linewidth than that obtained for the cw operation, or the 
downchirp phenomenon (frequency downscan across the pulse) can be 
exploited to obtain a complete lineshape within a pulse. The application 
of pulsed lasers for single-wavelength measurements is limited to mol-
ecules with broadband spectra, e.g., hydrocarbon species, because the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009976A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Beer–Lambert  law  requires  a  negligibly  narrow  laser  linewidth 
compared  with  the  molecular  absorption  spectrum.  Examples of  such 
applications  include  recent  works  on  acetylene  [78]  and  propylene 
detection [79] using pulsed QCLs with short duty cycles and pulse du-
rations (< 100 ns). 

For molecules with distinct and narrow absorption lines, the spectral 
downchirp at high duty cycles can resolve line features, albeit with a 
(cid:0) 1)  that  may  be  unsuitable  for  the 
large  laser  linewidth  (> 0.01  cm
monochromatic assumption of the Beer–Lambert law. The broad laser 
linewidth is attributed to the rapid frequency downscan observed in the 
pulsed mode. The laser linewidth ΔνL is related to the scan rate (dν/dt) 
based on the following expression [80] 

ΔνL = β

√

̅̅̅̅̅
dν
,
dt

(14)  

where β represents a proportionality constant with a value of < 1 and is 
determined based on a rectangular or Gaussian time window. Compared 
with  conventional  wavelength  scanning,  the  scan  rates  in  the  pulsed 
mode may be up to 100 times higher. Manne et al [81]. investigated the 
variation in the chirp rate and tuning range of a pulsed QCL as a function 
of the pulse duration for a 10 kHz pulse repetition rate. At this repetition 
(cid:0) 1/µs was observed, 
rate, the maximum intrapulse chirp rate of 8.9 cm
(cid:0) 1/µs [83], 
compared with the scan rates of ~ 0.003 [82] and 0.006 cm
respectively, for conventional scanning at similar repetition frequencies 
of 2.5 and 10 kHz, respectively. Because Manne et al [81]. only inves-
tigated  limited  duty  cycles  (0.01–0.1%),  a  nearly  linear  relation  was 
observed between the tuning range and pulse duration. In a later study, 
Chrystie  et  al.  characterized  the  tuning  range  for  a  pulsed  QCL  in  a 
considerably broader range of duty cycles (20%–80%) and pulse repe-
tition rates (400 kHz–1.5 MHz) [84]. This work was extended further by 
Nasir et al. down to 100 kHz repetition rates [85], in addition to the 
characterization  of  the  chirp  rate  across  the  pulse  for  different  pulse 
durations. The tuning range increased with a decrease in the repetition 
rate, reaching the maximum at a duty cycle of 50%. The instantaneous 
intrapulse chirp rate decreased exponentially with time, exerting spec-
tral resolution consequences on applications sensitive to the laser line-
width [80]. In a recent work, Nair et al [86]. employed a bias tee circuit 
(cid:0) 1/µs with the sinusoidal 
to achieve a very high scan rate of ~1.67 cm
modulation of the laser injection current. This alternative strategy for 
achieving a large tuning range at rapid scan rates is attractive because it 
can  provide  better  scan-to-scan  repeatability  than  the  chirped-pulse 
mode. 

Although  pulsed  QCLs  have  been  employed  for  gas  sensing  at 
ambient or low-pressure conditions in several studies [81,87–89], the 
laser linewidth is comparable to the collisional linewidth under these 
conditions. Thus, for the appropriate application of the Beer–Lambert 
law, the Gaussian lineshape must account for both the Doppler broad-
ening  and  artificial  broadening  induced  by  the  laser  linewidth  [90]. 
Recent works by Nasir and Farooq exploited the predominance of the 
collisional linewidth at high pressures (>10 bar) to recover absorption 
lineshapes without accounting for the laser linewidth [85,91]. Thus the 
pulsed-mode  operation 
involving 
suitable 
high-pressure  conditions  where  a  broad  tuning  range  is  required  to 
resolve  the absorption FWHM. Another important advantage  of using 
the  pulsed-mode  operation  is  that  it  facilitates  time-division  multi-
plexing  such  that  a  single  IR  detector  can  be  used  to  simultaneously 
capture multiple laser signals [85,91]. 

for  applications 

is 

3. Recent developments in laser absorption-based sensing 
techniques 

Several advances have recently been made in laser applications using 
novel  approaches for  absorption-based gas  sensing. These  approaches 
involve both the exploitation of existing laser sources and the adaptation 
of new light sources. Here, we highlight some such developments. This is 

not  meant  to  be  a  comprehensive  review  of  all  literature  in  laser  ab-
sorption, rather a selection of some recent developments. 

3.1. Absorption in nonuniform media 

′′

As mentioned previously, laser absorption measurements are path- 
averaged,  rendering  them  suitable  for  homogeneous  gas-phase  envi-
ronments.  However,  efforts  have  been  made  to  resolve  concentration 
and temperature gradients along the line of sight. Sanders et al. showed 
that  by  probing  multiple  absorption  lines  with  different  linestrengths 
as well as using an a priori model of the expected temperature 
and E
distribution, the measured integrated area of the spectral lines can be 
used to determine the temperature profile along the line of sight [92]. 
The  strategy  for  determining  the  temperature  distribution  involves 
dividing the measurement length into different temperature bins. The 
number of bins is constrained by the number of absorption lines and the 
complexity of temperature nonuniformity. 

An alternative to temperature binning is the fitting of the spectral 
line  profiles  while  floating  the  temperature  and  concentration  distri-
bution  within  the  measurement  domain.  This  method  requires  the  a 
priori  estimation  of  the  shape  of  the  temperature  and  concentration 
distributions.  Liu  et  al.  demonstrated  line-of-sight  temperature  and 
concentration measurements for H2O on a flat flame burner using seven 
H2O absorption lines between the 1.35- and 1.40- µm bands [93]. They 
used both the temperature binning and profile fitting approaches. The 
flat  flame  burner  used  in  the  experiment  showed  a  nearly  uniform 
top-hat temperature profile, considerably aiding their analysis. In a later 
work by Liu et al., measurements were made on a circular flame burner 
with a parabolic temperature profile [94]. Twelve H2O absorption lines 
in the NIR region (1.30–1.35 µm) were accessed using a broadly tunable 
external-cavity  diode  laser  for  temperature  and  H2O  concentration 
measurements. The authors used a simulated temperature and concen-
tration distribution to construct their inversion scheme by dividing the 
flame cross section into six single uniform zones. Furthermore, they used 
a fitting technique for determining the temperature and concentration 
distribution. Goldenstein et al. could estimate the path-averaged tem-
perature  and  species  concentration  in  a  nonlinear  environment  by 
selecting  only  two  absorption  lines  that  exhibit  a  linear  temperature 
dependence  of  the  linestrength  in  the  considered  temperature  range 
[95].  Recently,  Ma  et  al.  proposed  a  new  multiband  IR  absorption 
spectroscopic method for measuring nonuniform temperature and spe-
cies concentration in laminar premixed flames [96]. The effects of the 
coflow  rate,  equivalence  ratio,  and  Reynolds  number  of  the  reactant 
flow on the thermochemical distribution were thoroughly studied using 
the proposed absorption spectroscopic method, achieving high accuracy 
[97]. 

Malarich and Rieker determined the minimum number of absorption 
lines  required  to  recover  the  temperature  for  a  typical  line-of-sight 
experiment on a flame [98]. They found that as the number of absorp-
tion  lines  increases,  the  temperature  obtained  using  the  inversion 
scheme is closer to the true value (Fig. 1). A large number of spectral 
lines  can  be  accessed  using  widely  tunable  laser  sources,  such  as  a 
dual-comb spectrometer [98,99], external cavity lasers [94,100], mul-
tiplexed laser systems [101], and vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers 
(VCSELs) [102]. 

Compared  with  diode  lasers,  broadband  sources,  such  as  super-
continuum  lasers,  provide  sweeps  of  large  wavelength  regions.  In 
supercontinuum lasers, a short broadband pulse (ranging from the fs to 
ns timescale) of NIR radiation at high repetition rates (tens of kHz to tens 
of MHz) is coupled with a long dispersive single-mode fiber, effectively 
affording a fast wavelength scan. In an early work on gas sensing using a 
supercontinuum  laser  source,  Sanders  achieved  the  maximum  wave-
(cid:0) 1) within 20 ns at a nominal center 
length sweep of 200 nm (951 cm
wavelength of 1.4 µm [103]. In this work, Sanders used 300 fs pulses at 
(cid:0) 1, which can thus be 
48 MHz, achieving an effective linewidth of ~1 cm
applied  to  gas  mixtures  at  10  bar  where  the  molecular  absorption 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009977A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

situations.  The  selected  applications  of  supercontinuum  lasers  for 
broadband absorption spectroscopy are listed in Table 3.1. 

Recently,  new  sources  and  techniques  have  been  developed  to 
perform broadband spectroscopy with a sufficiently high spectral reso-
lution.  For  example,  time-resolved  optically  gated  absorption  was 
developed for measuring broadband background-free single-shot laser 
absorption [111]. This technique exploits the inherent difference in the 
timescale of a broadband fs light source and the long-duration response 
of atomic/molecular absorption transitions. Further, this strategy was 
extended to applications in the MIR region (~3.3 µm) [112]. Similarly, 
some  recent  studies  have  employed  an  optical  parametric  oscillator/-
amplifier  (OPO/OPA)  along  with  an  Er-fiber  laser  or  a  Ti-sapphire 
oscillator  for  broadband  measurements  in  the  MIR  region  [113,114]. 
Tancin and Goldenstein extended this methodology to the high-pressure 
(40 bar) one-dimensional (1D) imaging of aluminum propellant flames 
[113]. 

3.2. Laser absorption tomography 

Conventional line-of-sight absorption measurements can only yield 
zero-dimensional (0D) or some aspects of 1D information (described in 
Section 4.1). Laser absorption tomography (LAT) can be used to recover 
the  complete  2D/3D  information  of  the  species  concentration  and 
temperature in a given gas-phase environment [118]. LAT involves the 
measurement of multiple projections, where each projection is a con-
ventional  line-of-sight  absorption  measurement.  Generally,  when  a 
given measurement volume is subject to more orthogonal projections, 
the fidelity that can be achieved in the final reconstruction of the 2D 
cross section of the flowfield increases. In the simplest case, each pro-
jection will be measured using a single laser-diode/photodetector pair. 
A single linear array of laser diodes and the corresponding detectors will 
enable 1D reconstruction, whereas additional orthogonal arrays facili-
tate  2D  reconstruction  of  species  concentration/temperature  informa-
tion.  The  reconstruction  algorithms  for  LAT  experiments  must  be 
modified  according  to  the  beam  arrangement,  typically  affording 
sparser  projections  (10–100)  compared  with  medical  tomography  ap-
plications. The reconstruction algorithms for LAT have been extensively 
discussed  in  previous  reviews  [119–122].  For  example,  Cai  and 
Kaminski introduced a frequency-agile tomographic (FAT) reconstruc-
tion algorithm that facilitated the measurement of the spatially resolved 

Fig. 1. Temperature profiles obtained using different laser sources. Green line 
represents the two-line thermometric technique using a diode laser, blue line 
represents 12 spectral lines using an external cavity laser, and black line rep-
resents a dual-comb spectrometer covering 937 lines [98]. 

linewidth  is  expected  to  be  large.  A  low  laser  pulse  duration  and 
dispersion rate exhibited by the single-mode fiber corresponds to a low 
final  laser  linewidth,  although  a  minimum  value  of  laser  lindewidth 
exists  based  on the  pulse  duration  owing  to  Heisenberg’s  uncertainty 
principle. Sensitive multispecies detection in the MIR region (2–4 µm) 
has recently been demonstrated using a high-repetition-rate (2.5 MHz) 
supercontinuum source [104]. Such an MIR laser source combined with 
a multipass gas cell enables the detection of hydrocarbons, alcohols, and 
(cid:0) 1/2. 
aldehydes, with a noise-equivalent detection limit of 100 ppbv Hz
Recently, supercontinuum sources have received attention for combus-
tion applications at high pressures. Werblinski et al. demonstrated the 
use of supercontinuum absorption for conditions relevant to IC engines 
(5–65 bar), where the H2O concentration was measured in the NIR re-
gion  using  several  absorption  lines  [105–107];  a  schematic  of  their 
experimental  setup  is  presented  in  Fig.  2.  Other  studies  have  applied 
supercontinuum  sources  on  atmospheric  pressure  flames  [108–110], 
although owing to its broad linewidth, the supercontinuum source must 
be  appropriately  characterized  to  determine  the  lineshape  in  such 

Fig. 2. Schematic of the application of a supercontinuum laser to a rapid compression machine (RCM) [107].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009978A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.1 
Applications of supercontinuum lasers for broadband absorption spectroscopy.  

Reference 

Measured species 

Wavelength range 

Repetition 
rate 

Application 

Sanders [103] 

Hult et al [115]. 

H2O, CO2, C2H2, and 
C2H5OH 
CH4 and H2O 

Kranendonk et al [116].  H2O 
Werblinski et al [105]. 

CO2, H2O, and T 

Blume and Wagner  

CH4 

[109] 

Werblinski et al [110]. 

H2O and T 

Werblinski et al [107]. 

H2O and T 

Emmert et al [117]. 

CH4 

1350–1550 nm, Er-doped fiber laser 

48 MHz 

Gas cell at 10 bar, L = 184 cm 

1100–1700 nm, Yttrium fiber laser 

1.13 MHz 

1335–1373 nm, FDML 
1300–1700 and 1064 nm, pumped 
PCF 
1650–1700 and 1064 nm, pumped 
PCF 
1235–1680 and 1064 nm, pumped 
PCF 
1326–1410 and 1064 nm, pumped 
PCF 
1627–1668 nm 

CH4/air unburnt stream, 1 atm, L = 10.5 
cm 
Motored IC engine, 17 bar 
Flow cell, 450–800 K, 0.22 MPa 

98.85 kHz 
2.136 MHz 

2 MHz 

CH4/air flame, L = 41 mm 

1.178 MHz 

CH4/air flame, multipass, L = 46.2 mm 

0.41 nm 

40 MHz 

RCM, 2.5–65 bar, 300–900 K, L = 84 mm 

0.15 nm 

2 MHz 

Gas cell at 0.096–0.497 bar, L = 367 mm 

(cid:0) 1  

0.1 cm

Spectral 
resolution 

210 pm 

15 pm 

10 pm 
0.76 nm 

43 pm 

temperature and species concentration as well as pressure distribution at 
a high temporal resolution [123]. 

In numerous studies on LAT, different beam arrangements have been 
investigated for combustion flow applications. Tsekenis and Polydorides 
reviewed  beam  arrangements for  tomographic  studies, including con-
ventional one-laser/one-photodetector combination and other arrange-
ments,  such  as  fan-beam  illumination  or  scanning  a  beam  by  either 
moving  the  light  source  itself  or  using  guiding  optics  [124].  In  these 
arrangements, a single diode laser can illuminate an array of detectors, 
provided  sufficient  laser  power  is  available.  For  steady-state  applica-
tions, performing beam scanning using the mechanical motion of guid-
ing  optics  or  using  electro-optic/acousto-optic  deflectors  may  be 
feasible.  The  mechanical  motion  of  optics  usually  affords  increased 
noise, whereas electro-optic/acousto-optic deflectors are relatively sta-
ble  scanning  methods.  For  applications  with  unsteady  processes  and 
small  time  scales,  the  fan-beam  illumination  method  provides  good 
performance. Liu et al. demonstrated the fan-beam illumination method 
using  two  NIR  diode  lasers  for  a  tomographic  study  on  a  swirling 
methane/air flame [125]. The diode lasers exhibited an output power of 
20 mW and were combined into five fiber optics around the flame using 
a fiber coupler. Each fiber was equipped with an anamorphic prism and 
a cylindrical lens located at the output to convert the laser beam into a 
planar,  divergent  sheet  (fan  beam)  to  illuminate  an  array  of  twelve 
equally  spaced  photodetectors.  Thus,  projections  from  five  photode-
tector arrays were used to reconstruct the 2D profiles of temperature and 
H2O  concentration  information.  A  simple  grid  projection  pattern  was 
used by Ma et al. for H2O concentration and temperature measurements 

in  the  exhaust  of  a  J85  turbojet  engine.  In  this  case,  three 
Fourier-domain  mode-locked  lasers  (FDMLs),  which  are  considerably 
tunable,  similar  to  supercontinuum  sources,  were  multiplexed  into 
thirty  single-mode  fibers,  affording  a  square  grid  of  15  × 15  equally 
spaced  beams  [126].  Similar  to  most  previous  tomographic  and 
line-of-sight studies, FDMLs used in their work were centered in the NIR 
(cid:0) 1) to 
region at 1350 nm while providing a broad tuning range (10 cm
cover 12 H2O absorption lines at a temporal resolution of 50 kHz. 

Recently, tomographic imaging has been extended to the MIR region 
[127–132].  Wei  et  al.  used  a  fan-beam  illumination  method  by 
employing one QCL and two ICLs for the simultaneous imaging of CO, 
CO2,  and  ethane  in  a  laboratory  Bunsen  flame  [128]  (Fig.  3).  They 
achieved effective spatial resolutions of ~50 and ~125 µm  along the 
horizontal  and  vertical  directions,  respectively,  considerably  higher 
than those achieved in previous studies, where the laser beam size was 
the limiting factor in improving the spatial resolution. Tancin et al. later 
extended tomographic imaging to 2D temperature imaging in a laminar 
flame, achieving a temporal resolution of 0.1 s and a spatial resolution of 
140  µm  [129].  In  other  studies  on  MIR  tomography,  the  burner  was 
translated across a single line-of-sight laser beam to obtain 2D temper-
ature profiles in a swirling flame [130] and a premixed jet flame [131]. 
Moreover, Cheong  et al. conducted a comprehensive study on the in-
fluence of the selection of the absorption line on the tomographic results 
for an axisymmetric laminar premixed flame [132]. The proper selection 
of line pairs, such as in the MIR range, reduced 25% of the measurement 
uncertainty for the reconstruction of the temperature and species con-
centration profiles. Moreover, a detailed absorption line selection rule 

Fig. 3. Image of a flame (left) and projected absorbances for selected rovibrational transitions of three imaged species [128].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1009979A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

was proposed for tomographic measurements. 

Some other notable developments include hyperspectral absorption 
tomography (HAT), volumetric tomography, and machine learning (ML) 
algorithms  for  image  reconstruction.  In  particular,  the  availability  of 
efficient  ML  algorithms  has  kickstarted  a  new  era  of  tomographic 
studies.  Because  the  inversion/reconstruction  process  is  inherently 
nonlinear and depends on numerous spectral and flowfield parameters, 
the inversion problem can be addressed using neural networks and other 
ML methods. Some representative studies related to these developments 
are presented in Table 3.2. 

3.3. Cavity-based techniques 

For given thermodynamic conditions of a specific gas mixture and a 
given  absorption  transition  of  a  certain  species  within  the  same  gas 
mixture, the only feasible method for maintaining the same measurable 
absorbance at a low species mole fraction is increasing the beam path 
length. A fundamental method for increasing the beam path length in-
volves  the  use  of  reflective  surfaces  to  increase  the  number  of  beam 
passes.  Herriott  and  White  cells  perform  this  function  using  internal 
reflective surfaces that can increase the beam path length in some cases 
by up to a few hundred times the original length. However, these cells 
are tailor-made for static gas applications in a particular configuration. 
A more fundamental method for increasing the beam path length is the 
use of optically resonant cavities [140]. Typically, two concave mirrors 
are used to establish a resonant condition in an optical cavity, where the 
cavity will facilitate the buildup of photons from a laser emission mode 
that  is  resonant  with  a  cavity  transmission  mode.  The  cavity  mode 
spacing  (free  spectral  range,  FSR)  is  obtained  using  the  following 
expression: 

FSR =

c
2nrL

(15)  

where c denotes the speed of light, nr denotes the refractive index of the 
medium within the cavity, and L represents the single-pass beam path 
length within the cavity. The photon residence time within the cavity is 
calculated as 

τ =

L
,
c(1 (cid:0) R + αSP)

(16)  

Table 3.2 
Recent developments in laser absorption tomography.  

Reference 

Measured 
species 

Wavelength 

Methodology 

where R represents the mirror reflectivity and αSP  denotes the single- 
pass  absorbance.  Similar  to  a  conventional  single-pass  experiment, 
absorbance can be measured directly in a cavity absorption experiment. 
In  this  case,  the  technique  is  usually  referred  to  as  either  integrated 
cavity output spectroscopy (ICOS) or cavity-enhanced absorption spec-
troscopy (CEAS). Alternatively, the residence time of the cavity can be 
measured and using Eq. (16) will yield the single-pass absorbance. This 
approach is referred to as cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS). CRDS 
involves measuring the decay of a photodetector signal at the end of a 
laser pulse or when the input of a cw laser is cut off rapidly. The signal 
decay is fit using an exponential function, from which the photon resi-
dence time (or “ring-down time”) is extracted. An alternative to fitting 
the  decay  signal  is  modulating  the  laser  intensity  using  a  sinusoidal 
function and observing the phase shift between the photodetector signal 
and input function, provided that the modulation period is of the order 
of the ring-down time [141]. 

Generally, the reflectivity of the mirrors and the available detection 
bandwidth will determine the technique (CRDS or CEAS) to be used. For 
a mirror reflectivity of < 99.9%, the photon residence time will be of the 
order  of a few ns  for a vacuum reference measurement. Thus, in this 
case, small absorption-induced changes in the residence time cannot be 
measured without a very high bandwidth detection system (> 10 MHz). 
Therefore, in the case of such a low mirror reflectivity, CEAS is generally 
employed.  For  highly  reflective  mirrors  (> 99.99%),  the  photon  resi-
dence time becomes sufficiently large (of the order of microseconds); 
hence, CRDS can be employed. The measurement sensitivity is a strong 
function of the mirror reflectivity such that in the case of CRDS, it is 
(cid:0) 1 
possible  to  obtain  a  minimum  absorption  coefficient  of  10
[140] with a mirror reflectivity of up to 99.999%. However, in practice, 
such a high mirror reflectivity is difficult to maintain during long periods 
of operation because any slight imperfection or fouling of the mirror will 
affect the measurement sensitivity. Thus, the gain in absorbance in such 
cases  should  be  calibrated  before  each  measurement.  CEAS  measure-
ments in the case of a low mirror reflectivity tend to be more robust and 
require calibration less often. Hence, compared with CRDS, CEAS has 
broader applications in combustion and kinetics, such as in shock tubes 
[142–146], and more recently in high-pressure environments, such as 
rapid compression machines [85]. 

(cid:0) 10  cm

A key issue in cavity-based measurements is to ensure the spectral 
overlap  between  cavity  and  laser  modes.  Different  experimental 
schemes are available to facilitate this overlap. The simplest scheme is 

Ma et al [126]. 

H2O and T 

1350 nm 

Cai and Kaminski 

- 

- 

[123] 

Stritzke et al  

NH3 

2200.5 nm 

[133]. 

Liu et al [130]. 

CO2 and T 

4.2 μm 

Liu et al [125]. 

H2O and T 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

744.36 cm
7185.6 cm
4.97, 4.19, and 
3.34 μm 
4.8 μm 

CO, CO2, C2H6, 
and T 
CO and T 

H2O and T 

7326–7519 cm

(cid:0) 1 

Wei et al [128]. 

Tancin et al  
[129]. 
Grauer et al  
[134]. 

Jiang et al [135]. 

H2O and T 

Wei et al [136]. 
Deng et al.[137] 

CH4 
T 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

744.36 cm
7185.6 cm
3.16 μm 
- 

Wei et al [138]. 
Wei et al [139]. 

CO 
CO, CO2, and T 

4.85 μm 
4.19 and 4.85 μm 

(cid:0) 1 sweep each at 50 kHz 

2D hyperspectral tomography, three FDML lasers for ~10 
cm
Frequency-agile tomography, simultaneous reconstruction of 
T, μ, and P  
Limited-data tomorgraphy, Tikhonov regularization temporal 
resolution: 1 s 
2D scanning of the burner, phase-locked tomographic 
reconstruction, temporal resolution: 0.1 ms 
Coplanar fan-beam illumination 

High-speed IR camera, 1D laser sheet imaging, 2D imaging 
with burner scan 
High-speed IR camera, 2D laser sheet imaging, temporal 
resolution: 0.1 s 
Linear HAT 

Convolutional neural network (CNN) inversion, 32-beam 
arrangement 
Deep neural network (DNN) inversion, 3D species imaging 
Comparison of CNN with a deep brief network and a recurrent 
neural network for inversion 
Volumetric imaging, LES-trained DNN 
Volumetric imaging, 3D-masked Tikhonov regularization 

Spatial 
resolution 

38.3 mm 

- 

0.5 mm 

7.8 mm 

50–125 μm 

140 μm 

- 

- 

70 μm 
- 

70 μm 
70 μm 

Application 

Exhaust of an aeropropulsion 
engine 
Representative flame 
phantoms 
Diesel engine exhaust 

Acoustically forced swirling 
burner 
Lean blowout limit in a 
swirling flame 
Laboratory Bunsen flame 

Laminar partially premixed 
flame 
Turbulent phantoms, 
nonuniform cylinder 
Laboratory circular test rig 

Laboratory Bunsen flame 
Simulated phantoms 

Laboratory Bunsen flame 
Laboratory Bunsen flame  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099710A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

selecting  a  laser  with  a  broad  linewidth  that  simultaneously  overlaps 
with multiple cavity modes, such as the use of a ps-pulsed Ti: Sapphire 
laser  [147].  This  approach  is  feasible  in  the  limited  case  where  the 
spectral linewidth of the laser, while being sufficiently broad to cover 
several  FSRs,  is  still  narrow  compared  with  the  molecular  absorption 
linewidth. In other cases, laser and cavity modes can be translated with 
respect to each other in the spectral domain. If this translation occurs at 
a time scale lower than that detected using the data acquisition system, 
laser–cavity mode coupling noise can be minimized. O’Keefe et al. used 
this  approach  by  modulating  the  cavity  length  at  1  kHz  using  a 
piezo-driven mirror mount [148]. Instead of changing the cavity length, 
the  laser  wavelength  can  also  be  modulated  to  achieve  efficient 
laser-cavity mode coupling. This is particularly useful for cw lasers with 
a  narrow  linewidth,  such  as  diode  lasers  and  QCLs,  which  can  be 
modulated easily via the current injection. Similarly, Moyer et al [149]. 
and  Sun  et  al  [143].  used  cw  QCLs  to  suppress  laser–cavity  mode 
coupling  noise.  Other  broadband  sources  provide  the  advantage  of 
increased linewidths and scan rates compared with the cw operation of 
TDLs  or  QCLs. One  example is  the  use of  an intrapulse downchirp of 
(cid:0) 1/µs  in  a  pulsed  QCL  for  cavity  noise  suppression  [85]. 
~6–7  cm
Supercontinuum sources have recently been demonstrated for CEAS for 
multispecies measurements [150]. In addition to the rapid scanning of 
laser or cavity modes, off-axis cavity alignment can be used to decrease 
the effective FSR, thus achieving enhanced laser–cavity mode coupling 
[151]. Sayres et al. reported a decrease by a factor of 300 in the effective 
FSR by subjecting the beam to 300 nonoverlapping passes before cavity 
re-entry [152] (Fig. 4). 

Another scheme for ensuring laser–cavity mode coupling is actively 
locking a cavity mode to a laser mode. Morville et al. used a V-shaped 
cavity with three mirrors to feedback light resonant with only the cavity 
mode into the diode laser source [153]. This optical feedback scheme 
ensured that only the laser mode resonant with the cavity mode will pass 
through the cavity and be measured using the photodetector. Another 
experimental technique that relies on optical feedback is noise-immune 
cavity-enhanced optical heterodyne spectroscopy (NICE-OHMS) [154]. 
NICE-OHMS involves the tuning of the cavity length using a PZT and the 
locking  of  the  cavity  mode  to  the  modulation  frequency  of  the  diode 
laser.  Generally,  cavity  locking  techniques  tend  to  increase  the 
complexity  of  the  optical  setup,  thus  inducing  problems  when  imple-
mented  in  practical  systems.  Some  key  applications  of  cavity-based 

techniques in chemical kinetic studies are listed in Table 3.3. 

3.4. Wavelength modulation spectroscopy 

WMS is an extension of absorption spectroscopy and can be used for 
sensitive  species  concentration  detection  and  thermometry.  In  this 
technique, the laser wavelength is rapidly modulated using a sinusoidal 
function,  which  simultaneously  modulates  laser  intensity  and  fre-
quency. The harmonics of the transmitted intensity signal can be iso-
lated  using  a  lock-in  amplifier.  This  signal  is  a  function  of  the  gas 
conditions and spectroscopic parameters and therefore can be used to 
measure  unknown  gas  properties.  WMS  is  sensitive  to  the  lineshape 
curvature rather than the absorption magnitude [157]. The WMS theory 
has been described in detail previously [158]. 

The first and second Fourier coefficients of the WMS signal are used 
to compute 1f and 2f signals, respectively, using the root–sum–square 
approximation of the cosine and sine components. The 1f and 2f signals 
are  functions  of  the  first  and  second  derivatives  of  the  lineshape, 
respectively,  as  well  as  the  detector  gain.  The  dependence  of  the 
measured signals on the detector gain can be removed by normalizing 
the  2f  signal  using  the  1f  signal,  affording  a  frequency-domain  mea-
surement unaffected by low-frequency intensity fluctuations. 

The WMS modulation frequency f is considerably smaller than the 
absorption linewidth of the considered spectral feature. Typically, f is 
selected as <1 MHz. The second harmonic 2f is commonly employed as 
the detection signal because it is sensitive to the absorption line curva-
ture and absorber gas properties. WMS requires almost the same hard-
ware  as  direct  absorption  spectroscopy,  except  for  the  addition  of  a 
function generator for the laser wavelength modulation. This technique 
is extremely suitable for applications involving harsh environments due 
to its low-frequency noise rejection benefits. The normalization of the 2f 
signal  using  the  1f  signal  is  also  advantageous  for  rejecting  non-
absorption  losses  of  the  incident  light.  Finally,  similar  to  direct  ab-
sorption  spectroscopy,  calibration-free  WMS  can  be  realized  by 
characterizing the laser source and determining the spectral properties 
of the target gas. 

Since the  early  (1981–1982)  works  by  Reid and  Labrie  [159]  and 
Cassidy  and  Reid  [160]  on  the  use of  harmonic  signals  in  absorption 
spectroscopy, several developments have been made in WMS in theo-
retical and experimental aspects. These developments have been made 

Fig. 4. Demonstration of (a) large cavity FSR which results in (b) large spectral sampling, (c) a decreased cavity FSR using a multipass pattern, resulting in (d) 
smooth absorption feature. LLW refers to laser linewidth [152]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099711A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

m
t
a

1
<
d
n
a
K
0
0
0
8
–
0
0
4
5

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

m
t
a

2
–
1

d
n
a
K
3
0
5
1
–
7
2
2
1

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

r
a
b

1

d
n
a
K
8
0
7
1
–
5
5
9

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

r
a
b

2

d
n
a
K
5
4
8
1

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

m
t
a

1

d
n
a
K
0
0
5
2
–
0
0
2
1

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

K
8
9
2

:
e
b
u
t

g
n
i
x
i
M

m
t
a

.

4
6
1
–
7
8
0

.

d
n
a
K
0
0
2
1
–
5
2
9

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

r
a
b

0
1

d
n
a
K
0
0
9
–
0
0
8

:

M
C
R

e
g
n
a
r

d
n
a
b
d
a
o
r
b

e
h
t

n
i

%
8
9
–
%
5
9

S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
n
O

%
0
3
9
9

.

.

d
n
a
%
5
0
9
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
f
f

O

.

%
8
9
9
=
R
S
D
R
C
s
i
x
a
-
n
O

.

%
6
9
7
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
n
O

%
8
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
n
O

.

%
6
9
7
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
n
O

.

%
4
2
9
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
f
f

O

.

%
5
2
9
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
f
f

O

z
H
k

0
0
1

,
L
C
Q
y
t
i
v
a
c

l
a
n
r
e
t
x
E

)
d
n
a
b
d
a
o
r
b
(

p
m
a
l

c
r
a

e
X

z
H
M
8
7

,
e
r
i
h
p
p
a
s
:
i
T
d
e
s
l
u
p
-
s
P

z
H
M
8
7

,
e
r
i
h
p
p
a
s
:
i
T
d
e
s
l
u
p
-
s
P

z
H
k

0
5

,

m
u
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
r
e
p
u
S

z
H
k

0
0
1

,
L
C
Q
B
F
D

z
H
k

0
5

,
L
C
Q
B
F
D

m
n

0
2
4
–
0
8
2

m
µ

3
5
0
1

.

m
n

.

5
5
5
1
2

m
n

0
7
5
1
–
0
2
4
1

m
n

.

2
6
6
1
2

m
µ

m
µ

3
6
7

.

9
8
4

.

m
t
a

.

6
1
–
2
1

.

d
n
a
K
0
0
1
2
–
0
0
0
1

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

m
t
a

1
6
1

.

d
n
a
K
6
0
9

:
e
b
u
t

k
c
o
h
S

.

%
8
8
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
f
f

O

.

%
9
8
9
=
R
S
A
E
C
s
i
x
a
-
f
f

O

z
H
k

0
5

,
e
d
o
i
d

e
l
b
a
n
u
T

z
H
k

0
5

,
L
C
Q
B
F
D

m
n

7
3
5
1

m
µ

6
4

.

2
H
2
C

O
C

z
H
k

0
5

,
e
d
o
i
d

e
l
b
a
n
u
T

m
n

.

6
4
4
8

d
n
a

.

2
7
7
7

)

m
o
t
a

n
e
g
y
x
o

d
e
t
i
c
x
e
(

*
O

O
2
H

,
2
H
2
C

,
2
O
C

.
]
0
5
1
[

l
a

t
e

i
k
s
n
i
l
b
r
e
W

2
O
2
H

3
H
C

O
C

.
]
6
4
1
[

l
a

t
e

y
t
i
a
u
q
l
A

.
]
7
4
1
[

l
a

t
e

g
n
a
W

.
]
5
8
[

l
a

t
e

r
i
s
a
N

4
H
2
C

O
2
H
C

2
O

.
]
4
4
1
[

l
a

t
e

s
n
o
i
t
a
N

.
]
5
5
1
[

l
a

t
e

y
t
i
a
u
q
l
A

.
]
6
5
1
[

l
a

t
e

i
g
u
s
t
a
M

.
]
5
4
1
[

l
a

t
e

g
n
a
W

,
.
]
2
4
1
[

.
]
3
4
1
[

l
a

l
a

t
e

t
e

n
u
S

n
u
S

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
A

e
p
y
t

y
t
i
v
a
C

e
p
y
t

r
e
s
a
L

h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
W

s
e
i
c
e
p
s

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

.
s
e
i
d
u
t
s

c
i
t
e
n
i
k

l
a
c
i
m
e
h
c

n
i

s
e
u
q
i
n
h
c
e
t

y
t
i
v
a
c

f
o

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
A

3
.
3

e
l
b
a
T

in the form of hardware improvements, software algorithms, theoretical 
illustrations, inclusion of increased harmonics, use of large-modulation 
depths,  lineshape  characterization,  and  applications  to  highly  chal-
lenging  environments.  Some  of  these  key  developments  are  listed  in 
Table 3.4. 

3.5. Frequency comb spectroscopy 

A recent advancement in the field of high-precision spectroscopy is 
the  development  of  frequency  comb  spectrometers.  Originally  devel-
oped  for  ultraprecise  atomic  clocks  [178],  frequency  combs  provide 
high-stability  and  ultranarrow  (Hz  range)  laser  emission  modes  that 
serve  as  a  standard  for  frequency  calibration.  A  common  method  for 
frequency comb generation is the use of mode-locked ps/fs pulsed lasers, 
affording an output spectrum of many discrete and narrow-frequency 
modes owing to the broad spectral nature of the short pulse. Using la-
sers with slightly different pulse repetition rates, two frequency combs 
can  be  combined  to  yield  an  interferogram  that  covers  a  large  wave-
length  range.  The  resulting  “dual-comb  spectrometer”  has  been  pro-
posed  as  an  alternative  to  conventional  Fourier  transform  IR  (FTIR) 
spectrometers.  Two  combs  can  be  combined  in  several  ways,  such  as 
using  free-running,  mutually  coherent,  and  fully  referenced  combs 
(Fig. 5). Fully referenced combs yield high-resolution spectra, absolute 
frequency accuracy, and a high SNR. The wavelength range of frequency 
combs has expanded from the visible and NIR regions to most of the MIR 
and THz regions [179,180]. Fundamental fiber-based combs (Er, Th, and 
Yb) are mainly focused in the NIR region, and other regions are accessed 
using  various  techniques,  such  as  second-harmonic  generation  (SHG) 
and high-harmonic generation (HHG) for short wavelengths, and OPO 
and  difference-frequency  generation  (DFG)  for  long  wavelengths.  For 
the MIR region, semiconductor-based dual-comb spectrometry based on 
QCL frequency combs has been proposed, albeit with a limited wave-
length  coverage  and  larger  spectral  sampling  compared  to  near-IR 
combs [181]. Another interesting method is the microresonator-based 
frequency comb technology that exploits an ultrahigh resonance qual-
ity factor (> 100 million) to achieve long interaction lengths, affording 
extremely low thresholds for nonlinear optical effects [182]. Similar to 
QCL  frequency  combs,  the  spectral  spacing  of  microresonator-based 
combs  tends  to  be  relatively  large  compared  to  NIR  fiber–based 
combs.  When  a  particular  IR  wavelength  region  cannot  be  directly 
accessed  using  an  existing  frequency  comb,  frequency  locking  can  be 
achieved  between  conventional  laser  sources,  such  as  QCLs,  and  an 
existing frequency comb for ultra-precision spectroscopy [183]. 

(cid:0) 1 around 1440 nm, with each comb mode spaced at 0.007 cm

Recently, dual-comb spectroscopy (DCS) has been used in practical 
gas sensing applications. Schroeder et al. employed DCS that covered 
(cid:0) 1 
112 cm
[99]. The linewidth reported for each comb mode was 2 kHz, whereas 
the absolute magnitude of the frequency was known to an accuracy of 
10 MHz. Compared with the linewidth of pulsed QCLs (~500 MHz) or 
supercontinuum sources (>1 GHz), broad spectra of H2O and CO2 (322 
absorption features) with a linewidth of ~202 MHz were achieved using 
the  DCS  instrument.  Another  application  of  DCS  is  thermometry,  as 
demonstrated by Shimizu et al [184].. They used DCS near 1.5 µm to 
record a nearly complete absorption band of acetylene. Based on indi-
vidual line-center absorbances in the P and R branches of the band, the 
gas  temperature  was  deduced  based  on  the  Boltzmann  distribution. 
Draper et al. applied DCS in the NIR region to the transient process of a 
rapid compression  machine to measure  the broad spectra of methane 
(cid:0) 1  at  a  time  resolution  of  ~700  µs  for 
between  5967  and  6133  cm
time-resolved temperature measurements [185]. The use of two inde-
pendent mode-locked laser cavities required sophisticated  and expen-
sive phase-locking systems to ensure mutually coherent combs. Recently 
Xu  et  al.  performed  DCS  measurements  on  H2O  and  C2H2  in  laminar 
premixed flames using a single free-running erbium-doped fiber (EDF) 
laser, enabling a new approach for DCS-based combustion diagnostics 
without  any  complex  optical  and  electronic  feedback  systems  [186]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099712 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.4 
Key developments in the WMS technique over the last few decades.  

Reference 

Reid and Labrie [159] 

Measured 
species 

CO2, SO2, and 
NO 

Wavelength 

4.5–7.3 µm 

Cassidy and Reid [157] 

N2O 

Wang et al [161]. 

H2O 

Silver [162] 

Kluczynski & Axner [163] 

- 

- 

8.7 µm 

816 nm 

- 

- 

Weidmann et al [164]. 

SO2 and NH3 

9 µm 

Li et al [77]. 

Hancock et al [165]. 

Rieker et al [166]. 

H2O 

NO 

1388 nm 

5.1–5.3 µm 

Modulation 
frequency 

0.5–10 kHz 

133 Hz 

1 kHz and 100 
MHz 
- 

- 

20 kHz 

50 kHz 

15 kHz 

H2O, CO2, and 
T 

1.3–2.0 µm 

160–200 kHz 

Farooq et al [158,167]. 

CO2 and T 

2.7 µm 

100 kHz 

Sun et al [168,169]. 

H2O and CO 

1.39 and 2.3 µm 

1 and 10 kHz 

Klein et al [170]. 

H2O 

1.37 µm 

20 kHz 

Goldenstein et al [73]. 

Qu et al [171]. 

H2O, T, P, and 
V 
H2O and T 

1.4 µm 

1.4 µm 

637.5 and 825 kHz 

5 kHz 

Upadhyay and 

Chakraborty [172] 

CH4, P 

1650 nm 

20 kHz 

Mei and Svanberg [173] 

- 

Du et al [174]. 

H2O 

- 

1.4 µm 

- 

100 Hz 

Wang et al [175]. 

CH4 

1653 nm 

10 kHz 

Wei et al [176]. 

CO 

4.85 μm 

90 kHz 

Mathews and Goldenstein  

H2O and T 

[177] 

1392 nm and 1469 
nm 

35–45.5 MHz 

Key features 

*2f detection using a lock-in amplifier 
*Optimal modulation amplitude of 2.2 
*Lorentzian, Gaussian, and Voigt lineshapes 
*6f detection at 800 Hz 
*Absorption sensitivity of 0.01% achieved 
*Comparison of wavelength and frequency modulations 
*Sensitivity limited by residual amplitude modulation (RAM) 
*Theoretical comparison of wavelength and frequency modulations 
*Inclusion of RAM and dispersion effects 
*Theoretical description of WMS 2f and 4f signals 
*4f technique yields low background signals 
*Linear intensity modulation does not give rise to RAM 
*WMS demonstration using quasi-cw QCL 
*WMS provided three times better sensitivity than direct absorption 
*WMS at large modulation depths for high pressures 
*Incorporation of the nonlinear intensity modulation in the WMS model 
*WMS demonstration using EC-QCL 
*WMS provided 23 times better sensitivity than direct absorption 
*Calibration-free WMS demonstrated using 1f normalization and inclusion of laser- 
specific tuning parameters 
*Wavelength and frequency demultiplexing implemented for multispecies detection 
*WMS uncertainties described 
*WMS demonstration using extended NIR diode lasers 
*Low-temperature uncertainty (±3 K) achieved 
*WMS at high pressures (12 atm) shown to be unaffected by non-Lorentzian effects 
*Simulation of transmitted laser intensity using measured laser intensity 
*Digital lock-in amplifier using a low-pass filter 
*WMS nf harmonics for n = 1– 6 used 
*Advantages of high harmonics demonstrated for high pressures 
*Combined WMS-DAS with time-division multiplexing 
*Calibration of WMS signal using DAS in the intermediate SNR 
*Enhanced precision and dynamic range demonstrated 
*Scanned WMS used to determine gas properties and absorption lineshape 
(analogous to scanned direct absorption) 
*Inclusion of wavelength-dependent modulation amplitude in WMS spectral fitting 
*Phase shifting between intensity and wavelength modulations obtained using the 
fitting algorithm 
*Laser modulation at the phase quadrature frequency 
*Linear intensity modulation distorting components are made orthogonal to recover 
undistorted 2f signal 
*2f RAM nulling implemented 
*Detailed theoretical aspects of Fourier analysis method described 
*Phase delay between intensity and wavelength modulation obtained from 1f signal 
*Combined WMS-DAS demonstration 
*Characteristic frequencies of the modulated transmitted signal obtained using FFT 
*Lineshape parameters determined from the recovered absorbance profile 
*Direct signal from the detector used for normalization rather than 1f normalization 
*Frequency locking implemented using a triangular laser intensity modulation 
*This method afforded three times better sensitivity than WMS 2f/1f 
*Suppression of nonabsorbing intensity fluctuations 
*Superior performance of WMS compared with direct absorption 
*Reduced sensitivity to optical alignment 
*First work to demonstrate WMS measurements at 1 Mhz repetition rate 
*Methodology to characterize laser modulation at ultrahigh modulation rates  

QCL-based DCS was recently applied to a shock tube [187,188] to study 
fuel  autoignition,  wherein  the  spectrometer  achieved  an  ultrafast 
(cid:0) 1). 
response time (4 µs) but quite a large spectral sampling (~0.3 cm
Frequency  combs  can  also  be  coupled  with  cavity-enhanced  tech-
niques.  Thorpe  and  Ye  reviewed  frequency  comb  methods  based  on 
CRDS  and  CEAS  [189].  Similar  to  other  laser  systems,  laser–cavity 
coupling noise is suppressed either by mode locking between laser and 
cavity  modes  or  the  frequency  scanning  of  the  comb.  Furthermore,  a 
silicon chip–based MIR dual-comb spectrometer was recently designed 
wherein  two  mutually  coherent  mode-locked  frequency  combs  (span-
ning 2.6–4.1 µm)  were generated in two silicon microresonators. The 
spectrometer was validated by acquiring the spectra of acetone in the 
(cid:0) 1  [190].  This  type  of 
liquid  phase  at  a  sampling  interval  of  4.2  cm
system  can  be  implemented  in  a  small  chip  for  broadband  MIR 

spectroscopic  applications.  Selected  applications  of  frequency  comb 
spectroscopy in transient systems are listed in Table 3.5. 

3.6. Faraday rotation spectroscopy 

For absorption spectroscopy, the target species must exhibit strong 
absorption  lines  and  these  absorption  lines  should  be  free  of  spectral 
interference  from  other  species.  Faraday  rotation  spectroscopy  (FRS) 
enhances the selectivity of paramagnetic species that exhibit unpaired 
valence  electrons,  including  stable  species,  such  as  molecular  oxygen 
(O2)  and  nitric  oxide  (NO),  and  unstable  radical  species,  such  as  hy-
droxyl (OH) and hydroperoxyl (HO2) radicals. FRS involves the appli-
cation of a magnetic field to a laser-probed gas mixture. The magnetic 
field  induces  the  Zeeman  splitting  of  the  absorption  lines  of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099713A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

paramagnetic  species,  resulting  in  circular  birefringence,  namely,  the 
rotation of the polarization plane of an incident, linearly polarized light 
[193].  The  magnitude  of  the  rotation  angle  depends  on  the  number 
density  of  the  absorbing  species.  Because  a  nonparamagnetic  species 
does not undergo the Zeeman splitting of absorption lines, their spectra 
will not affect the polarization. The polarization signal can be measured 
using two methods. The first method involves placing crossed polarizers 
◦
(at  90
from  each  other)  before  and  after  the  test  gas,  with  the  final 
output recorded on a single photodetector. The second method involves 
replacing the polarizer after the test gas with a Wollaston prism, which 
splits  the  laser  beam  into  two  orthogonally  polarized  components, 
recorded on two photodetectors. Zhang et al. examined the differences 
between the two methods, reporting that the first method is more suit-
able for an increased laser intensity than the second method because the 
second  polarizer  cuts  down  a  large  portion  of  the  intensity  [194]. 
Alternatively, the second method involving two photodetectors does not 
facilitate polarization signal attenuation after the test gas and is there-
fore  restricted  by  the  detector  saturation  limit.  However,  the  method 
involving  dual  photodetectors  enables  the  self-referencing  and  sup-
pression of laser intensity noise. Thus, the power and noise level of the 
laser source determine the optimal detection method for FRS. 

Using the FRS technique, the SNR can be improved by modulating 
the magnetic field, enabling the rejection of low-frequency noise, similar 
to WMS. However, unlike WMS, the magnetic field modulation in FRS 
affords a zero-background measurement because the modulation signal 
can  only  be  detected  if  the  species  is  present  in  the  test  gas  [195]. 
Lewicki et al. achieved the minimum detection limit of 4.3 ppbv for NO 
using an AC magnetic field and an EC-QCL centered at 5.33 µm [195] 
(Fig. 6). The same group also measured molecular oxygen using a DC 
magnetic field, achieving the minimum detection limit of 1.3 ppmv with 
a VCSEL source at 763 nm [196]. 

FRS shows the greatest potential in unstable radical species detection 
because  these  species  are  found  in  trace  concentrations  in  various 
chemical environments, such as the atmosphere and combustors. Zhao 
et al. employed FRS for OH measurements using a distributed feedback 
(DFB) diode laser near 2.8 µm [197]. OH radicals were generated by the 
microwave discharge of H2O, and although the spectra of H2O domi-
nated the absorption spectrum of OH, the modulated FRS spectrum of 
OH was unaffected by H2O. Brumfield et al. employed modulated FRS 
for combustion studies in a  flow reactor to measure the HO2  concen-
(cid:0) 1 [197], reporting the minimum detection limit of 
tration at 1396.9 cm
0.35 ppmv. Recently, a modulated FRS system was successfully used to 
study  the  rate  constant  and  branching  ratios  of  the  reaction  between 
ethyl and hydroperoxyl radicals in a photolysis reactor, which is the key 
radical–radical  reaction  for  intermediate  temperature  combustion 
chemistry [198]. FRS is expected to be used in studies on combustion 
kinetics at low temperatures where HO2 plays a significant role. 

The  FRS  technique  is  primarily  used  to  improve  the  selectivity  of 
conventional  absorption  and  thus  can  be  integrated  with  other  ap-
proaches in absorption spectroscopy. Recently, Westberg and Wysocki 
applied the FRS technique to CRDS for O2 detection [199]. A DC mag-
netic field was used, and the need for a vacuum reference measurement 
of the ring-down time was eliminated using the dual-detector approach. 
This  technique  is  expected  to  provide  two-  to  five-fold  sensivitiy 
improvement  over  conventional  CRDS.  Johansson  et  al.  used  a  fre-
quency comb source for FRS measurements [200], where the frequency 
comb  served  as  a  spectrally  resolved  broad-wavelength  source  in  the 
MIR region. Some applications of FRS are listed in Table 3.6. 

4. Other laser-based sensing techniques 

In this section, PAS, LIF, CARS and LIBS are discussed. Each tech-
nique  is  presented  with  a  brief  historical  overview,  description  of  its 
working principle, and recent advancements. 

4.1. Photoacoustic spectroscopy 

PAS is considered as a powerful spectroscopic technique for trace gas 
sensing,  measuring  the  gas  concentration  at  the  ppt/ppb  level.  Fig. 7 
presents a historical overview—from the discovery of the photoacoustic 
effect to the development and application of laser-based PAS. 

In  PAS,  the  optical  energy  absorbed  by  a  sample  is  partially  con-
verted into heat, inducing pressure waves that can be detected using a 
microphone.  Fig.  8  shows  key  processes  that  occur  in  PAS,  from  the 
optical excitation of sample molecules to the detection of photoacoustic 
signals. Instead of direct light absorption detection, similar to absorption 
or  transmission  spectroscopy,  PAS  exploits  the  absorption-induced 
photoacoustic effect. When a cw tunable laser is used as the radiation 
source, the incident laser intensity is first modulated using a mechanical 
chopper and then directed through the PAS cell using a focusing lens. 
The photoacoustic signal generated owing to the periodic absorption of 
the incident light is detected using a microphone, followed by a lock-in 
amplifier. The intensity of the photoacoustic signal (SPAS) can be related 
to gas properties based on the following equation: 

SPAS∝

kνxIQf L
,
f0V

(17)  

where kν  denotes the absorption coefficient of the target gas, x repre-
sents the mole fraction, I represents the incident laser intensity, Qf  de-
notes  the  quality  factor  of  the  acoustic  transducer,  f0  denotes  the 
resonant frequency of the acoustic resonator, and L and V represent the 
absorption path length and sample volume, respectively. 

PAS  offers  several  benefits  such  as  high  sensitivity,  small  sample 
volume, simple setup without photodetectors, rapidity, and in-principle 
background-free response. However, compared with LAS, which can be 
readily used for in situ measurements, PAS is mainly used in extractive 
sampling  applications  because  a  separate  photoacoustic  gas  cell  is 
required.  The  in  situ  photoacoustic  detection  of  multispecies  in  harsh 
environments can be performed using pulsed PAS [213]; however, its 
wide application is still lacking. Furthermore, photoacoustic detection 
elements may be affected by the features of harsh environments, such as 
mechanical  vibration,  temperature  variation,  and  external  acoustic 
noise. 

Over  the  past  few  decades,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in 
tunable lasers, photoacoustic cells, and acoustic elements. These inno-
vative instrumentation developments have enabled the construction of 
various PAS techniques, including acoustically resonant photoacoustic- 
cell  PAS  [214],  wavelength-modulation  PAS  (WM-PAS)  [215], 
amplitude-modulation  PAS  (AM-PAS)  [216],  multipass-assisted  PAS 
(MP-PAS) 
[218,210], 
cavity-enhanced  PAS  (CE-PAS)  [34],  and  cantilever-enhanced  PAS 
(CL-PAS) [219]. The key features of these techniques are summarized in 
Table  4.1.  Comprehensive  details  of  various  PAS  techniques  can  be 
found  in  the  literature  [34].  Herein,  we  present  a  review  of  selected 
recent studies and highlight their important features. 

[217],  quartz-enhanced  PAS 

(QEPAS) 

Several types of photoacoustic resonator cells, such as radial acous-
tic, Helmholtz, cavity, and 1D cylindrical resonator cells, have been used 
in PAS [220]. Differential photoacoustic cells with high Q factors and 
low noise characteristics have been used for fabricating PAS sensors for 
trace  gas sensing  [221]. A miniature differential  Helmholtz  resonator 
photoacoustic cell–based PAS system has been developed for ppbv-level 
methane detection [222]. Recently, a 3D-printed miniature gas cell has 
been reported for photoacoustic gas detection [223]. 

A cantilever  is an  acoustic  element  that can be used  for detecting 
pressure  variations  induced  by  the  photoacoustic  effect  [224].  The 
displacement of a miniature silicon cantilever can be measured using a 
compact Michelson interferometer. A normalized noise equivalent ab-
sorption (NNEA) coefficient of 1.7 × 10
was achieved 
for CO2 at atmospheric pressure using CL-PAS [225]. A high sensitivity 
can  be  achieved  using  dual  cantilevers  on  opposite  walls  of  the 

(cid:0) 10 cm

(cid:0) 1 W/

̅̅̅̅̅̅
Hz

√

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099714A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 5. Three categories of dual-comb spectroscopy (DCS) [180].  

Table 3.5 
Applications of frequency comb spectroscopy in transient systems.  

Reference 

Measured species 

Wavelength 
range 

Laser type 

Bjork et al [191]. 

OD and DOCO 

Abbas et al [192]. 

CH4 and C2H6 

Schroeder et al  

H2O and CO2 

[99]. 

Draper et al [185]. 

CH4 

Pinkowski et al  

H2O and C3H4 

[188]. 

Zhang et al [187]. 

CH4, C3H6, C3H6O, 
andC3H4 

(cid:0) 1 

2660–2710 
cm
2900–3150 
cm
1435–1445 nm 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

5967–6133 
cm
1174–1233 
cm
1175–1235 
cm

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

OPO pumped mode-locked laser (frep 
= 136 MHz) 
OPO pumped mode-locked laser (frep 
= 90 MHz) 
Er-fiber mode-locked laser (frep =
100 MHz) 
Er-fiber mode-locked laser (frep =
204 MHz) 
QCL frequency comb 

QCL frequency comb 

Time 
resolution 

10 µs 

20 µs 

10 s 

Spectral 
sampling 

0.009 cm

(cid:0) 1 

6 GHz 

0.007 cm

704 µs 

0.007 cm

Application 

Photolysis flow cell and OD + CO 
→ DOCO 
Electric discharge tube 

(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

Exhaust of a gas turbine 

Rapid compression machine 

4 µs 

4 µs 

(cid:0) 1 

0.3 cm

(cid:0) 1 

0.3 cm

Shock tube 

Shock tube  

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅
Hz

(cid:0) 8  cm

(cid:0) 9(cid:0) 10

(cid:0) 1  W/

mass-produced element used in digital watches, is small and exhibits a 
resonant frequency of 32.768 kHz. The generated photoacoustic wave at 
the  resonant  frequency  induces  the  mechanical  vibration  of  the  QTF, 
thus generating electrons on the QTF owing to the piezoelectric effect. 
is  generally  achieved  using 
An  NNEA  of  10
QEAPS [234–237]. Since its invention at Rice University [207], QEPAS 
has been adopted for energy, environmental, and biomedical applica-
tions  using  different  laser  sources,  including  semiconductor  lasers, 
OPOs, and fiber lasers [238–242]. The dimensions of a QTF can influ-
ence  the  physical  parameters  controlling  its  performance.  Recently, 
customized  QTFs  have  been  designed  and  fabricated  using  different 
crystal thicknesses, lengths, and prong spacings [243]. Results suggest 
that for QEPAS applications, the Q factor should be as high as possible 
while maintaining a low dynamic resistance. Li et al. designed a novel 
customized QTF with grooved surfaces to achieve a very high Q factor of 
~150000  [244].  By  reducing  the  electrical  resistance  using  grooved 
surfaces, the detection sensitivity of the new QTF-based QEPAS sensor 
increased by two orders of magnitude compared with that of a standard 
32.7 kHz QTF. 

Because  the  photoacoustic  signal  is  proportional  to  the  incident 
power, several efforts have been made to perform ultrasensitive PAS by 
exploiting high-power lasers. The simplest method involves the direct 
use of high-power lasers such as solid-state and gas lasers [245]. With 
the advancement of fiber amplifiers in the 1.4–1.6 µm region, the sen-
sitive photoacoustic detection of H2S, C2H2, and NH3 has been reported 

Fig. 6. Schematic of an EC-QCL-based FRS experiment [195].  

photoacoustic cell, suppressing the background noise [226]. Moreover, 
different types of cantilevers, such as standard atomic force microscopy 
based on a microcantilever and a silicon microelectromechanical system 
cantilever, have been proposed for sensitive PAS [227]. Ultrasensitive 
(ppt/ppb level) trace gas detection for different species (i.e., HF, C2H2, 
C6H6,  and  H2S)  has  recently  been  developed  using  different  CL-PAS 
techniques [219,228–230]. 

QEPAS is another type of PAS that uses a quartz tuning fork (QTF) for 
sound  energy  accumulation.  QTFs  tend  to  show  a  high  Q  factor  and 
immunity  to  environmental  acoustic  noise  [35,231–233].  The  QTF,  a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099715A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3.6 
Applications of Faraday rotation spectroscopy.  

Reference 

Measured species 

Wavelength 

Magnetic field 

Detection method 

Other features 

Fritsch et al [193]. 

Lewicki et al [195]. 

Nitric oxide (NO) 
isotopologues 
Nitric oxide (NO) 

5263–5435 nm (QCL slow 
scan) 
5331 nm (EC-QCL slow 
scan) 

15 mT: 6 kHz AC 
modulation 
11 mT: 950 Hz AC 
modulation 

Single detector, dual polarizers 

Single detector, dual polarizers 
(with a reference cell) 

Zhao et al [201]. 

Hydroxyl (OH) 

Brumfield et al [196]. 

Oxygen (O2) 

2803 nm (DFB-TDL) 
Modulation: 16 kHz 
762 nm (VCSEL) 
Modulation: 10 kHz 

17.7 mT: 1.302 kHz AC 
modulation 
55.4 mT (Permanent 
magnet) 

Single detector, dual polarizers 

Dual detectors with Wollaston prism 

Westberg and 

Wysocki [199] 

Oxygen (O2) 

762 nm (Diode laser) 

30 mT (DC solenoid) 

Dual detectors with plane polarizing 
beam splitter 

Johansson [200] 

Nitric oxide (NO) 

5181–5405 nm (Frequency 
comb) 

26 mT (DC solenoid) 

Single detector, dual polarizers 

*Single pass 25 cm 
*30–150 mbar pressure 
*Single pass 50 cm 
*4.3 ppbv detection 
limit 
*40 Torr, 1 atm 
*Single pass 38 cm 
*0.5–1 mbar 
*62 pass 6.8 m path 
length 
*1 atm 
*1.3 ppmv detection 
limit 
*Cavity ring-down with 
50 cm cell 
*160 ppbv detection 
limit 
*Single pass 17.5 cm 
*100 Torr 
*14.3 ppmv detection 
limit  

Fig.  7. Historical  overview  of  photoacoustic  spectroscopy  [202–212]  (PA:  photoacoustic;  PAS:  photoacoustic  spectroscopy;  LPAS:  laser-based  PAS;  QEPAS: 
quartz-enhanced PAS; I-QEPAS: intracavity quartz-enhanced PAS; IR-BBL: infrared broadband light). 

Fig. 8. Basic processes involved in photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099716A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

at the ppb level [245–247]. A more effective method for ultrasensitive 
PAS involves the use of a high-finesse cavity, which generally comprises 
two high-reflectivity dielectric mirrors (Fabry–P´erot cavity), to achieve 
large laser energy accumulation. The intracavity power buildup is pro-
portional to the finesse of the cavity, thereby amplifying the laser power 
by  several  orders  of  magnitude  [248].  Recently,  Wang  et  al.  used 
Pound–Drever–Hall (PDH) locking to combine PAS and a high-finesse 
cavity  (finesse  = 9235)  to  develop  an  ultrasensitive  photoacoustic 
sensor,  achieving  unprecedented  sensitivity,  NNEA  of  1.1  ×
10
[212] (Fig. 9) . The active modulation of the laser 
power without external modulators can enable simple CE-PAS sensors 
[249]. In addition to the Fabry–P´erot cavity, a bow-tie optical resonator 
with a finesse exceeding 1500 has been employed to perform intracavity 
QEPAS (I-QEPAS) [210]. Such a cavity configuration eliminates the use 
of optical isolators, which are not always available in the MIR range. 

(cid:0) 11 cm(cid:0) 1 W/

̅̅̅̅̅̅
Hz

√

The intracavity power is considerably higher than the laser output, 
thus  providing  an  approach  for  enhancing  the  sensitivity  of  PAS  by 
placing the photoacoustic cell inside the laser cavity. This technique has 
been recently employed using semiconductor and fiber lasers to achieve 
a compact sensor setup. Starovoitov et al. combined an external-cavity 
QCL  and  a  1D  longitudinal  photoacoustic  cell  to  realize  intracavity 
PAS technology in the MIR band (5.5 μm) [250]. Wang et al. developed a 
novel PAS technology by placing a 1D longitudinal photoacoustic cell 
inside an EDF laser [211] and theoretically and experimentally studied 
the  sensing  performance  [251].  Further,  they  successfully  designed  a 
fiber-ring  laser  intracavity QEPAS  sensor  using  a  customized  7.2  kHz 
QTF, achieving ppb-level sensitivity for C2H2 and a linear dynamic range 
of > 105 [252]. The detection limit of different species measured using 
various PAS techniques from selected literature, along with details on 
light sources, are listed in Table 4.2. 

4.2. Laser-induced fluorescence 

Since it was first used for detecting atoms and molecules in the gas 
phase in 1968 [39], LIF has exhibited several interesting benefits over 
absorption  spectroscopy,  particularly  the  ability  to  perform  spatially 
resolved measurements. If a laser beam is expanded to a thin sheet of 
light,  a  planar  fluorescence  signal  can  be  imaged  using  a  camera, 

Table 4.1 
Key features of various PAS techniques.  

Techniques 

Key features 

WM-PAS  

• Signals are detected at high frequencies, far from the base-band 

AM-PAS  

MP-PAS  

QEPAS  

CL-PAS  

noise, thus improving the detected SNR.  

• Wavelength modulation (WM) combined with resonant 
amplification efficiently improves the sensitivity of the 
photoacoustic signal. 

• A chopper or an acousto-optic modulator is employed for amplitude 
modulation, and the detection sensitivity is generally less than that 
of WM-PAS.  

• This technique is usually utilized for large and complex molecules 
where individual rotational–vibrational transitions are unavailable. 
• The detection sensitivity is enhanced by increasing the absorption 
path length using a multipass optical system (Herriott or White 
type). 

• A quartz tuning fork (QTF), which exhibits a high Q factor (~104 at 
atmospheric pressure) and intrinsic immunity to external acoustic 
noise, is used as an acoustics detector.  

• QTFs are inexpensive, tiny, and suitable for compact sensor 

development. 

• The pressure variation inside the photoacoustic cell is detected by 
measuring the movement of a silicon cantilever using an optical 
interferometer.  

• The cantilever operates best in a nonresonant mode at frequencies of 

10–100 Hz. 

CE-PAS 

• A high-finesse optical cavity is adapted to amplify the incident op-

tical power and thus the PAS sensitivity.  

• The acoustic element is placed inside the optical cavity to exploit 

high intracavity power.  

facilitating the 2D imaging of the species, thus affording the name planar 
LIF (PLIF). The use of LIF for studying spatially resolved flame structure 
dates  back  to  1989  [256].  The  group  of  Ronald  Hanson  at  Stanford 
University was among the first to demonstrate the LIF imaging of OH 
radicals in combustion gases [257]. Daily et al. systematically reviewed 
the application of LIF for thermometry in flames [258]. Generally, LIF 
has been widely employed for combustion diagnostics owing to its high 
sensitivity, high spatial resolution, good species selectivity, strong im-
aging  capability,  and  good  applicability  in  harsh  environments  [38]. 
PLIF  has  become  a  standard  2D  diagnostic  technique  for  measuring 
temperature, species concentration, pressure, and velocity for the study 
of combustion phenomena and characterization of propulsion systems. 
The principle of LIF is based on fluorescence produced by an elec-
tronically  excited  state  when  laser  light  is  absorbed  by  the  target 
molecule. Fig. 10 presents the schematic of LIF. A high-energy pulsed 
laser is generally used to excite a specific rotational–vibrational (rovi-
brational) energy level of a species from the ground state. The excited 
molecule returns to the ground state via spontaneous photon emission, 
thus generating the fluorescence signal. The intensity of the LIF signal 
(SLIF) can be expressed as 
(
∑
[
]
′ ′ (T)Bg
fj

SLIF =

η,

)

(18)  

A
A + Qu

Ep
σl

xP
kT

i

where Ep denotes the laser pulse energy, σl represents the cross-sectional 
area of the laser sheet, x denotes the mole fraction of the target species, P 
denotes the gas pressure, T represents the gas temperature, k denotes the 
Boltzmann constant, fj
′′(T) represents the Boltzmann percentage of the 
′′
absorption  state  at  quantum  number  j
,  B  represents  the  Einstein  ab-
sorption coefficient, g represents the spectral overlap integral, A denotes 
the  effective  spontaneous  emission  rate,  Qu  denotes  the  sum  of  colli-
sional  quenching  rates,  and  η  denotes  the  efficiency  of  the  optical 
detection  system.  Although  most  LIF  systems  exploit  the  electronic 
excitation of species (e.g., OH, CH, NO, and C3H6O) in resonance with a 
UV laser, IR LIF on molecules based on vibrational excitation can also be 
used for quantitative 2D imaging [259]. IR LIF/PLIF has been success-
fully demonstrated for CO [260], CO2 [260–263], and CH4 [264] using 
different IR lasers. 

The instrumentation for LIF for practical combustion diagnostics has 
been well documented in the literature [42,258]. In this review, some 
recent LIF studies are discussed (Table 4.3). Rosell et al. developed a 
PLIF system for simultaneous multispecies (OH, CH, CH2O, and toluene) 
measurements using a multi-YAG system to generate four laser beams at 
different wavelengths [265]. Li et al. adopted photofragmentation LIF 
(PF-LIF) for measuring 2D methyl radicals (CH3) in flames [266,267]. 
LIF can also  be extended to single-shot 3D measurements using volu-
metric LIF (VLIF) [268]. Five ICCD cameras were used to simultaneously 
record  fluorescence  signals  (Fig.  11),  and  the  modified  algebraic 
reconstruction  technique  (ART)  was  employed  to  reconstruct  the  3D 
distribution of CH radicals. Single-shot VLIF based on iodine vapor was 
employed to achieve instantaneous 3D measurements at a repetition rate 
of 10 kHz in a turbulent jet [269]. Further, the four-dimensional (4D) 
VLIF measurement of OH radicals was performed at a repetition rate of 
10 kHz using a UV-tunable burst-mode laser-pumped narrowband OPO 
[270]. Eight unique views were obtained using two detectors coupled 
with  quadscopes  and  were  reconstructed  using  the  iterative  multipli-
cative ART. 

Various LIF schemes have been developed and employed for ther-
mometry and species detection measurements in combustion environ-
ments. Speciation, thermometry and flame-structure measurements help 
understand  the  underlying  mechanism  of  turbulence  chemistry  in-
teractions. A combined technique of particle image velocimetry (PIV) 
and OH-PLIF was developed to investigate the effects of turbulence on a 
swirling  CH4/air flame  [272], noting  the  presence  of a  helical vortex 
(PVC). This imaging technique was further employed to a high repeti-
tion rate of 5 kHz [273]. Notably, the combination of PIV with PLIF has 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099717A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 9. Schematic of an intracavity photoacoustic gas sensor using PDH locking [212].  

Table 4.2 
Species detection limits using various PAS techniques from selected literature.  

PAS 
technique 

Target 
species 

Frequency 
(cid:0) 1) 
(cm

Light source 

LPAS 

CL-PAS 

QEPAS 

CE-PAS 

CH4 
C2H2 

NO2 
CH2O 
CO2 

2988.795 
6523.9 

1599 
1778.9 
6361.25 

CH4 

2950 

HF 
H2S 
C6H6 
C2H4 
SF6 
NO 
CO 
CH4 
H2S 
C2H2 

CO2 
NO 
C2H2 

4039.23 
6344 
674.1 
949.34 
948.6 
1900.08 
2169.2 
3017.5 
6320.6 
6529.2 

2309.5 
1900 
6529.2 

DFB-ICL 
DFB diode 
laser 
Cw EC-QCL 
Pulsed QCL 
DFB diode 
laser 
IR 
broadband 
source 
OPO 
EDFA 
QCL 
DFB-QCL 
DFB-QCL 
DFB-QCL 
DFB-QCL 
OPO 
EDFA 
External- 
cavity diode 
laser 
DFB-QCL 
QCL 
Fiber laser 

Minimum 
detection 
limit 

0.6 ppb 
750 ppb 

0.5 ppb 
150 ppb 
1.9 ppm 

Reference 

[211] 
[223] 

[253] 
[254] 
[225] 

0.5 ppm 

[226] 

2.5 ppt 
33 ppb 
150 ppt 
50 ppb 
50 ppt 
24 ppb 
7 ppb 
0.8 ppm 
142 ppb 
300 ppt 

[219] 
[228] 
[229] 
[231] 
[235] 
[233] 
[244] 
[241] 
[247] 
[212] 

300 ppt 
4.8 ppb 
29 ppb 

[210] 
[255] 
[252]  

been  widely  used  in  experimental  turbulent  combustion  applications. 
Recently,  ML models, such as a convolutional neural network (CNN), 
were adopted to morph time-resolved PLIF images into corresponding 
three-component planar PIV fields of a premixed swirl combustor [274]. 

Consequently, the planar velocity fields could be decoded from planar 
OH-PLIF images in both attached and detached flame regimes. 

Conventional Nd:YAG pulsed lasers exhibit a limited repetition rate 
of 10–100 Hz, with the maximum output power of the order of tens of 
watts. Although a continuously pulsed diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) 
laser  can  be  used  for  kHz-repetition-rate  LIF  measurements  [275], 
pulsed lasers with even higher repetition frequencies and pulse energies 
are significant for high-speed LIF. Moreover, tunable dye lasers coupled 
with  multi-YAG  or  dual-pulsed  YAG  lasers  have  been  used  for 
short-burst  applications.  In  combination  with  stereoscopic  PIV,  these 
methods  have  facilitated  effective  flame  speed  measurements  in 

Fig. 10. Basic principle of laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) (ICCD: intensified 
charge-coupled device). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099718A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

stabilized bluff-body burners [276] and reciprocating engines [277]. 

4.3. Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy 

Recent advancements in high-energy burst-mode lasers have paved 
the way for ultrafast multidimensional laser diagnostics for character-
izing  highly  dynamic  and  transient  phenomena  in  reacting  and  non-
reacting  flows  [278,279].  During  burst-mode  operation,  a  series  of 
high-energy laser pulses is generated at high repetition rates in a short 
duration (order of 1 ms), followed by a relatively long duration (order of 
0.1–1 s) for heat dissipation. The burst laser system is normally designed 
using a master oscillator power amplifier (MOPA) configuration, which 
comprises  a  pulse  slicer,  a  power  amplifier  chain,  and  a  wavelength 
converter  [280].  State-of-the-art  burst  lasers  can  deliver  UV  to  NIR 
wavelength pulses with a repetition rate of up to 5 MHz and energy of up 
to 2 J/pulse. These laser sources have been successfully employed in a 
highly turbulent swirling jet flame using simultaneous dual-plane ste-
reoscopic PIV and OH-PLIF techniques [281], an optical rotating deto-
nation combustor to perform MHz-repetition-rate OH-PLIF [282], and 
hypersonic flows to perform NO PLIF with a repetition rate of 10 kHz 
[283]. Fig. 12 illustrates the experimental setup, OPO layout, and results 
of  the  MHz-repetition-rate  OH-PLIF  imaging  of  hydrogen/air  in  a 
rotating  detonation  combustor.  The  system  generates  a  sequence  of 
more than 150 UV pulses with 400 and 150 µJ/pulse at 1 and 2 MHz, 
respectively, enabling the spatiotemporal analysis of complex detona-
tion combustion dynamics. 

Single-photon excitation LIF is preferred in combustion diagnostics 
owing to its linear response and high absorption cross section. However, 
it  cannot  be  used  for  measuring  some  key  intermediate  combustion 
species, such as CO as well as atomic O and H, which exhibit a large 
energy gap between the ground and first excited electronic states. This 
limitation can be addressed using a two-photon LIF scheme, which was 
first demonstrated for hydrogen and deuterium atom detection [285]. 
This  approach  offers  several  benefits  such  as  red-shifted  wavelengths 
that  enable  minimum-absorption  beam  propagation  in  air  and  small 
absorption cross sections that facilitate high-resolution reacting species 
measurements.  Hence,  two-photon  LIF  has  been  demonstrated  for  O 
atom detection in an atmospheric-pressure plasma jet [286–288], CO in 
flames [289,290], and H atoms in hydrocarbon flames [291]. 

Quantitative  species  measurements  using  LIF  are  still  quite  chal-
lenging  [292].  Recently,  Wan  et  al.  presented  a  quantitative  feature 
extraction method for processing imaged ribbon structures and repre-
senting  radical  layers  in  flames  [293].  Skiba  et  al.  used  novel  image 
processing schemes for the quantitative extraction of local thicknesses of 
ribbon structures corresponding to reaction layers visualized using CH 
PLIF and/or CH2O/OH PLIF techniques [294]; moreover, they proposed 
a combustion regime diagram. A new approach based on NO seeding in 
an oxidizer stream was demonstrated for quantitative mixture fraction 
imaging in a turbulent coflow experiment [295]. 

Table 4.3 
Summary of various LIF applications from selected articles.  

Raman  spectroscopy  is  a  well-established  technique  for  chemical 
analysis, material characterization, and noninvasive diagnostics. Such a 
label-free analytical technique employs inelastic light scattering induced 
by a change in molecular polarizability. The light scattered because of 
the interaction between a laser beam and a medium contains frequencies 
different from that obtained using an excitation source, including Stokes 
light at a low frequency and anti-Stokes light at a high frequency. This 
technique complements LAS in terms of accessible species because the 
scattering cross section or polarizability tends  to be favorable for ho-
monuclear species, such as N2, O2, and H2, which are difficult to measure 
using LAS. The ultrasensitive (ppm/ppb) trace gas detection of homo-
nuclear  molecules  has  been  performed  using  Raman  spectroscopy  in 
hollow-core photonic crystal fibers (HC-PCFs) [298]. In addition to the 
detection  of  species,  temperature  can  be  estimated  by  exploiting  the 
Raman  Stokes  and  anti-Stokes  features  in  vibrational  and  rotational 
Raman  spectra  [299,300].  In  this  section,  CARS,  a  highly  sensitive 
technique for temperature and species measurements, is discussed based 
on a concise historical background and a brief amount of theory, fol-
lowed by recent developments. 

CARS  is  a  nonlinear  spectroscopic  technique  where  a  coherent 
Raman  beam  is  generated  via  the  nonlinear  conversion  of  two  laser 
beams  in  the  anti-Stokes  region.  The  magnitude  of  emission  is  often 
greater  than  that  of  the  normal  Raman  scattering  because  of  the 
coherent  and  anti-Stokes  characteristics  of  radiation.  CARS  offers 
several  advantages  including  the  generation  of  laser-like  directional 
signal, good spectral selectivity, high luminosity (105–1010 higher than 
(cid:0) 1), and good 
Raman scattering), high spectral resolution (~0.03–1 cm
time resolution (~100 fs) [301] Fig. 13. depicts the optical setup, signal 
generation process,  and phase matching condition for a typical CARS 
system.  Three  laser  beams  with  angular  frequencies  ω1,  ω2,  and  ω3 
interact  with  the  gas  medium,  generating  the  fourth  laser  beam  with 
angular  frequency  ωCARS  = ω1  (cid:0) ω2  + ω3.  When  the  Raman-excited 
angular frequency ωR  is equal to ω1  (cid:0) ω2, the signal wave at ωCARS  is 
enhanced, representing a Raman resonance. The generated Raman beam 
propagates in a direction described using the following vector relation: 

⇀
+ k3

⇀
(cid:0) k2

⇀ 
= k1

⇀
kCARS
.  Under  high-temperature  and  high-pressure 
turbulent conditions, establishing the CARS system is technically chal-
lenging owing to the spatial overlap requirement between multiple laser 
beams. Under perfect phase matching and weak excitation conditions, 
CARS signal can be expressed as 

SCARS∝

w2

CARS
n1n2n3n4

|χCARS|2I1I2I3l2,

(19)  

where  ni  denotes  refractive  indices  for  frequencies  of  the  individual 

LIF technique 

Laser system 

Test facility 

Measurement 

Reference 

PLIF 

Multi-YAG system 
Dual-cavity DPSS Nd:YAG laser 
High-energy burst-mode laser 

High-energy burst-mode laser 
Nd:YAG laser 

Premixed flame jet burner 
Gas turbine model combustor 
Turbulent swirling jet flame and rotating detonation 
combustor 
Shock tunnel 
Counterflow burner 

VLIF 

Two-photon LIF 

Frequency-doubled Nd:YAG-pumped dye 
laser 
Frequency doubled Nd:YAG-pumped dye 
laser 
Ti:sapphire fs laser 

Premixed flame jet burner 

Radio frequency (RF)–excited atmospheric pressure 
plasma jet 
Hencken burner and high-pressure gas cell 

Three-photon 

LIF 

Ti:sapphire fs laser 
Ti:sapphire fs laser 

Bunsen jet flame 
Bunsen jet flame 

OH, CH, CH2O, and toluene 
OH 
OH 

NO 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs) 
CH and iodine 

O atom 

CO 

H atom 
H atom 

[265] 
[275] 
[281, 
282] 
[283] 
[296] 

[268, 
269] 
[288] 

[289, 
290] 
[291] 
[297]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099719A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 11. (a) Schematic of the experimental setup for 3D combustion measurements using a CH-based tomographic VLIF; (b) sample laser profile with a slab thickness 
of 15 mm [271]. 

Fig. 12. (a) Experimental setup of a MHz-repetition-rate OH-PLIF system in a rotating detonation combustor (RDC). (b) Partial time-lapsed image sequence showing 
the axial/radial OH signal at 1 MHz during detonation propagation through the PLIF plane. Color bar represents the relative OH signal in arbitrary units [284]. 

fields, χCARS  represents the optical susceptibility, Ii  represents laser in-
tensities, and l denotes the length of the laser beam intersection region. 
Maker and Terhune observed CARS for the first time in organic liq-
uids  [302].  Giordmaine  and  Kaiser  observed  the  efficient  Stokes  and 
anti-Stokes scattering of the second harmonic of a ruby laser in calcite 
crystals [303]. In the early 1970s, the use of time-resolved CARS with ps 
laser pulses enabled the extraction of characteristic relaxation times of 
molecular 
using 
frequency-tunable lasers represent a new phase in the development of 
frequency-domain  CARS  as  an  active  spectroscopic  method  [306]. 
Owing  to  the  nondestructive  and  in  situ  measurement  capability  of 
CARS,  it has  been widely employed for temperature and  species con-
centration  measurements  in  flames  [47].  In  the  last  two  decades,  ns 
lasers  have  mainly  been  used  in  CARS  for  propellant  burners, 
gas-turbine combustors, IC engines, natural gas engines, and industrial 
furnaces. Ps and fs lasers have further extended CARS applications to 

[304,305].  CARS  measurements 

systems 

gas-phase  reacting  flows.  Herein,  some  selected  recent  studies  are 
reviewed to demonstrate the advanced features of ns-CARS, ps-CARS, 
fs-CARS, and hybrid fs/ps-CARS along with their applications in energy 
systems.  A  brief  comparison  of  ns-CARS,  ps-CARS,  and  fs-CARS  for 
reacting flows is presented in Table 4.4. 

Among  ns-CARS  techniques,  dual-pump  CARS  is  a  powerful  tech-
nique that can be used for simultaneous thermometry and multispecies 
concentration  measurements  [307–310],  wherein  two  pump  beams 
(fixed  or  tunable  wavelength)  are  used  to  simultaneously  excite  the 
target  Raman  transitions  of  two  molecules.  This  technique  can  be 
extended to triple-pump CARS for concurrently measuring temperature 
and multispecies concentrations [311]. Dual-broadband CARS was used 
for practical combustion using two broad laser pulses with a bandwidth 
(cid:0) 1  to  simultaneously  excite  rovibrational  transitions  of 
of  ~200  cm
multiple combustion species [312]. A novel dye laser pumping scheme 
(cid:0) 1 for the 
was recently used to generate the desired bandwidth of 410 cm

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099720A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

width-increased dual-pump enhanced CARS measurements of temper-
ature  and  major  species  [313].  In  practical  combustion  systems,  the 
capability of dual-pump dual-broadband CARS for species concentration 
measurements  and  thermometry  has  been  evaluated  under  unsteady 
turbulent conditions in model gas-turbine combustors [314]. 

However,  ns-CARS  techniques  are  unsuitable  for  minor  species 
detection in reacting gas flows because the NRB signal dominates the 
resonant CARS signal. A promising approach for eliminating the NRB 
influence is the development of electronic resonance–enhanced ns-CARS 
(ERE-ns-CARS).  By  tuning  the  probe  beam  to  the  target  electronic 
transition of the molecule, a CARS signal enhanced by almost three or-
ders of magnitude relative to the conventional CARS can be obtained. 
Attal-Tretout et al. reported the first application of ERE-ns-CARS for OH 
in a high-pressure flame [315]. In their study, pump, Stokes, and probe 
beams were all electronically resonant with OH radicals. In addition to 
OH and NO [316], this approach was recently effectively employed for 
spatially  resolved  CH2O  measurements  in  reactive  environments, 
showing promise for application in high-pressure combustors [317]. 

Alternatively, ps-CARS is suitable for hydrocarbon-rich combustion 
environments because it can suppress NRB signals, particularly under 
high-pressure conditions. In ps-CARS, the NRB signal is suppressed by 
delaying the probe beam relative to the pump and Stokes beam, as well 
as  using  different  polarization  schemes  [47,318].  Roy  et  al.  used  a 
solid-state optical parametric generator/OPA system to provide a stable 
broadband laser pulse at ~680 nm when pumped using a burst-mode 
laser [319]. They demonstrated gas-phase thermometry at a repetition 
rate of 100 kHz in laminar and turbulent jet flames. Using fs lasers that 
offer high peak power and repetition rates of ≥1 kHz, single-shot ther-
mometry  can be realized  in turbulent and  transient combustion envi-
ronments.  Beaud et  al.  reported flame  temperature measurements  for 
the  first  time  using  nitrogen-based  time-resolved  fs-CARS  [320]. 
Single-shot thermometry was demonstrated using a chirped probe pulse 
(CPP) [321] by passing the probe pulse through a dispersive material, 
such as a glass rod. 

Hybrid fs/ps-CARS is a state-of-the-art diagnostic tool for gas-phase 
thermometry.  In  hybrid  fs/ps-CARS,  fs-resolved  CARS  is  combined 
with a narrowband ps-duration probe pulse, instead of a broadband fs- 
duration probe pulse, affording a four-wave-mixing excitation scheme. 
This approach allows the direct frequency-domain detection of active 
Raman molecular states with excellent sensitivity [322]. It combines the 
advantages of ps- and fs-CARS using broadband fs-laser pulses to create 
Raman  coherence  and  using  a  narrowband  ps-duration  probe  pulse.  

Fig. 14 shows a typical optical layout of a dual-pump fs/ps-CARS system 
used in a dielectric barrier discharge plasma [323]. The source was a 
regeneratively amplified 100 fs Ti:sapphire laser (2.5 mJ and 798 nm) 
with a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The laser pulse was split into multiple 
beams, with 1 mJ used to pump an OPA to produce rovibrational CARS 
pump pulses (674 nm). The residual energy from the OPA was split to 
form  the  pure-rotational  CARS  pump  pulse  and  Stokes  pulse;  the 
remaining energy (1.5 mJ) from the fs source was pulse-shaped into a 
near-Gaussian, narrowband, 6 ps probe pulse. These four pulses were 
focused  at  the  CARS  probe  volume  using  a  folded  BOXCARS  phase 
matching configuration. Such ultrafast hybrid fs/ps-CARS systems have 
also been employed for accurate thermometry in gas-phase combustion 
diagnostics  [324,325],  particle-laden  flames  [326],  and  high-pressure 
thermometric applications [327]. 

Various CARS techniques based on two- and three-beam approaches 
have been used for gas-phase thermometry and multispecies detection. 
Bohlin et al. developed a novel phase matching approach for hybrid fs/ 
ps-CARS, in which a two-beam approach was used instead of the tradi-
tional three-beam approach [328], enabling effective 1D [329–335] and 
2D CARS imaging [336,337]. This is a significant achievement because 
CARS is traditionally a 0D diagnostic tool. Bohlin et al. demonstrated the 
single-shot coherent Raman imaging [329] and ultrabroadband CARS 
1D imaging [330] of temperature and species in flames. Hybrid fs/ps 

Table 4.4 
Comparison of different CARS techniques for gas-phase reacting flows.  

CARS 
technique 

ns-CARS 

ps-CARS 

fs-CARS 

Benefit 

Limitation 

Most widely employed coherent 
diagnostic method for temperature and 
species concentration measurements 
Applications in harsh environments and 
practical usage 
Suppressed NRB signals by delaying the 
probe beam with respect to the pump and 
Stokes beams or using polarization- 
sensitive techniques 
Suppressed NRB signals 
High-bandwidth data acquisition 
Collision-free measurements 
Single-laser-beam CARS  

Interference of the 
NRB signal 
Slow data acquisition 
Influence of the 
collisional effect 
Slow data acquisition 
Collisional 
dependence 

Availability of fs lasers 
Collisional effect even 
at high pressures  

Fig. 13. Principle of CARS: (a) typical optical arrangement, (b) energy levels for CARS signal generation, and (c) phase matching condition for CARS signals.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099721A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

rotational CARS based on a two-beam matching approach was used for 
1D measurements in a jet burner [331]. Furthermore, 1D hybrid fs/ps 
rotational  CARS  was  used  for  single-shot  temperature  measurements 
(spatial resolution 40 µm and wall-normal distance of up to 3 mm) in an 
optically accessible chamber designed to study transient near-wall heat 
transfer  processes relevant to IC engine operation [332]. Retter et al. 
used 1D fs/ps rotational CARS imaging to measure temperature, oxygen, 
and  fuel  in  a  dielectric-barrier-discharge  plasma-assisted  hydrogen 
diffusion flame [334]. A single ultrafast regenerative amplifier system 
based on 1D spatiotemporal pure-rotational CARS was demonstrated for 
thermometry at a repetition rate of 1 kHz across an unstable premixed 
methane/air flame front [335]. Dual-probe 1D fs/ps hybrid rotational 
CARS  has  demonstrated  impressive  capability  to  resolve  1D  pressure 
gradients  occurring  in  an  N2  jet  impinging  on  a  surface,  both  under 
laminar and turbulent conditions [333]. CARS based on the three-beam 
approach has also been used for 1D imaging; however, this method has 
limited  applicability  owing  to  its  complicated  experimental  setup 
[338–340]. Recently, a new dual-probe 1D hybrid fs/ps rotational CARS 
scheme was presented (Fig. 15) that can be used to capture 1D pressure 
gradients during high-speed N2 jet imaging on a surface [333] Table 4.5. 
presents a summary of some recent CARS applications to various com-
bustions systems. 

4.4. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 

LIBS is a powerful technique for elemental analysis it facilitates rapid 
and  approximately  nondestructive  detection.  In  LIBS,  the  elemental 
composition and amount can be obtained by analyzing atomic emission 
spectra. Compared with other elemental analysis techniques, LIBS offers 
many advantages, such as a simple experimental setup, fast and on-site 
detection,  effortless  sample  preparation,  and  adaptability  to  various 
samples (gas, liquid, aerosol, or solid). 

A  typical  LIBS  setup  is  depicted  in  Fig.  16.  A  pulsed  laser  (pulse 
energy typically tens to hundreds of mJ) is focused on the sample sur-
face, which quickly vaporizes, ablates, and dissociates a small amount of 
the sample to generate hot and dense plasma. The laser-induced plasma 
contains numerous free electrons, ions, and atoms. The generated ions 
and atoms at the excited state transition to the ground state or lower 
energy  state,  inducing  strong  plasma  emission  that  contains  unique 
wavelengths of light. A portion of the plasma emission is collected into a 
spectrometer via fiber optics, which is integrated with a charge-coupled 
device detector. Generally, a pulse generator is used to control the delay 
time  of  emission  collection  to  avoid  strong  continuum  emission  and 
achieve  the  high  SNR spectra  of neutral  atoms  for  LIBS  analysis. The 
integrated line intensity of an atomic line (II

ji) can be expressed as 

II
ji = F

nIAI
jigI
j
UI(T)

EI
j
kT ,

e(cid:0)

(20)  

where nI denotes the number density of atomic species; AI
ji  denotes the 
Einstein coefficient for the transition from upper level j to lower level i; 
j  represents the statistical weight of upper level j; UI(T) represents the 
gI
partition function; EI
j  denotes the energy of upper level j; and F, k, and T 
represent  the  collection  efficiencies  of  the  optical  system,  Boltzmann 
constant,  and  plasma  temperature,  respectively.  Fig.  17  presents  a 
typical LIBS spectrum of coal, containing many spectral lines at specific 
wavelengths that refer to different elements. The signals of the charac-
teristic  spectral  lines,  partial  or  entire  spectrum,  combined  with 
appropriate  chemometric  tools  are  used  for  qualitatively  or  quantita-
tively analyzing the target sample. 

A detailed description on LIBS history can be found in the Handbook 
of Laser-induced Breakdown Spectroscopy [347]. Laser plasma was first 
analytical used in 1963, soon after the invention of pulsed lasers. A key 
milestone  was  the  adoption  of  LIBS  on  the  Mars  Science  Laboratory 
Curiosity Rover (2011). In this section, we focus on recent progress in 
LIBS measurement schemes and data evaluation methods. 

Considerable research efforts have been undertaken to optimize the 
laser source, spectrometer, optical setup, and atmospheric conditions. 
Apart from conventional schemes, advanced LIBS measurement schemes 
have been developed to enhance and stabilize plasma in different ways, 
including  the  double-pulse  scheme  (DP-LIBS)  [348,349],  multipulse 
scheme  (MP-LIBS)  [350,351],  microwave-assisted  scheme  [352,353], 
spatial  confinement  scheme  [354–356],  magnetic  confinement 
[357–359],  surface-enhanced  scheme  (SENLIBS)  [360,361],  and 
nanoparticle-enhanced  scheme  (NELIBS)  [362,363].  Moreover,  some 
measurement schemes combine LIBS with other analytical techniques, 
such  as  Raman–LIBS  [364–366],  LIBS  combined  with  laser-ablation 
inductively  coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry  (LIBS–LA-ICP-MS) 
[367–369],  laser  ablation–LIBS  (LA-LIBS)  [370,371],  and  LIBS  com-
bined with LIF (LA–LIF) [372–374]. Key features of these measurement 
schemes are summarized in Table 4. 

Associating LIBS spectra with the analyte composition for quantita-
tive  analysis  has  been  a  major  challenge  because  the  spectrum  is 
extremely sensitive to experimental conditions, plasma characteristics, 
and  sample  properties.  Spectrum  correction  using  a  normalization 
method is often performed before qualitative and quantitative analyses. 
Detailed  descriptions  on  different reference  signals  can be  found in  a 
critical  review  by  Guezenoc  et  al  [375]..  Some  advanced  spectrum 
correction methods have recently been developed. Feng et al. proposed a 
normalization  method  based  on the  plasma temperature  and  electron 
density [376]. Wang et al. proposed a spectrum standardization method 
in  which  a  standard  plasma  state  was  defined  and  the  theoretical 

Fig. 14. (a) Optical layout of dual-pump fs/ps-CARS with dielectric barrier discharge plasma at the probe volume. (b) Averaged image of CARS measurement lo-
cations and the corresponding vibrational and rotational temperatures [323] 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099722A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

the trace element concentration in soils with generalized LIBS spectra 
[384].  Li et  al.  constructed a  calibration model based  on an  artificial 
neural network (ANN) to analyze Cu and V in steel samples, employing a 
genetic algorithm (GA) to select model inputs [385]. Some data fusion 
models based on LIBS and other spectroscopic techniques, such as NIR 
reflectance spectroscopy (NIRS) [386,387] and FTIR spectroscopy [388, 
389], have also been recently investigated. 

CF-LIBS is used to estimate all element concentrations in the target 
sample based on the line intensity, plasma temperature, electron den-
sity, and Boltzmann population assumption of the excited level [390]. 
Because CF-LIBS does not require reference samples to establish a cali-
bration curve, it is suitable for field measurements of unknown samples. 
However, the self-absorption effect and plasma temperature variations 
limit the accuracy of CF-LIBS. A recent trend in CF-LIBS is developing 
different methods for the self-absorption effect correction and precisely 
calculating the plasma temperature. Li et al. proposed a blackbody ra-
diation  referenced  self-absorption  correction  (BRR-SAC)  method  that 
directly  compares  the  measured  spectrum  with  the  corresponding 
theoretical blackbody radiation [391]. Yang et al. introduced a particle 
swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm for plasma temperature estimation 
to achieve an improved accuracy of alloy steel analysis [392]. Dong et al. 
used a GA to iteratively correct plasma temperature and improved the 
accuracy of quantitative analysis of an aluminum–bronze alloy [393]. 

4.5. Comparison of sensing techniques 

All laser-based techniques show merits and limitations in terms of 
accuracy,  sensitivity,  selectivity,  spatiotemporal  resolution,  system 
complexity, and field deployment. In this review, we primarily focus on 
LAS  and set  it  as the  benchmark that provides the  most quantitative, 
sensitive, and time-resolved measurements of many flowfield parame-
ters in laboratory and field applications. We compare LAS with other 
sensing strategies that exhibit unique and/or superior features. 

PAS shows competitive accuracy and sensitivity relative to absorp-
tion sensors and has a very compact sensor size. As the photoacoustic 
signal is directly proportional to the optical power, increasing the inci-
dent laser power increases the sensitivity. However, PAS-based sensors 
require  frequent  calibration,  particularly  when  they  are  used  in  field 
applications.  Moreover,  using  PAS  for  in  situ  measurements  in  harsh 
environments is challenging because the photoacoustic signal is sensi-
tive  to  mechanical  vibrations  and  external  acoustic  noise.  Compared 
with line-of-sight measurements that use absorption spectroscopy, LIF 
and CARS can provide 2D and 3D profiles of the species concentration 
and temperature, which are very useful for performing spatially resolved 

Fig.  15. Experimental  setup  of  hybrid  fs/ps  rotational  CARS  for  N2  jet- 
impinging measurements [333]. 

spectral line intensity was calculated using the Taylor expansion [377]. 
Yaroshchyk  et  al.  reported  the  first  use  of  a  model-free  algorithm 
designed  for  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR)  to  correct  the  LIBS 
spectrum background [378]. Schlenke et al. used a wavelet transform to 
suppress  noise  in  LIBS  signals  [379].  Appropriate  correction  methods 
improve the signal repeatability and suppress signal noise, facilitating 
enhanced spectral features for subsequent analysis. 

LIBS  enables  the  rapid  determination  of  the  sample  composition, 
offering  a  key  advantage  over  other  atomic  spectroscopic techniques. 
However, the analytical performance of LIBS still requires improvement, 
particularly  its  accuracy  and  sensitivity.  Apart  from  exploring  new 
measurement schemes, the development of chemometric methods can 
facilitate improved accuracy and sensitivity. Two types of quantitative 
analysis  methods  are  available  in  current  LIBS  research:  calibration- 
based strategies and calibration-free LIBS (CF-LIBS). 

The calibration-based strategy is a traditional method for quantita-
tive analysis. Thus far, no specific calibration model is considered as the 
standard by the LIBS community; some multivariate calibration methods 
are employed often, such as partial least-squares (PLS) regression, sup-
port vector regression, principal component regression, and multivariate 
linear  regression  (MLR)  [380–383].  Apart  from  the  traditional 
calibration-based  strategy,  ML  algorithms  are  gaining  popularity  for 
LIBS quantitative analysis for feature selection and model construction. 
Sun et al. used a back-propagation neural network (BPNN) to estimate 

Table 4.5 
Summary of some recent CARS application examples.  

CARS technique 

Test facility 

Measurement 

Reference 

Dual-pump vibrational CARS 

Piloted axisymmetric reactor-assisted turbulent premixed flame 
burner 

Interference-free hybrid fs/ps 

vibrational CARS  

Dual-broadband rotational 

Gülder burner 

CARS 

Single-laser-shot CPP fs-CARS 

Piloted Sydney needle spray burner 

CPP fs-CARS 

Sydney needle spray burner 

Dual-pump vibrational CARS 

Yale burner, also known as Smooke/Long burner 

Hybrid fs/ps-CARS 

McKenna burner and oxyacetylenic torch 

Hybrid fs/ps-CARS 

McKenna burner 

Pure-rotational 1D CARS 

fs/ps rotational CARS 

Ultrafast regenerative amplifier system combined with second- 
harmonic bandwidth compression and an external compressor 
Hencken burner 

Simultaneous temperature, O2, and CO2 measurements in 
turbulent premixed flames 
N2 thermometry of 1300–2300 K in high-pressure, laminar 
H2–air, and CH4–air diffusion flames (up to 10 bar) 
Thermometry and relative concentration of C2H6 measured in 
an ethane diffusion flame 
Thermometry at a repetition rate of 5 kHz in turbulent dilute 
and dense spray flames 
Thermometry at a repetition rate of 5 kHz in turbulent spray 
flames 
Temperature measurements in C2H4–air coflow diffusion 
flames 
N2 thermometry (300–3000 K) in ambient air, CH4-air, and 
C2H2-O2 flames at a kHz repetition rate 
Single-shot thermometry at a repetition rate of 5 kHz in an a 
laminar CH4/air flame and ambient air 
Temperature measurements in a premixed CH4/air flame 
front 
kHz thermometry up to 2400 K in H2/air 

[308] 

[327] 

[341] 

[321] 

[342] 

[310] 

[343] 

[344] 

[335] 

[345]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099723A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 4.6 
Key features of various LIBS measurement schemes.  

Measurement 
scheme 

DP-LIBS 

MP-LIBS 

Microwave-assisted 

LIBS 

Spatial confinement 

Magnetic 

confinement 

SENLIBS 

NELIBS 

Fig. 16. Schematic of the energy level diagram of LIBS.  

Raman–LIBS 

LIBS–LA-ICP-MS 

LA–LIBS 

LIBS–LIF 

Key features 

• Uses two laser pulses or beams split from one pulse to 
generate plasma 
• Increases the plasma temperature and material ablation 
• Provides enhanced signal intensity 
•An extension of DP-LIBS 
• Provides significantly enhanced signal intensity and 
repeatability 
• Produces microwave radiation around plasma 
• Increases the lifetime of plasma and rate of collision 
• Provides enhanced signal intensity and sensitivity 
• Uses a cavity to create a confined space for the generated 
plasma 
• Cost-effective and simple approach for improved signal 
intensity 
• Applies an external magnetic field to the plasma 
• Decelerates plasma expansion, increasing electron density 
and plasma temperature 
• Provides improved signal intensity and sensitivity 
• Attaches a thin layer of samples to a metallic substrate 
surface 
• Provides improved signal intensity and repeatability 
• Eliminates the matrix effect 
• Attaches nanoparticles on a solid sample surface or adds 
them to liquid samples 
• Provides enhanced signal intensity and repeatability 
• Provides elemental and molecular composition 
• Single laser source fulfills the need for LIBS and Raman 
analysis 
• Depth-resolved analysis of sample is possible 
• Single laser source is used for plasma generation and laser 
ablation 
• Providing both element composition and isotope analysis. 
• Single laser source is used for plasma generation and laser 
ablation 
• Eliminates the matrix effect in LIBS analysis 
• Atoms of the analyzed element in the laser-induced plasma 
are resonantly excited by the LIF technique 
• Improves the limit of detection for minor elements  

and future prospects. The discussion of selected works will provide in-
sights on the usefulness of laser-based sensors in practical applications. 

Fig. 17. Typical LIBS spectrum of coal [346].  

5.1. Engines and automobile exhaust 

studies on laminar and turbulent flowfields. However, these techniques 
require very expensive, fragile, and complex optical systems, rendering 
them unsuitable for field applications. The temporal resolution of these 
techniques is limited mainly due to the requirement of high-power laser 
sources  to  achieve  high  sensitivity.  Pulse-burst  lasers  enable  ultrafast 
LIF/CARS;  however,  only  limited  research  groups  in  the  world  can 
afford  these  laser  sources.  LIBS  provides  a  powerful  method  for 
elemental analysis, which cannot be achieved using LAS or other spec-
troscopic techniques. However, challenges associated with quantitative 
measurements  and  field  deployment  limit  its  applications  in  energy 
systems and industrial processes. 

5. Applications in energy systems and process industries 

Laser sensors are highly attractive in various applications owing to 
their  nonintrusive,  high-selectivity,  and  high-sensitivity  sensing  capa-
bilities. In this section, we present a summary of the previous literature 
wherein laser-based sensors were applied to energy systems and process 
industries. It is not our objective to provide an exhaustive review of all 
relevant literature; we focus on recent studies and highlight their merits 

Transportation is an essential building block of modern economies 
and  integral  to  urban  lifestyles.  Approximately  a  quarter  of  the  total 
global energy is consumed in people and goods transportation. Current 
transportation systems that primarily rely on petroleum-based fuels emit 
carbon  dioxide  and  harmful  pollutants.  In  the  last  two  decades,  the 
optimization of these systems in terms of their efficiency and emissions 
has been pursued on a large scale. Such emphasis has led to the devel-
opment and application of various sensing methods in automotive sys-
tems  to  help  understand  their  complex  physical/chemical  processes, 
track emissions, and use measurements for feedback control. 

Laser-based sensing applications in the automotive sector have pri-
marily focused on three key system components: intake manifold, en-
gine, and exhaust manifold. Sensor requirements for each component 
vary  considerably,  with  the  engine  constituting  the  most  challenging 
environment for optical measurements. The temperature and pressure 
inside  an  engine  are  generally  quite  high  and  can  vary  significantly 
(pressure  1–100  bar  and  temperature  300–2500  K)  from  the  intake 
stroke to compression and postcombustion. Fuel combustion leads to the 
formation of hundreds of species of varying concentrations, rendering 
sensitive and selective measurements quite challenging. Optical access is 
generally  not  easy,  and  laser  transmission  is  further  compromised  by 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099724A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

window fouling and light scattering owing to soot particles and liquid 
fuel  droplets.  Several  in-cylinder  laser  sensors  rely  on  the  use  of  a 
modified spark plug for optical access. Fig. 18 shows measurement lo-
cations typically used for laser-based sensors in automobiles. 

Laser-based sensors have been employed in automobiles and IC en-
gines  since  1974–1975.  Some  previous  studies  are  summarized  in 
Table  5.1. The early literature  focused on  measuring exhaust species, 
such as CO, CO2 and CH4. However, a lack of portable and easy-to-use 
laser  sources  limited  diagnostic  development  and  applications.  In 
1996, Hall and Koenig introduced the concept of using a spark plug for 
light transmission and a reflector for light collection [394]. They could 
measure  variations in the fuel/air ratio in motored (no spark) engine 
cycles at a repetition rate of 1.3 kHz. The introduced spark plug concept 
was extended in the 2000s, when numerous researchers used new and 
compact laser sources for measuring the crank-angle resolved temper-
ature and fuel/product concentration. Rieker et al. employed NIR lasers 
and WMS with second harmonic detection (WMS-2f/1f) to achieve high 
temperature-sensitivity  and  scattering  loss  immunity  [395].  Mattison 
et al. successfully performed temperature and H2O concentration mea-
surements in motored as well as firing engine cycles [396]. Kranendonk 
et  al.  used  mode-locked/external-cavity  lasers  to  rapidly  sweep  large 
wavelength ranges in the NIR region for precise temperature and water 
concentration measurements [116,397]. Witzel et al. used NIR lasers to 
measure the H2O concentration as a function of the crank angle with 
optical access directly through cylinder walls [398–400]. In their latest 
work, H2O concentration measurements were performed in a production 
engine using endoscopic optical access and the scattering/capture of the 
transmitted  laser  beam  at  90
[400].  Jatana  et  al.  designed  a  special 
optical access for temperature, pressure, and H2O concentration mea-
surements at the intake manifold and turbocharger inlet [401]. How-
ever,  these  methods  provide  a  line-of-sight  average  result  in  an 
environment  that  can  exhibit  significant  temperature  and  mixture 
fraction stratification, constituting a drawback of laser absorption sen-
sors  in  engine  applications.  To  address  this,  Terzija  et  al.  recently 
demonstrated 32-beam tomography to achieve a 2D profile of the fuel 
concentration inside an engine [402]. 

◦

With the recent development of MIR laser sources that access strong 
rovibrational bands of hydrocarbons, they have been deployed for high- 
speed  spatially resolved  species measurements  in the intake  manifold 
and multispecies measurements in IC engine exhausts. Yoo et al. mul-
tiplexed a MIR laser sensor into four probes and performed temporally 
resolved CO2 measurements at multiple locations in the intake manifold 
of  a  diesel  engine  [403].  Diemel  et  al.  leveraged  time-division  multi-
plexing for in situ multispecies and gas temperature measurements in 
the exhaust of a spark-ignition (SI) research engine [404]. Cycle-to-cycle 
variations in the gas temperature and mole fractions of H2O, CO2, CO, 
NO, and NO2/CH4 were measured and correlated with the equivalence 
ratio (Fig. 19). 

Understanding detailed flame propagation in IC engines is important 
for  accurately  estimating  ignition  and  combustion  phasing  as  well  as 
heat  release  rate  and  assessing  engine  performance.  Therefore,  in 
addition to laser absorption–based sensors, multiple diagnostics based 
on LIF and CARS have been used to help further understand combustion 
processes in engines; some recent studies are discussed herein. Peterson 
et al. combined high-speed PLIF and PIV techniques for quantitatively 
measuring the equivalence ratio and flow velocity in the tumble plane of 
a  spray-guided  direct-injection  SI  optical  engine  [405].  Optical  mea-
surements enable the identification of the primary mechanisms involved 
in  rare  misfires  and  partial  burn  events  in  the  engine.  Wang  et  al. 
investigated  the  formation  process  of  the  fuel–air  mixture  in  a 
heavy-duty  optical  engine  using  PLIF  [406,407].  An  ultrahigh-speed 
burst-mode  laser  facilitated  a  single  cycle  resolution,  thereby  elimi-
nating the effect of cycle-to-cycle variations that increase measurement 
uncertainty. Peterson et al. used dual-plane OH-LIF to examine flame 
transport  in  an  SI  engine  [277].  High-speed  toluene  LIF  strategies, 
including  one-color  and  two-color  strategies,  have  been  applied  to 

Fig.  18. Schematic  of  optical  systems  for  investigating  engine,  intake,  and 
exhaust ports. 

accurately resolve temperature stratification in IC engines [408]. Flame 
distributions near the piston surface in an optically accessible SI engine 
were  measured  at  the  kHz  repetition  rate  using  SO2  PLIF  [409]. 
Dual-plane OH LIF was employed to track the reaction-zone position and 
flame-normal direction in the 3D space in an SI engine [410]. Tawfik 
et  al.  used  PLIF  for  investigating  combustion  zone  and  flame  front 
development  on  the  horizontal  swirl  plane  after  spark  ignition  in  a 
gasoline direct-injection (GDI) engine [411]. Recently, Matamis et al. 
investigated  the  ignition  of  methanol  in  an  optically  accessible 
compression  ignition  engine  using  single-shot  PLIF  measurements 
[412]. Rotational CARS measurements were performed for the first time 
in  an  IC  engine  in  1994  by  Bengtsson  et  al  [413].  and  have  since 
encouraged multiple studies on temperature and species concentration 
measurements  using CARS. Weikl et  al. obtained a  single-pulse CARS 
spectrum  during  compression  stroke  and  postcombustion 
in  a 
four-cylinder engine running on market gasoline fuel [414]. They used 
dual-broadband  rotational  CARS  for  simultaneous  temperature  and 
charge composition measurements in a production engine. 

Measurements reported in several previous studies have mostly been 
performed  for  demonstrative  purposes.  In  some  cases,  measured  data 
were  compared  with  engine  simulations  and/or  used  to  understand 
variations  in  the  temperature  and  species  concentration  using  engine 
operating  parameters  (e.g.,  injection  timing,  injection  pressure,  load, 
and  speed).  For  example,  Witzel  et  al.  compared  in-cylinder  water 
concentration  measurements  using  a  residual  gas  model,  noting  a 
satisfactory agreement, which opens up the potential for applying such 
sensors in more complex combustion modes [400]. 

The importance of laser diagnostics in reducing engine emissions and 
improving  combustion  efficiency  is  underlined  by  the  active  involve-
ment  of  industry  partners  in  numerous  related  research  projects; 
selected examples are discussed herein. Rieker et al. collaborated with 
the Nissan Motor Company for fabricating spark-plug-based laser sen-
sors,  which  were  implemented  in  research  engines  [395].  Nishiyama 
et  al.  from  Okayama  University  collaborated  with  researchers  from 
Honda R&D and used an optical spark plug sensor for performing in situ 
fuel  concentration  measurements  in  a  port-injected  lean-burn  engine 
[414]. A 3.39 µm He–Ne laser was used to target the absorption features 
of  hydrocarbons  in  the  MIR  region,  and  fuel  concentration  measure-
ments helped identify the appropriate range of fuel injection timings to 
improve the lean combustion process. Golzke et al. from Robert Bosch 
GmbH collaborated with researchers from HS Karlsruhe and TU Darm-
stadt to evaluate the spatial distribution of exhaust gas recirculation in 
an  optically  accessible  SI  engine  [415].  Using  H2O  as  a  marker  for 
exhaust  gases,  NIR  absorption  and  inverse  LIF  techniques  were 
employed to achieve the 2D distribution of exhaust gases in the cylinder. 
Although  continuous  progress  has  been  made  in  laser-based 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099725A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 5.1 
Summary of notable implementations of laser diagnostics in automotive systems.  

Reference 

Quantity 

Wavelength 

Weikl et al  
[414]. 

T and O2/N2 ratio 

532 and 640 nm 

Laser type 

Nd:YAG 

Measurement 

Key features 

Optical access between 
a cylindrical block and 
cylindrical head 

Rieker et al  
[395]. 

T and H2O 

1345 and 1388 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB 
lasers 

In-cylinder via spark 
plug 

Cundy et al  
[416]. 

Fuel (isooctane/ 
biacetyl) and exhaust 
(H2O + CO2) 

3.3–3.5 and 2.7 mm 

Tungsten lamp 

Jeffries et al  

T and gasoline 

3367 and 3389 nm 

DFG laser 

In-cylinder via spark 
plug 

In-cylinder via spark 
plug 

[417]. 

Wright et al  
[418]. 

Witzel et al  
[398]. 

Witzel et al  
[399]. 

Jatana et al  
[401]. 

Hydrocarbons 

1651 and 1700 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB 
lasers 

In-cylinder via optical 
access 

H2O 

H2O 

1369.97 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser 

1369.97 nm 

VCSEL 

T, P, and H2O 

1387.2 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser 

In-cylinder via optical 
access 

In-cylinder via optical 
access 

Turbocharger inlet, EGR 
cooler exit, and intake 
manifold 
In-cylinder via optical 
access 

Witzel et al  
[400]. 

H2O 

1369.97 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser 

Terzija et al  
[402]. 

Fuel droplets and fuel 
vapor 

1651 and 1700 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB 
lasers 

In-cylinder via optical 
access 

Golzke et al  
[419]. 

H2O 

near 1370 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser 

In-cylinder via optical 
access 

Yoo et al  
[403]. 

CO2 

2706 nm 

HWG fiber-coupled DFB 
lasers 

Diesel engine intake 
manifold 

Diemel et al  
[404]. 

T, H2O, CO2, CO, 
CH4, NO2, and NO 

1391.5–1392.74 nm (H2O and T), 
5184 nm (NO), 2314 nm (CO), 2004 
nm (CO2), and 3425.1 nm (NO2/ 
CH4) 

VCSEL (H2O) and DFB 
(NO, CO, CO2, NO2, and 
CH4) 

Exhaust gas of SI engine 

Werblinski et 
al [107]. 

T, P, and H2O 

1340–1405.5 nm 

Supercontinuum 

Compression cycle of 
RCM 

Peterson et al 

Fuel mixing 

355 nm 

[405]. 

Frequency-tripled Nd: 
YAG 

In-cylinder via optical 
access 

Matamis et al 

Acetone fuel tracer 

266 nm 

[412].  

Frequency-quadrupled 
Nd:YAG 

In-cylinder via optical 
access 

*First demonstration of dual-broadband 
pure-rotational CARS for simultaneous 
temperature and O2/N2 ratio 
measurements 
*Engine operated in the HCCI mode 
*10-Hz repetition rate, single-shot 
measurements 
*WMS-2f/1f methodology 
*7.5-kHz repetition rate 
*Short path length of 6 mm 
*Crank-angle-resolved data in motored 
and fired cases 
*30-kHz repetition rate 
*Bandpass spectral filters used for MIR 
absorption 
*Fuel measurements in motored tests 
*Exhaust measurements in firing tests 
*Short path length of 5.3 mm 
*10-kHz repetition rate 
*Crank-angle-resolved data 
*Fuel/air ratio measurement in firing 
tests 
*27-beam tomography 
*3-kHz repetition rate 
*Qualitative fuel measurements in 
motored and fired cases 
*4-kHz repetition rate 
*Crank-angle-resolved data 
*Motored tests only 
*10-kHz repetition rate 
*Crank-angle-resolved data 
*Motored tests only 
*100 Hz–5 kHz repetition rate 
*Ceramic insulator used as a heat shield 
for optical components 
*4-kHz repetition rate 
*Crank-angle-resolved data in firing tests 
(except combustion stroke) 
*32-beam tomography 
*2.4–7.2-kHz repetition rate 
*Qualitative measurements in motored 
cases only 
*Fixed wavelength measurements using 
a NIR camera 
*250-µs integration time; limited to 340 
frames/s 
*LIF for complement absorption 
measurements 
*Multipoint measurements 
*5-kHz repetition rate 
*Spatiotemporally resolved EGR 
measurements 
*Multispecies measurements 
*1-kHz repetition rate 
*Correlation between fuel–air 
equivalence ratio and species mole 
fraction 
*Supercontinuum laser source 
*Multiparameter measurements 
*50-kHz repetition rate 
*4.8-kHz repetition rate 
*PLIF combined with PIV and Mie 
scattering measurements 
*10-Hz repetition rate, single-shot 
measurements 
*PLIF combined with flame luminosity 
and Mie scattering measurements  

diagnostics for visualizing IC engines, intake ports, and exhaust, there is 
still potential for improvement. MIR laser sources have only been used in 
recent  studies  [403,404];  however,  their  application  is  expected  to 
expand further because they provide access to strong vibrational bands 
of  hydrocarbons,  thereby  providing  diagnostics  with  enhanced 

selectivity and sensitivity. Multispecies/multiparameter measurements 
in IC engines using widely swept laser sources, such as supercontinuum 
lasers,  are  also  expected  to  be  employed  in  future  research  studies. 
Recently, Werblinski et al. used a broadband supercontinuum laser for 
the high-speed measurement of temperature, pressure, and H2O mole 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099726A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

turbine  combustors  may  be  operated  in  regimes  in  which  thermoa-
coustic  instabilities  become  a  major  obstacle.  In  such  situations,  a 
closed-loop  monitoring  system  is  required  to  measure  critical  engine 
performance parameters (e.g., temperature and emissions) and enable 
rapid  corrective  actions  to  avoid  unstable  operations.  Among  laser 
diagnostic tools, laser absorption sensors serve this purpose efficiently 
because  of  their  advantages  of  rapid  response,  nonintrusiveness,  and 
robustness. For example, Li et al. employed a laser absorption temper-
ature  sensor  to  actively  control  the  combustion  process  in  a  swirl- 
stabilized  partially  premixed  dump combustor  (model for  gas turbine 
combustor), thereby preventing lean blowout  [429]. Laser absorption 
sensors  have  also  been  used  for  actively  controlling  the  combustion 
process in other propulsion systems, such as pulse detonation engines 
(PDEs). Ma et al. used a fixed-wavelength diode laser for fuel (ethylene) 
mole fraction and temperature measurements in a PDE, thereby actively 
controlling  fuel  loading  to  reduce  fuel  consumption  and  improve  the 
specific impulse of the engine [430]. 

The  investigation  of  combustion  processes  in  rotating  detonation 
engines (RDEs) has been hampered by the lack of ultrafast diagnostics. 
Recent  efforts  have  reduced  the  time  resolution  below  1  μs  using 
diplexed RF modulation with MIR lasers for species concentration (CO 
and CO2), pressure, and temperature measurements in the exhaust of an 
RDE at a repetition rate of > 1 MHz [431]. Finally, some studies have 
recently focused on extending the range of absorption-based diagnostics 
to high pressures (75–100 bar) for practical combustors by exploiting 
multiple vibrational bands and line-mixing effects [432,433]. 

For 0-D temperature measurements in practical applications, CARS is 
among the most robust laser-based thermometric techniques. CARS has 
been successfully employed for thermometry in high-pressure gas tur-
bine  [434]  and  rocket  combustors[435,436].  For  example,  Thariyan 
et al. used dual-pump CARS for single-shot thermometry and CO2/N2 
concentration  ratio  measurements  in  a  high-pressure  (1.03  MPa)  gas 
turbine fueled with Jet A [437]. 

Furthermore, two-line OH-PLIF has been used for thermometry in a 
model gas-turbine combustor [438]. Meier et al. used the PLIF technique 
for temperature measurements in kerosene-fired high-pressure gas tur-
bine relevant flames [439], while Heinze et al. used a variant of OH-PLIF 
for temperature and OH concentration measurements [440]. Steinberg 
et  al.  performed  OH-PLIF  and  stereoscopic  PIV  and  OH*  chemilumi-
nescent measurements at a high repetition rate (~5 kHz) in a gas-turbine 
model  combustor  to  resolve  combustion  dynamics  attributed  to  flow-
–flame 
interactions  [441]  (Fig.  21).  Hermann  et  al.  studied 
flame-cooling air flows in a model gas turbine combustor [442], which 
are  important  in  lean  premixed  flames,  particularly  in  downsized  en-
gines. OH-PLIF, CARS, and PIV techniques were used to investigate the 
flow field and flame structure in a versatile novel test rig at high pres-
sures (~10 bar). Results indicated spatial nonuniformities in the fuel–air 
equivalence ratio, apart from the significant influence of fuel staging as 
far as 30 mm downstream of the burner head. Other types of lasers, such 
as frequency-quadrupled Nd:YLF and disk lasers, have been used for LIF 
measurements at the kHz repetition rate [443,444]. 

5.3. Power plants 

Annual  world  electricity  consumption  in  2019  was  approximately 
22.5 PWh [451]. Approximately 65% of this electricity was generated by 
fossil fuel–based power plants. Despite the rapid development of alter-
native  energy  resources,  coal  and  other  fossil  fuels  will  remain  an 
indispensable energy resource in the near future. The growing urgency 
for  reducing  pollutant  emissions  and  improving  fuel  economy  has 
induced  a  demand  for  accurate  and  reliable  real-time  sensors  for 
monitoring key pollutants and combustion-efficiency markers in power 
generation plants. Emission monitoring is traditionally performed using 
sampling  probes  coupled  with  gas  chromatography  (GC)/mass  spec-
trometry (MS). However, the response rate of such measurements is low 
and  intrusive  probes  can  introduce  perturbations  in  the  process. 

Fig.  19. Schematic  of  the  diagnostic  for  planar  laser-induced  fluorescence 
(PLIF) measurements of methanol in an optical engine [412]. 

fractions  in  an  RCM,  representing  the  closest  implementation  of  a 
supercontinuum  laser  in  an  environment  resembling  the  compression 
and expansion stroke of an IC engine [107]. 

5.2. Aviation gas turbines 

To promote a reduction in the carbon footprint of the transportation 
sector, advanced gas turbine combustors are essential, which enable low 
emissions  and  decreased  fuel  consumption.  For  example,  the  airline 
industry has a target of reducing NOx emissions by 90% between 2020 
and 2050 [420]. This target can be achieved by improving the current 
combustor  design  possibly  with  a  paradigm  shift  to  a  different  com-
bustion mode. Selected studies in which laser sensors are used to help 
further  understand  combustion  processes  in  various  aviation  gas  tur-
bines are summarized in Table 5.2. The application of laser-based sen-
sors to power-generation stationary gas turbines is discussed in Section 
5.3. 

The lean premixed combustion mode has promising potential to meet 
the  strict  NOx  emission  regulation  of  gas  turbine  engines  [421].  The 
effect of the fuel–air equivalence ratio on heat release during unstable 
premixed combustion was examined by IR absorption using a 3.39-µm 
He–Ne laser [422]. The same absorption technique was employed for 
hydrocarbon fuel concentration measurements in IC and pulse detona-
tion engines [423,424]. However, absorption at 3.39 µm is common in 
the  C–H  asymmetric  stretch  bond  of  most  hydrocarbon  fuels,  thus 
limiting  the  wide  application  of  this  strategy  in  gas  turbine  engines. 
Therefore, calibrating absorption sensors for different fuel mixtures is 
essential, such as the use of other laser wavelengths, including those in 
the MIR region, to distinguish various fuel molecules. 

Significant advancements in TDLAS in the last several decades will 
soon facilitate its applicability to real flight operations. For example, a 
TDLAS sensor used in the HIFiRE2 scramjet completed a flight test in 
2012 [425]. Multiple TDLAS sensors have been used to perform tomo-
graphic measurements of the converted hydrogen mass flow rate (via 
water vapor measurements) to extract information on the combustion 
efficiency of a hydrogen-fueled scramjet engine [426] (Fig. 20). To date, 
various  TDLAS  sensors  have  been  developed  for  measuring  the  mass 
flux, flow velocity, temperature, and gaseous species, such as H2O, CO2, 
and O2 [30,427]. For example, a VCSEL-based sensor was employed for 
O2 measurements in a high-pressure environment, showing potential for 
use in aeropropulsion gas-turbine applications [428]. 

To achieve high combustion efficiency and low NOx  emissions, gas 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099727A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 5.2 
Summary of selected implementations of laser diagnostics in aviation gas turbines.  

Reference 

Quantity 

Wavelength 

Diagnostic type 

Key features 

Wang et al [428]. 

O2; lab demonstration 

~760 nm 

VCSEL 

Roy et al [43]. 

T, N2, and CO2; lab 
demonstration 

496, 560, and 607 
nm 

Dual-pump 
CARS 

Byrne et al [445]. 

T, N2, and O2; supersonic 
combustor 

491, 532, and 607 
nm 

Dual-pump 
CARS 

Read et al [446].  

Fuel distribution influence 
on ignition outcome 

266 nm 

Kerosene PLIF 

Busa et al [426]. 

H2O and T; lab 
demonstration 

~1400 nm 

DFB lasers 

Cantu et al [447]. 

NO; lab demonstration 

226 nm 

NO PLIF 

Cutler et al [309]. 

C2H4, O2, N2, CO2, and T; lab 
demonstration 

550.1, 532, and 
588–610 nm 

Dual-pump 
CARS 

{Sopek, 2020 #2416} 
Sopek et al [448]. 

T and OH; lab demonstration  ~283 nm 

Thermally 
assisted LIF 

Peng et al [449]. 

OH; lab demonstration 

283.553 nm 

OH PLIF 

Fang et al [450]. 

H2O and T; lab 
demonstration 

near 2500 nm 

DFB laser 

*Scanned wavelength direct absorption and WMS-2f measurements 
*Detection limit: 800 ppm averaged over 1 m 
*Oxygen concentrations measured up to 10.9 bar 
*Measurements in the exhaust stream of liquid fueled combustor 
*Dual-pump N2–CO2 CARS spectroscopy 
*Standard deviation: 3%–4% for single-shot temperature measurements; 9%– 
20% for single-shot CO2 concentration measurements ( = 0.4–1.1) 
*Measurements at the nozzle exit and four planes downstream of fuel 
injection 
*~130 K standard deviation of freestream temperature measurements at the 
facility nozzle exit 
*Upper limits of standard deviation for O2 and N2 were 0.024 and 0.042, 
respectively 
*High variability in atomization quality 
*In the presence of flame, medium-sized fuel droplets were spotted near the 
injector centerline 
*In the case of flame absence, small droplets were confined in the area of 
recirculation and large droplets near the wall 
*Multiplexed lasers used for tomographic absorption measurements 
*Number density of water vapor measured across the exit plane of a scramjet 
engine 
*NO PLIF measurements performed in a NO/N2 gas mixture using NO as a 
surrogate for ethylene fuel 
*PLIF images in the scramjet combustor help identify injection configuration 
for optimized fuel/air mixture 
*Single-shot CARS measurements in premixed, cavity-stabilized, ethylene–air 
flame in a dual-mode scramjet 
*Measurements performed along lines perpendicular to the streamwise axis in 
the symmetry plane of the dual-model scramjet combustor 
*Laser beam was focused onto a scramjet combustor for single-shot 
thermometry 
*Temperature distribution across the combustor width was obtained by fitting 
the full spectra 
*Combustion instability investigated in hydrogen-fueled scramjet combustor 
* Nd:YAG laser with a repetition rate of 500 kHz enabled the characterization 
of dominant frequencies in the scramjet mode and ram-to-scram transition 
*Scanned wavelength direct absorption with a repetition rate of 2 kHz 
*Temperature and H2O partial pressure measured in the exhaust of a lab-scale 
hybrid rocket motor  

Therefore, laser-based in situ sensors are ideal for such complex appli-
cations / harsh conditions. These sensors can be used to implement a 
feedback-loop  control  system  to  optimize  the  plant  performance  for 
increased efficiency and/or reduced emissions. Apart from GC/MS sys-
tems,  chemiluminescent  detectors  and  nondispersive  IR  sensors  are 
often used for NOx  and CO/CO2  measurements, respectively. Selected 
studies  on  the  development  and  implementation  of  laser  sensors  in 
power plants are summarized in Table 5.3. 

Exhaust  gas  temperature  (EGT)  measurements  in  turbines  are 
considered crucial for optimizing fuel economy. A sensor used for this 
purpose  is  deemed  a  critical  part  of  turbine  engine  instrumentation. 
TDLAS sensors have been employed for EGT measurements in industrial 
gas turbines. For example, a direct absorption sensor was used for in-
dustrial gas turbine exhaust thermometry and its results were compared 
with those obtained using a K-type thermocouple [452]. Furthermore, 
an enhanced two-line scheme was demonstrated for gas turbine exhaust 
thermometry by exploiting a pair of H2O absorption lines [453]. Overall, 
TDLAS sensors are considered among the best diagnostic tools for EGT 
sensing and offer temperature measurements in a wide range compared 
with  traditional  diagnostic  tools.  Recently,  Schroeder  et  al.  demon-
strated the first application of frequency comb spectroscopy for simul-
taneous  temperature  and  species  (H2O  and  CO2)  concentration 
measurements  in  a  16  MW  gas  turbine  [99]  (Fig.  22).  The  mobile 
spectrometer showed the possibility of implementing frequency comb 
systems in laboratory and field applications. 

Besides  gas  turbines,  coal-fired  power  plants  are  an  important 
component  of  the  power  generation  infrastructure  in  many  countries 

because coal is among the most abundant primary energy sources across 
the globe. However, coal-fired plants are major sources of air pollution 
and are associated with CO2, SO2, NOx, and dust emissions. To reduce 
pollutant  emissions  and  optimize  combustion,  real-time  analysis  is 
indispensable. Selective/nonselective catalytic reduction (SCR/SNCR) is 
the most widely used de-NOx  process, where real-time NOx/NH3  con-
centration measurements and thermometry are particularly important. 
Absorption sensors are often deployed in such environments because of 
their unique advantages of the in situ monitoring of gas properties with 
high sensitivity and high temporal resolution, along with their compact 
and robust architecture. Peng et al. developed a QCL absorption sensor 
to perform in situ NH3  measurements in a high-temperature (~600 K) 
gas flow cell, achieving detection limits of 2.8 ± 0.26 ppm [454]. Qiu 
et al. recently demonstrated high-temperature NH3 measurements using 
a  direct  absorption  spectroscopic  sensor  in  a  coal-fired  power  plant 
[455].  More  recently,  a  NIR  portable  laser  sensor  was  developed  for 
monitoring NH3 concentration in the coke-oven flue gas of a coal gasi-
fication plant [456]. In this case, WMS-2f/1f was employed to overcome 
fluctuations caused by laser noise and nonabsorption transmission los-
ses.  A  minimum  ammonia  detection  limit  of  0.16  ppm  was  achieved 
using Allan deviation analysis at an integration time of 184 s. 

TDLAS sensors have also been developed for multispecies measure-
ments,  such  as  CO2,  H2O,  NO,  and  NH3,  from  industrial  combustion 
exhausts.  Real-time  in  situ  nitric  oxide  (NO)  sensors  are  desirable  for 
accurate  stack  exhaust  monitoring,  which  cannot  be  achieved  using 
conventional emission-monitoring devices. Wysocki et al. developed a 
MIR QCL-based sensor that can detect sub-ppm NO in a harsh industrial 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099728A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 20. Mass flow rate of converted hydrogen measured using the TDLAS tomography technique (left) compared with CFD prediction (right) for a hydrogen-fueled 
scramjet engine [426]. 

exhaust  system  [457].  Mohsin  et  al.  developed  a  dual-species  sensor 
near a wavelength of 2.3 µm using a calibration-free WMS-2f/1f tech-
nique  that  can  be  employed  in  the  exhaust  of  practical  combustion 
systems, such as NH3  monitoring for NOx  abatement in selective cata-
lytic  reduction  (SCR)  aftertreatment  and  CO  sensing  for  optimizing 
combustor  efficiency  [458].  Chao  et  al.  developed  a  QCL-based  NO 
sensor at 5.2 µm using a calibration-free WMS-2f/1f technique [459]. 
The sensor was used for NO concentration measurements at the exit of 
the economizer for ~3 h during the SNCR system operation with varying 
levels of urea injection rates. Nitric oxide concentration measurements 
correlated  closely  with  the  urea  injection  rate,  where  the  fast 
time-resolution  sensor  adequately  captured  sharp  rises/falls,  over-
shoots, and oscillations of nitric oxide concentration. 

Recent advancements in MIR QCLs have facilitated the development 
of rugged analyzers that can address challenges associated with varia-
tions in the matrix composition and analyte concentration [460–462]. 
Two pulsed DFB QCLs  (5.26 and 6.13 µm)  were used for the quasisi-
multaneous in-line monitoring of NO and NO2 inside a flue tube in the 
Dürnrohr  power  plant in  Austria  [463] (Fig.  23).  During pulsed  laser 
operation, the entire rovibrational transition and background intensity 
can be measured during a single laser pulse. This feature is particularly 
useful for in-line monitoring to overcome issues of rapid changes in the 
sample composition, such as in a turbulent flow, and significant particle 
loading, such as in a stack exhaust of a coal-fired power plant. Despite 
water vapor contents of 152–235 g/m3 and an average particle loading 
of 15.8 mg/m3 in flue gases, the quasisimultaneous measurements of 73 
ppb NO and 91-ppb NO2 were achieved [463]. 

Special design measures must be implemented to successfully install 
and operate sensors in complex environments, such as coal-fired power 

plants. The harsh conditions causes various issues, such as the genera-
tion  of  particulates,  window  contamination,  high  heat  release,  high 
pressure, limited optical access, and laser misalignment. Some of these 
issues can be addressed using a smart engineering design, such as en-
closures, window tubes, cooling strategies, collinear visible laser, and 
remote monitoring [464]. Long-term unattended operation in a harsh 
combustion  environment  can  be  achieved  using  thermoelectrically 
cooled  detectors/lasers.  In  coal-fired  power  plants,  laser  light  passes 
through  heavily  charged  fly  ash  exhausts  and  the  light  intensity  is 
attenuated  by  particulate  scattering.  This  can  be  addressed  via  non-
absorbing baseline correction or a WMS-2f/1f strategy. Laser misalign-
ment,  refractive  index  changes,  and  light  scattering  can  induce  large 
fluctuations in the transmitted laser power, which can be reduced using 
large collection optics. 

Compared with TDLAS, PAS techniques have only been employed in 
few works related to power plants [213,465,466]. Thus, the use of PAS 
systems in harsh environments has not yet been fully explored. Sigrist 
developed a fully automated CO2  laser–based photoacoustic spectrom-
eter for methanol and ethanol vapor monitoring in the stack emission of 
a  pharmaceutical  production  plant  in  Switzerland  [465,466].  The 
measurement results showed good time resolution and high detection 
selectivity for multicomponent analysis. Stenberg et al. used an in situ 
pulsed  PAS  technique  for  gas  sensing  in  a  fluidized  bed  combustion 
(FBC)–pressurized  high-temperature  test  reactor  and  a  12  MW  circu-
lating bed boiler [213]. The photoacoustic spectrum was measured in a 
quartz-lined  test  cell  using  a  tubular  gas-analysis  probe.  The  probe 
response  was  calibrated  for NO,  NO2,  N2O,  and  NH3,  and  the  overall 
sensitivity and probe response increased at a high pressure of up to 1.2 
MPa. 

Fig. 21. Time sequence of OH PLIF images recorded at 5 kHz in a gas-turbine model combustor. Axes units are mm [441].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099729A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

LIBS-based  sensors  have  been  used  for  coal  analysis  with  unique 
features comprising little or no sample preparation, rapid analysis, and 
in situ detection. Coal properties are important parameters for realizing 
the storage management of coal, online evaluation of coal consumption, 
and optimization operation of boilers [467]. Unburned carbon (UC) in 
fly  ash  is  crucial  for  evaluating  combustion  efficiency.  The  real-time 
monitoring of coal properties and the UC content in fly ash can enable 
the  timely  modification  of  the  operation  mode,  ensure  efficient  and 
clean combustion in the boiler, and ascertain the safety of the power 
unit. LIBS is mainly used in coal analysis for ultimate, proximate, and 
calorific value analyses. 

Ultimate analysis refers to the quantitative analysis of the elemental 
composition of coal, including major (C, H, O, and N) and minor trace 
(such as Al, Fe, Mg, Ca, and Si) elements. LIBS has been used for qual-
itatively  analyzing  the  elemental  composition  of  single  particles  in 
combustion  environments  and  semiquantitatively  measuring  the 
elemental composition of Mg, Ca, Al, Si, Fe, and Ti in flowing environ-
ments [468]. Proximate analysis refers to the analysis of the moisture 
content,  volatile  matter,  ash  content,  and  fixed  carbon  content.  The 
calorific value analysis of coal is a basic technique for understanding the 
quality of coal, which is instrumental in coal trading, combustion opti-
mization, and pollutant reduction. Dong et al. employed partial corre-
lation  and  principal  component  analysis  to  extract  LIBS  spectral  data 
associated  with  volatile  matter  [469].  A  multiregression  method  was 
used to establish a calibration model based on the LIBS data and volatile 
matter  content  for  17  coal  samples.  Yao  et  al.  employed  LIBS  for 
extracting  the  content  of  coal  ash  from  LIBS  spectra  using  the  PLS 

Fig. 22. (a) Real-time measurements (1-min average) of CO2, H2O, and tem-
perature  using  dual-comb  spectroscopy  (DCS).  Thermocouple  temperature 
measurements were performed 0.8 m away from the DCS measurement loca-
tion. (b) 10-s averaged temperature data during supplemental burner ignition, 
as indicated in the shaded region of panel (a) [99]. 

method  [470].  The  best  results  were  obtained  using  spectral  data  at 
wavelengths  ranging  290–397  nm  based  on  the  PLS  method.  Fig.  24 
shows  a  rapid  coal  analyzer  based  on  LIBS  [471],  which  comprises 
pulverized  coal-feeding,  spectral  measurement,  and  control  modules. 

Table 5.3 
Summary of selected laser sensors for monitoring species/temperature in power plants.  

Reference 

Quantity 

Wavelength 

Diagnostic type 

Key features 

Wysocki et al  

NO; lab demonstration 

5263 nm 

Pulsed QCLs 

[457]. 

Liu et al [452]. 

T and H2O 

1341–1346 nm 

DFB absorption sensor 

Chao et al  
[459]. 

NO 

near 5191 nm 

External cavity QCL 
absorption sensor 

Reidl-Leuthner 
et al [463]. 

NO and NO2 

5260 and 6130 
nm 

Pulsed DFB-QCL 
absorption sensor 

Schroeder et al  

T, H2O, and CO2 

near 1440 nm 

[99]. 

Dual frequency comb 
spectrometer 

Yao et al [471]. 

Coal analysis (ash, volatile 
matter, fixed carbon, and 
caloric value) 

1064 nm 

LIBS coal analyzer 

Guo et al [456]. 

NH3; lab demonstration 

1515.15 nm 

DFB absorption sensor 

Legnaioli et al  

[482]. 

Ash content of coal; lab 
measurement 

1064 nm 

LIBS system 

Li et al [483]. 

H, O, CN, and T; lab 
demonstration 

388.3, 656.2, 
and 777.3 nm 

LIBS 

Wang et al  
[484]. 

T; lab demonstration 

1343 and 1388 
nm 

Computed 
tomography–TDLAS 

(cid:0) 1 

*Rapid frequency modulation 
*Detection limit: 100 ppb × m/√Hz at room temperature 
*Direct absorption using the two-line thermometric technique demon-
strated in an industrial gas turbine 
*Temperature uncertainty: ±10 K in an expected exhaust temperature 
range of 600–900 K 
*Calibration free WMS for in situ NO measurement in particulate-laden 
combustion exhaust gas up to 700 K 
*Detection limit: 0.3 ppm-m using R15.5 transition near 1927 cm
*Time resolution: 1 s 
*Quasisimultaneous in-line monitoring of NO and NO2 inside a flue tube in 
the Dürnrohr power plant in Austria 
* Detection limit: 73 ppb NO and 91 ppb NO2 
* T, H2O, and CO2 concentrations measured in a 16-MW gas turbine 
exhaust 
*10–60-s time resolution 
*Measurement uncertainty: ±3.8 K and ±4400 ppm in mole fractions of 
H2O and CO2 
*Developed a rapid coal analyzer for the rapid quality analysis of 
pulverized coal using LIBS 
*Average standard deviation of repeated samples of ash, volatile matter, 
fixed carbon, and gross calorific value were 1.64%, 0.92%, 1.08%, and 
0.86 MJ/kg, respectively, indicating high sample-to-sample repeatability 
*2f/1f WMS using a 15-cm multipass cell 
*Sensor used for monitoring trace quantities of NH3 in the SCR of coke 
oven flue gas 
*Detection limit: 160 ppb at 184-s time resolution 
*Measurements were performed in a lab under conditions similar to a 
power plant 
*Results showed that the ash content can be determined with an average 
absolute error of 0.5 w% 
*Coal combustion conducted in O2/N2 and O2/CO2 environments 
* LIBS time resolution: 1.05 ms 
*Combustion environment has a greater impact on flame temperature in 
the char combustion stage than the volatile stage 
*Two laser beams mixed using a fiber combiner; optical fiber splitter used 
to split the mixed laser beam to 16 paths 
*Transmitted laser signals detected using 16 detectors to achieve a 2D 
temperature distribution ~5 cm above a coal-fired burner 
*Temperatures in the range of 300–2500 K measured with a 1-ms response 
time  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099730A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

The pulverized coal-feeding module provides a stable coal particle flow, 
and the spectral measurement module directly measures the coal par-
ticle flow to achieve LIBS data. A nonlinear regression method based on 
ANNs and a GA coupled with cluster analysis was used to analyze the 
properties of coal, including ash, volatile matter, fixed carbon, and gross 
calorific value [471]. 

A major challenge in the application of LIBS to coal analysis is the 
matrix  effect  of  coal,  which  is  a  complex  and  heterogeneous  mineral 
substance with carbon as its main component and contains other minor 
and trace elements. Although the types of elements present in coal are 
similar,  the  elemental  content  and  coal  properties  vary  considerably 
from one sample to another, affecting spectral characteristics because of 
the nonlinear interaction between the laser and sample during ablation, 
plasma formation, and vaporization [472]. Yao et al. recently studied 
five coal samples and their coal chars to investigate the effects of volatile 
content on the characteristics of the laser-induced plasma and spectral 
signal [473]. The emission line intensities of elements in the raw coal 
were lower than those in coal chars. Furthermore, increasing the volatile 
content  of  coal,  which  causes  changes  in  vaporization  and  ionization 
processes, can induce varying intensities and spatial distributions of C, 
H, O, and N. To reduce the matrix effect, specific data processing stra-
tegies (e.g., normalization) and sample preparation techniques (e.g., the 
introduction of standard additives into the sample) can be employed. 

A data fusion scheme that combines LIBS and FTIR spectroscopy has 
been  proposed  to  simultaneously  obtain  elemental  and  molecular  in-
formation  for  accurately  analyzing  the  volatile  content  and  calorific 
value  of  coal  [388].  Compared  with  LIBS  or  FTIR  spectroscopy,  the 
calibration model coupled with LIBS and FTIR significantly improved 
the  ability  to  measure  the  volatile  content  and  calorific  value  of  un-
known coal samples. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Research Center used 
LIBS for the online measurement of UC in fly ash for the first time [474, 
475]. Several other studies employed LIBS to measure fly ash and solve 
problems related to in situ field applications [476–480]. Yao et al. built a 
homemade gas–solid flow generation system to simulate the gas–solid 
two-phase flow state of fly ash in the duct of a coal-fired power plant, 
showing that LIBS can be a promising tool for direct fly ash measure-
ments in a gas–solid flow [481]. 

5.4. Natural gas leak detection 

Natural  gas  is  a  mixture  of  different  hydrocarbon  gases,  among 
which methane is the primary constituent. Natural gas is widely used as 

an  energy  source  for  electricity  generation,  heating,  and  cooking.  It 
produces less CO2 per unit energy output than coal, diesel, and gasoline. 
Recent  improvements  in  gas  extraction  technologies,  which  provide 
access to hitherto untapped shale gas reserves, have further boosted the 
global production and usage of natural gas [485]. However, methane is a 
potent  greenhouse  gas  with  a  global  warming  potential  ~30  times 
greater than CO2 over a 100-year horizon. Therefore, the increase in the 
global  infrastructure  related  to  natural  gas  must  be  accompanied  by 
advancements  in  natural  gas leak  detection and  elimination  from gas 
fields, refineries, pipelines, and other facilities. 

With  the  rapid  growth  of  intermittent  renewables  in  the  power 
sector, natural gas–fueled power plants are expected to replace coal for 
supplementing renewables and ensuring clean and reliable power gen-
eration. However, methane emissions from natural gas industries were 
estimated to account for ~22% of the total methane emission in the US 
in 2019 [486]. Thus, low-cost and robust leak detection sensors have 
become crucial for decreasing the environmental impact associated with 
natural gas usage. Moreover, methane is dangerously explosive at con-
centrations >5% in air, making gas leakage in a closed environment a 
serious explosion risk. Therefore, methane detection is crucial from an 
environmental perspective as well as from a safety viewpoint. 

Several active and passive detection techniques have been used for 
monitoring  methane  leakage;  however,  in  this  review,  we  primarily 
focus on laser-based active detection techniques (summary of selected 
examples are presented in Table 5.4). Although several types of laser 
sensing methodologies have been used for trace methane detection, we 
primarily discuss sensors based on LAS because it is the main technique 
used in most commercial mobile methane sensors [487]. Laser absorp-
tion sensors were first used for methane detection in 1965, when Moore 
et  al.  recorded  the  methane  absorption  line  near  the  3392-nm  band 
[488]. In 1985, Reid et al. achieved a 1 ppb detection limit for methane 
using a cooled lead–salt laser source emitting in the MIR region near 
7400 nm [489]. Advances in laser technology in the mid-90s enabled the 
development of compact, long-range sensors that can remotely detect 
methane leakage from pipelines. Compact and tunable diode laser ab-
sorption systems are employed for remote detection and can be mounted 
on vehicles/aircraft or active sites for remote methane leak detection. 
Diode  lasers  coupled  with  WMS  technique  have  also  been  used  for 
developing handheld methane sensors for leak detection in a range of 
several  meters  [490–492].  Compared  with  the  conventional  method 
involving flame ionization detectors for leak detection, handheld sen-
sors  can  detect  leakage  at  difficult-to-access  locations,  in  addition  to 

Fig. 23. (a) Photo of a caloric power plant. Red arrow indicates the position of the measurement platform. (b) Experimental setup at the platform during in-line 
measurement (total optical path: 2 m × 5.5 m), and (c) main components of the optical setup. (B) Results of NO and NO2  concentrations based on in-line mea-
surements and reference analytics at the Dürnrohr power plant, revealing a systematic error of 3%–5% [463]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099731A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

avoiding operator presence at potentially explosive locations. 

Current  measures  for  methane  leak  detection  include  portable 
handheld detectors, fixed sensors on sites, aerial monitoring using sen-
sors  in  aircrafts/helicopters,  and  satellite-based  measurements.  How-
ever,  owing  to  the  different  types,  intermittency  [493–495],  and 
spatially variable nature of gas leaks, rapidly identifying and pinpoint-
ing  the  source  of  leakage  using  fixed  on-site  sensors  or  infrequent 
measurements by aerial monitoring or satellites are challenging. High 
wind speeds can shift methane emissions to well above the ground level, 
thus  making  it  challenging  to  detect  leakage  using  ground-based  sta-
tionary  devices  or  vehicle-mounted  sensors.  Airborne  sensors  on  air-
crafts/helicopters cannot fly close to the location of leakage owing to 
restrictions  on  low-altitude  flying.  Furthermore,  their  usage  for  leak 
detection strongly depends on the terrain of the measurement location 
[496]. Satellite-based measurements are expensive and lack the spatial 
resolution to pinpoint leak sources, while labor-intensive handheld de-
vices limit their applications. 

Recently, compact and lightweight (< 5 kg) sensors based on rapidly 
advancing  unmanned  aerial  systems  (UASs)  have  been  employed  for 
high-spatial-resolution measurements in a limited range for addressing 
the gaps in airborne measurement techniques [497–500]. Nathan et al. 
used an NIR laser to develop a sensitive open-path sensor based on WMS 
and a Herriot cell, using which they detected mean methane emission 
rates  of 13  ± 8 g/s  emanating from a  natural gas  compressor station 
[497]. Although methane emissions were negligible compared with the 
throughput of the compressor station (0.02%), the emissions recorded 
using  the  UAS-based  sensor  showed  high  spatial  and  temporal  vari-
ability.  Based  on  a  similar  NIR  laser,  Martinez  et  al.  developed  an 
open-path  CRDS-based  sensor  to  achieve  sensitivity  in  the  range  of 
10–30  ppb  [500].  MIR  lasers  that  access  the  fundamental  absorption 
bands  of  methane  provide  an  alternate  route  for  developing 

high-sensitivity methane sensors [498,501]. Tuzson et al. used a novel 
circular multipass cell design coupled with a low-noise intermittent cw 
laser to develop a compact and lightweight (2.1  kg) spectrometer for 
methane  detection  [501].  This  MIR  laser  sensor  achieved  a  1  ppbv 
detection limit, which is an order of magnitude higher than other NIR 
and  MIR portable sensors. The  portable methane sensor was  used for 
performing  field  measurements  of  methane  concentrations  at  various 
altitudes to investigate the atmospheric boundary layer. The measure-
ment  results  compared  well  with  data  obtained  using  a  CRDS-based 
sensor installed at a monitoring station (Fig. 25). 

Considerable  advances  in  the  development  of  frequency  comb 
sources  have  enabled  the  fabrication  of  spectrometers  with  a  high 
spectral resolution and a broad spectral coverage, enabling precise and 
calibration-free  measurements  of  target  gases  such  as  methane 
[502–505].  Recently,  Alden  et  al  [503,505].  and  Coburn  et  al  [504]. 
showed  the  field  deployment  of  dual-comb  spectrometers  for  tiny 
methane  leak  monitoring  in  large  areas  (≥ 1  km2).  The  dual-comb 
sensors could detect leakage rates as small as 0.96 g/min [505]. These 
sensors enable the continuous detection, location, and quantification of 
both small and large leaks using a single instrument, thereby filling a key 
gap in conventional leak detection technologies (refer to the schematic 
of a dual-comb sensor in Fig. 26). 

Other laser spectroscopic techniques,  such as PAS, have also been 
used for trace methane detection. Grossel et al. used QCLs to develop a 
photoacoustic  sensor  for  ambient  air  monitoring,  achieving  a  3  ppb 
detection limit for methane with a 1 s integration time [507]. Jahjah 
et  al.  developed  a  quartz-enhanced  photoacoustic  gas  sensor  for 
methane and nitrous oxide detection using a cw DFB QCL at 7.83 μm 
[508]. The sensor was installed in a mobile laboratory for atmospheric 
measurements in the northeastern part of the greater Houston area in 
DISCOVER-AQ,  a  NASA  Earth  Venture  project.  To  obtain  low-cost 

Fig. 24. (a) Photo of a rapid coal analyzer. (b) Schematic of the rapid coal analyzer. (c) Section view of the measurement system [471].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099732A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

methane  sensors, noncoherent light sources, such  as thermal emitters 
[509]  and  light-emitting  diodes  (LEDs)  [510],  have  been  used  for 
methane detection sensor development. However, the minimum detec-
tion limit achieved using these sensors is of the order of a few ppmv for 
CH4,  thus  necessitating  further  improvement  by  increasing  the  laser 
power or effective absorption path length. 

Various leak detection technologies may need to be integrated in the 
future, for example, by employing a combination of portable handheld 
detectors,  UAS-mounted  sensors,  dual  frequency  comb  spectrometers, 
and satellite imaging [511]. Further improvements in drone-based leak 
detection  sensors  are  needed  in  terms  of  enhanced  emission  quantifi-
cation  algorithms  and  reduced  false  positives  to  complement  leak 
monitoring using portable handheld optical sensors [487]. The launch of 
ARPA-E’s Methane Observation Networks with Innovative Technology 
to Obtain Reductions program in 2016 has lead to the development of 
low-cost approaches for reduced methane emissions with a specific focus 
on oil and gas systems [512]. 

5.5. Petrochemical industry 

The petrochemical industry was among the early adopters of laser 
sensors  for  applications,  such  as  the  quality  control  of  feed  stocks, 
monitoring  of  toxic  or  flammable  gases,  and  tracking  of  species  in 
various vital processes [27]. Numerous industrial processes in this in-
dustry require real-time continuous species data for process control and 
optimization [515]. Monitoring the exact composition of key species in 
the  process  stream  is  crucial  and  significantly  impacts  the  process 
optimization,  product  quality,  yield,  and,  consequently,  profitability. 
Traditionally, petrochemical industries have relied on conventional gas 

analytical  systems,  such  as  GC,  FTIR  spectroscopy,  capacitance/elec-
trochemical sensors, solid-state sensors, and other analyzers. However, 
such traditional gas analysis systems suffer from numerous drawbacks, 
including  slow  response  times  (~10  min),  sensitivity  to  changing 
background  concentrations,  and  high  maintenance  and  consumable 
costs. In particular, GC/MS systems suffer from slow response times and 
high cost, while cheap and portable sensors, such as electrochemical and 
solid-state  sensors,  exhibit  poor  selectivity.  Real-time  response  is 
essential  for  implementing  process  control  strategies  and  is  currently 
hindered by the slow response time of the traditional gas analysis sys-
tems [516,517]. Therefore, laser-based sensors with high sensitivity and 
a fast response time that can continuously monitor the targeted species 
are ideal for implementing process optimization/automation in petro-
chemical applications. 

LAS has been applied for numerous processes in the petrochemical 
industry.  Industry-scale  processes  that  use  laser  absorption  sensors 
include  ethane  cracking,  catalytic  cracking,  synthetic  ammonia  pro-
duction,  urea  synthesis,  sulfur  recovery,  ethane  oxychlorination,  and 
methanol  production.  The  measured  gases  include  acetylene,  ethene, 
methane, water vapor, hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen chloride, hydrogen 
cyanide, ammonia, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and others, all of 
which, must be monitored at ppm or sub-ppm levels. Selected examples 
of  laser  sensors  and  their  contribution  in  various  processes  of  the 
petrochemical industry are summarized in Table 5.5. 

Ethene (C2H4) and propene (C3H6) are important feedstocks in the 
petrochemical  industry  and  are  used  in  the  manufacturing  of  poly-
ethylene, ethene/propene elastomers, and other petrochemicals. Ethene 
is produced by the hydrogenation of acetylene, the overconversion of 
which induces the generation of ethane, whereas its under-conversion 

Table 5.4 
Summary of selected laser sensors for trace methane detection.  

Reference 

Quantity 

Wavelength 

Laser type 

Key features 

Reid et al [489]. 

CH4 and CO2; lab demonstration 

Iseki et al [513]. 

CH4; lab demonstration, 
handheld unit 

7396–7407 
nm 
1650 nm 

Tunable diode laser 

DFB laser 

Van Well et al  

[490]. 

CH4; field measurement, 
handheld unit 

1650 nm 

DFB laser 

Gao et al [491]. 

CH4; lab demonstration, 
handheld unit 

1653 nm 

DFB laser 

Paige et al [492]. 

Nathan et al  

[497]. 

Zhu et al [502]. 

CH4; lab demonstration, 
handheld unit 
CH4; natural gas compressor 
station 
CH4; lab demonstration 

Alden et al  
[503]. 

CH4; field measurement 

1651 nm 

Diode laser 

1651 nm 

DFB laser 

3175–3448 
nm 
1620–1680 
nm 

Dual frequency comb 
spectrometer 
Dual frequency comb 
spectrometer 

Tombez et al  

CH4; lab demonstration 

1650 nm 

DFB laser 

[514]. 

Golston et al. 

[498] 

CH4 vertical profiles; field 
measurement 

3270 nm 

GaSb DFB 

Yang et al [499]. 

CH4; field measurement 

1650 nm 

Diode laser 

Coburn et al  

[504]. 
Alden et al  
[505]. 

Martinez et al  

[500]. 
Tuzson et al  
[501]. 

CH4 and H2O; field 
measurement 
CH4 and H2O; field 
measurement 
CH4; field measurement 

CH4; field measurement 

1620–1690 
nm 
1605–1675 
nm 
1651 nm 

7830–7837 
nm 

Dual frequency comb 
spectrometer 
Dual frequency comb 
spectrometer 
DFB laser 

DFB QCL 

*1-ppb CH4 detection limit 
*Multipass cell effective path length of 32 m 
*Second-harmonic FMS 
*Detection limit: 450 ppb averaged over 1 m 
*Remote detection up to 10 m from the target 
*Second-derivative WMS 
*Dedicated laser module with an internal reference cell 
*Detection limit: 10 ppm averaged over 1 m 
*Second-harmonic WMS 
*Detection limit: 50 ppm averaged over 1 m 
*Remote detection up to 20 m from the target 
*1.7-ppm pure gas levels*WMS with a multipass cell 
*Response time of 2 s 
*Open path sensor, UAS*Detection limit: 0.1 ppmv 
*Second-harmonic (2f) WMS 
*~580-m path length multipass cell 
*Detection limit: 60 ppbv 
*Detection limit: 6 ppb (<2g/m) in an area of 4 km2 and more 
*Location of point sources using the nonzero minimum bootstrap 
statistical method 
*On-chip absorption spectrometer 
*Detection limit: <100 ppmv 
*Open-path WMS, implemented on UAS 
*2.7-m path length Herriott cell 
*5-ppbv detection limit at a 1-s averaging time 
*Backscatter TDLAS, implemented on UAS 
*Detection limit of 5 ppm-m 
*Detection limit: 1.6 g/min 
*Detection distance: 1 km 
*Detection limit: 0.96 g/min 
*Detection distance: 1.1 km 
*Open-path cavity ring-down spectroscopic sensor for UAS 
*Detection limit: ~10–30 ppb (0.3 g/min leak rate) for a 1-s response time 
*Segmented circular multipass cell (10-m effective length) with low-noise 
intermittent cw (icw) laser 
*Detection limit: 1.1 ppbv at a 1-s averaging time and 0.1 ppb at a 100-s 
averaging time  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099733A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

retains acetylene impurities at high levels in the final product stream. 
Therefore, monitoring the acetylene concentration in ethene feedstocks 
is crucial for optimizing the hydrogenation process and maximizing the 
product yield. 

The acetylene concentration is measured at the exit of the acetylene 
converter  and  at  various  points  along  feed  pipelines,  where  ethylene 
obtained from multiple sources is mixed. Acetylene monitoring is used 
as a quality control tool, and its concentration must be maintained at <
1 ppm for some polymerization processes. Vogler et al. developed a laser 
absorption  sensor  based  on  CRDS  for  trace  acetylene  impurity  mea-
surements in an ethene stream [516]. A 160 ppbV detection limit was 
achieved for acetylene in an ethene background at the total pressure of 
20  mbar,  indicating  the  feasibility  of  CRDS  for  trace  acetylene  mea-
surements in the NIR region. Recently, Kluczynski et al. leveraged the 
strong  absorption  bands  of  acetylene  in  the  MIR  region  to  develop  a 
sensor with enhanced sensitivity based on the WMS-2f technique [517]. 
A detection limit of as low as 5 ppb at a time resolution of 100 s was 
realized for acetylene in polymer-grade ethene and ethane/ethene gas 
mixtures,  typically  found  in  the  stream  of  a  hydrogenation  reactor 
process (Fig. 27). 

Propene  is  an  essential  petrochemical  building  block  with  purity 
requirements similar to ethene when used as a feedstock for synthesizing 
polypropylene  and  common  chemicals,  such  as  acetone.  It  is  usually 
produced  as  a  byproduct  of  the  steam  cracking of  hydrocarbons.  The 
dehydrogenation of low-cost propane is another commonly used method 
for propene production [518]. Laser sensors with a 134 ppb detection 
limit  and  a  4-ms  response  time  have  been  developed  for  propene 
detection [100]. 

Another common application requiring the fast response time, good 
selectivity, and enhanced sensitivity of laser sensors is the detection of 
hazardous gases, such as hydrogen sulfide. Owing to stricter emission 
regulations,  the  use  of  hydrodesulfurization  processes  to  desulfurize 
crude oils has increased, thereby increasing the production of hydrogen 
sulfide.  Hydrogen  sulfide  is  an  extremely  toxic,  corrosive,  and  flam-
mable gas. It is an explosive and a health risk; therefore, its concentra-
tion must be kept in check for plant and human safety. Considering that 
1000 ppm of H2S is sufficient to cause the immediate collapse of a person 
within a minute, the real-time monitoring of H2S is crucial [519]. The 
high reactivity and absorptivity of H2S contribute to measurement errors 
and  should  be  considered  when  designing  a  sensor.  Recently,  Moser 
et al. demonstrated a sensitive and selective gas sensor based on WMS-2f 
along with a multipass Herriot cell for detecting sub-ppm levels of H2S in 
process gas streams [520] (Fig. 28). Because of the potential interference 
from  methane,  both  H2S  and  methane  were  detected  simultaneously. 
Moreover,  a  sensor  prototype  was  developed  and  employed  for  the 
simultaneous on-site measurements of H2S and CH4. 

Moisture content monitoring is essential in several industrial appli-
cations, including the petrochemical industry [521] and semiconductor 
manufacturing. It is particularly important in natural gas fields because 
a high moisture content can lead to the formation of methane hydrates, 
which  can  block  gas  pipelines  or  even  lead  to  corrosion.  Ebert  et  al. 
discussed the development of laser-based trace gas sensors for moisture 
detection,  presenting  collisional  broadening  coefficients  of  H2O  in 
field-relevant background gases to improve the measurement accuracy 
[522–525]. Trace moisture sensors are discussed further in Section 5.7 
because they are also important in semiconductor manufacturing. 

In  sum,  laser  sensing  for  petrochemical  processes  has  reached  a 
mature  stage  with  further  improvements  made  by  the  availability  of 
room-temperature widely tunable laser sources in the MIR region and an 
increased focus on portable and low-cost sensors. 

5.6. Steel furnace 

Steel  is  one of the  most widely  used materials  in the construction 
industry and is obtained from iron using an energy-intensive process. 
New sensing methods for monitoring and improving the steel production 

Fig.  25. Vertical  profile  measurements  performed  using  a  drone-based 
methane  sensor  (red)  compared  with  a  CRDS-based  methane  sensor  (gray) 
installed at a pollutant monitoring station [501]. 

process are desired for enhanced energy efficiency and reduced emis-
sions  from  the  steel  production  industry.  Gas  analytical  systems  are 
typically required for monitoring and controlling the energy-intensive 
steel  production  process.  Exhaust  gases  from  the  furnace  contain  key 
markers for process control and require precise real-time concentration 
measurements to optimize the production process. Laser sensors that can 
non-intrusively  measure  species  concentrations  with  high  selectivity 
and  a  fast  response  time  are  ideal  under  challenging  conditions, 
including  high  temperatures  and  corrosive  environments  with  high 
dust/particulate matter loading. In the last two decades, laser absorp-
tion  sensors  have  been  employed  in  various  proof-of-concept  field 
measurements for the detection of concentrations of key species, such as 
O2, CO, CO2, and H2O, and the temperature of exhaust gases to enable 
enhanced  process  and  quality  control,  thereby  improving  the  overall 
energy efficiency [530] Table 5.6. lists some selected studies in which 
laser-based  diagnostics  were  used  for  species  concentration  and/or 
temperature monitoring in steel furnaces. 

Steel production is performed in numerous steps, with the first step 
involving  the  conversion  of  molten  iron  into  high-quality  steel  by 
reducing  its  carbon  content  in  a  basic  oxygen  furnace  (BOF)  or  an 
electric arc furnace (EAF). The oxygen required to oxidize carbon in the 
molten  iron  to  CO  can  be  estimated  using  a  simple  material  balance 
calculation.  However,  variations  in  the  feedstock  composition  and 
oxidation  process  dynamics  induce  undesirable  changes  in  the  final 
carbon content of steel, thereby necessitating the real-time monitoring 
of  exhaust  gases  for  process  optimization  and  quality  control.  Moni-
toring  species  concentrations  in  the  exhaust  gases  of  the  BOF/EAF  is 
extremely challenging owing to high dust loading and high-temperature 
background gases that cause spectral interferences. 

Allendorf et al. were among the first research groups to use an MIR 
lead–salt diode laser for CO, CO2, and gas temperature measurements in 
particle-laden exhaust gases of a BOF [531]. They could measure the 
final melt temperature and carbon content with accuracies of ± 17 K and 
± 0.005%, respectively, at response times of 3–4 s. Owing to the strong 
attenuation of the absorption signal due to dust particles and IR emis-
sions from hot particles and gases, the WMS-2f technique was used for 
detecting small absorption signals. Although only the CO/CO2 ratio was 
monitored,  the  species  concentration  ratio  and  gas  temperature  pro-
vided insights into the oxidation process and demonstrated a sensor that 
showed  potential  as  a  tool  for  process  control.  Subsequently,  they 
designed  another  sensor  for  quantitative  CO  and  temperature  mea-
surements in exhaust gases of an EAF [532]. Von Drasek et al. [533–535] 
used  multiple fiber-coupled DFB lasers  for multispecies  concentration 
(O2, H2O, and CO) and gas temperature monitoring in exhaust gases of 
an oxy-fuel pilot furnace [533] and near the surface of steel billets in a 
reheating furnace [534] (Fig. 29). They used an AlGaAs diode laser in 
the 760 nm band to monitor O2 and a DFB laser near the 1500-nm band 
to scan multiple H2O absorption lines and a single CO line. A reference 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099734A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 26. Schematic of a dual-comb spectrometer used for performing open-path trace gas measurements; highly nonlinear fiber (HNLF), Ritchey–Chr´etien (RC), and 
hollow-corner cube retroreflector (HCC) [506]. 

signal was used for common-mode noise cancelation, and the laser beam 
was  scanned  over  the  entire  absorption  transition  to  ensure  that  the 
absorption  measurements  were  immune  to  pressure/temperature 
broadening effects. With averaging times of the order of 1 s, multispecies 
concentration (CO and O2) and gas temperature measurements provided 
a complete picture of the combustion process, in addition to keeping the 
oxygen concentration in check for quality control. 

Similar  to  laser  applications  in  the  petrochemical  industry,  the 
implementation of laser sensors in steel furnaces has reached a mature 
stage because of the availability of several commercial sensors. One such 
sensor manufactured by Zolo Technologies is based on the wavelength- 
multiplexed  WMS  technique  and  has  been  employed  for  multispecies 
concentration (CO, O2, and H2O) and gas temperature measurements in 
EAFs,  BOFs,  and  reheating  furnaces  [536].  The  fiber-coupled  laser 
emitter and receiver were placed close to each other in the exhaust gas 
flow  to  minimize  signal  attenuation  caused  by  Mie  scattering  in  the 
particle-laden exhaust. Decreasing the path length requires the insertion 
of optical probes into the hot exhaust gases [537]; this is performed to 
minimize  signal  attenuation  effects  while  achieving  the  sensitivity 
required to provide meaningful inputs for process control/optimization. 
Another application of laser-based techniques in the metal industry is 
the quality control of metal products, which requires the rapid detection 
of the elemental composition. Because most metal elements easily un-
dergo ionization, LIBS is suitable for metal analysis. Zeng et al. devel-
oped  a  portable  LIBS  sensor  for  quantitatively  analyzing  manganese 
(Mn),  vanadium  (V),  and  silicon  (Si)  contents  in  steel,  showing  low 
prediction errors [538]. Zhang et al. used an ML approach to build a 
multivariate  calibration  model  for  Mn,  Cr,  and  Ni  detection  [539], 
achieving improved performance compared with that of the univariate 
model.  Li  et  al  [373].  used  LIBS–LIF  to  measure  cobalt  in  low-alloy 
steels.  Sun  et  al.  employed  LIBS  for  the  small-invasive  determination 
of iron content in the coating of galvanized steel sheets and studied the 
ablation size of the crater under different laser fluences [540]. Xin et al. 
designed a standoff double-pulse LIBS analysis system to analyze Y, Pr, 
and Zr in Mg alloys during smelting [541]. Moreover, they applied LIBS 
to Al electrolysis and used the reciprocal of the molecular ratio as well as 
the normalized line intensity to build a PLS model for molecular anal-
ysis. Pacher et al. used LIBS to analyze a Ni–Co alloy coated on steel and 
converted  the  LIBS  data  into  stratigrams  using  the  linear  correlation 
coefficient method to determine layer boundaries for pure materials and 
alloy components [542]. Gudmundsson et al. used an LIBS analyzer to 
perform online analysis on 14 trace elements (Fe, Si, Cu, Ni, Ti, Cr, Mn, 
Sn,  V,  Ga,  Zn,  Sb,  Mg,  and  Na)  in  a  primary  Al  smelter  [543].  They 
concluded that the analysis accuracy and precision of important trace 
elements using LIBS were fully comparable to those of the offline labo-
ratory analysis of solid-process samples. Sturm et al. measured C content 
in steel using LIBS with components suitable for handheld instruments 
[544]; they achieved a detection limit of 34 µg/g for C. 

5.7. Semiconductor industry 

Semiconductor components have become an integral part of almost 
every day-to-day device. Semiconductor manufacturing involves several 
carefully  monitored  processes,  such  as  chemical  vapor  deposition 
(CVD), etching, and photolithography. Such processes require ultrahigh- 
purity process gases because the presence of even ppm-level impurities 
can  severely  affect  the  product  quality  and/or  yield  [550].  Typical 
process  gases  include  N2,  Ar,  and  He,  with  the  maximum  allowable 
contamination of impurities, such as moisture and oxygen, limited to 10 
ppb or less [26] Table 5.7. summarizes selected implementations of laser 
diagnostics for species concentration and temperature monitoring under 
conditions relevant to the semiconductor industry. 

CVD is used for thin film deposition and is extensively used in the 
semiconductor industry. The deposition of thin films on a substrate is 
performed  by  exposing  the  films  to  volatile  precursors,  forming  crys-
talline  films.  The  purity  of  process  gases  and  the  optimization  of  the 
deposition process are extremely crucial for the quality/yield of the final 
product and are achieved by monitoring one of the reaction products in 
real  time.  The  typical  advantages  of  LAS,  particularly  its  non-
intrusiveness,  fast  response  time,  and  immunity  to  corrosive  gases, 
render  it  a  suitable  candidate  for  process  monitoring/control  in  the 
various processes of semiconductor component manufacturing. 

Among  various  trace  contaminants,  moisture  is  the  most  common 
and  most  difficult  to  remove.  Accurate  moisture  contamination  mea-
surements help improve the yield owing to the improved regulation of 
the  purging  time and enhance  quality control  because the  fraction of 
defective  wafers  can  be  reduced  significantly.  The  presence  of  trace 
moisture in specialty process gases, such as NH3 and HBr, in addition to 
common process gases (N2, Ar, and He), can degrade the reactor per-
formance and gas delivery systems through corrosion. The use of high- 
purity  NH3  for  manufacturing  blue  LEDs  and  laser  diodes  has  moti-
vated  the  development  and  deployment  of  high-sensitivity  sensors, 
achieving a real-time response. Over the years, several research groups 
have developed laser absorption sensors for the sub-ppm-level detection 
of  moisture  in  high-purity  nitrogen  and  ammonia  gases  [550–553]. 
Recently, Pal et al. measured 4 ppm of H2O in He and air at a response 
time of < 2 ms [554]. They used a dual-cell detection strategy to ensure 
that the measurements were immune to water vapor absorption outside 
the sample gas cell, as well as for common-mode noise cancelation. 

In the photolithographic process used for microfabrication of semi-
conductor components, even 10 ppb of ammonia can decrease the wafer 
yield  and  induce  unscheduled  downtimes  of  lithographic  facilities. 
Ammonia is photoreactive and can be deposited on an optical surface of 
photolithographic systems, causing haze and unpredictable downtimes. 
Furthermore, trace levels of airborne ammonia can distort silicon wafer 
features. Therefore, to prevent ammonia contamination, a clean room is 
used for photolithographic processes and chemical filters are used in key 
areas.  Because  of  such  concerns,  the  continuous  and  autonomous 
monitoring of the ammonia concentration is essential to prevent costly 
damage  to  fabrication  systems  and  minimize  the  downtime  of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099735A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 5.5 
Summary of selected laser sensors for detecting key species in the petrochemical industry.  

Reference 

Quantity 

Laser and wavelength 

Key features 

Kosterev et al [526]. 

CO; lab demonstration 

DFB QCL, 4633 nm 

Wysocki et al [457]. 

NO; lab demonstration 

DFB QCL, 5263 nm 

Vogler et al [516]. 

C2H2; lab demonstration 

Kluczynski et al  

C2H2; lab demonstration 

[517]. 

External cavity diode laser (ECDL), 1530.9 
nm 
DFB laser, 3060 nm 

Kluczynski et al  

C3H8; lab demonstration 

DFB laser, 3370 nm 

[518]. 

Moser et al [519]. 

H2S and CH4; field measurements 

DFB-QCL, 8017.9 m 

Alquaity et al [100]. 

C2H4, C3H6, C4H8, and C3H4; lab 
demonstration 

EC-QCL, 10000–11100 nm 

Wang et al [527]. 

C3H8; lab demonstration 

VCSEL, 1682.7–1685.7 nm 

Moser et al [528]. 

Scheuermann et al  

[529]. 

H2S, CH3SH, and COS; lab 
demonstration 
C2H6, C3H8, C4H10, and i-C4H10; 
field measurements 

DFB QCL, 8019 nm (H2S), 7502 nm (CH3SH), 
and 4878 nm (COS) 
DFB ICL arrays, 3300–3500 nm 

*12 ppb, 150-s time resolution 
*Gas detection in ambient air/emission control 
* 400-ppb NO at 296 K and 900-ppb NO at 630 K 
*Industrial combustion exhaust systems 
*160 ppb in C2H2–C2H4 mixture at 20 mbar and 60-s time resolution 
*Cw-CRDS; polyethylene production process control 
*5 ppb-m in polymer grade ethene, 100-s time resolution 
*2f-WMS; process control in ethene manufacturing 
*30 ppb•m, 0.5-s response time 
*2f-WMS; process control in propene manufacturing 
*150 ppb in H2S–CH4 mixture, 15-s time resolution 
*2f-WMS; Herriott cell, hydrodesulfurization unit 
*17-ppb C2H4, 134-ppb C3H6, 754-ppb C4H8 (1-butene), 378-ppb 
C3H4 (allene), 4-ms time resolution 
*CRDS; emission control/leak detection 
*300 ppm detection limit 
*Herriott cell, leak detection 
*300-ppb H2S, 60-ppb CH3SH, 5-ppb COS, 10-s time resolution 
*2f-WMS; Herriott cell, production control/safety monitoring 
*Detection limit: 10 ppb-m for C1 to C3 species, 20 ppb-m for C4 
species at 3-s time resolution 
*Cell length: 2 mm  

lithographic  processes.  The  ammonia  concentration  in  clean  rooms  is 
typically monitored using a chemiluminescent technique with a sub-ppb 
detection limit; however, this technique suffers from interference from 
other nitrogen-containing compounds, such as amines and nitric oxide 
[555].  Ion  chromatography  is  another  commonly  used  technique  for 
ammonia  concentration  monitoring  in  clean  rooms.  However,  the 
ammonia concentration obtained using ion chromatography depends on 
the pH value of the background gas, thus rendering error-prone mea-
surements under conditions of varying pH values [556]. The limitations 
of  conventional  techniques  have  promoted  the  development  of 
numerous  highly  sensitive  and  selective  commercial  laser  sensors  for 
detecting  sub-ppb  levels  of  ammonia  [555,556].  Pushkarsky  et  al.  at 
Pranalytica Inc. used a CO2 laser to achieve a 1σ detection limit of 220 
ppt for ammonia using PAS [555]. They used an optically multiplexed 
configuration to simultaneously monitor the ammonia concentration in 
four optoacoustic cells. Crosson et al. at Picarro Inc. used the cw-CRDS 
technique  to  develop  a  field-deployable  laser  sensor  with  a  similar 
detection limit of 200 ppt for ammonia and a slightly faster response 
time of 120 s [556] compared with the response time of 200 s for the 
Pranalytica Inc. sensor. 

Laser  absorption  techniques  are  also  useful  for  quantifying  pre-
cursors or products of critical processes in the semiconductor industry, 
such as the etching process. Sensors for etching processes must fulfill 
specific criteria, such as the ability to perform real-time measurements, 
nonintrusiveness,  and  compliance  with  cleanroom  operation  re-
quirements. Laser-based sensors show all the desired characteristics and 
have been employed for the in situ process monitoring of the industry- 
scale  production  of  dynamic  random  access  memory  [557,558]. 
Stancu  et  al.  used  a  QCL  near  9727  nm  to  measure  absorption  cross 
sections of  etching products, SiF4  and  NF3, to  quantify spectral inter-
ference from NF3 [557] (Fig. 30). The first demonstration of online and 
in  situ  concentration  measurements  of  SiF4  and  NF3  by  Stancu  et  al 
[557]. was followed by the work of Lang et al [558]., in which the sensor 
was  synchronized  with  the  etching  process  to  facilitate  automated 
measurements. The laser sensor was used for the real-time measurement 
of SiF4  concentration–time profiles during the processing of 25 silicon 
wafers  to  evaluate  the  robustness  and  reproducibility  of  the  etching 
process. The etching cycles for which SiF4  concentrations varied from 
the expected values correlated well with defects in silicon wafer fabri-
cation.  The  synchronized  and  automated  measurements  reported  by 

Lang et al. showed the potential of laser absorption sensors for use in 
process control in the semiconductor industry and other plasma appli-
cations [558]. 

In sum, the utility of laser sensors has been demonstrated for various 
applications in the semiconductor industry. Sensors have been employed 
for trace contaminant monitoring in clean rooms and for process control 
by recording time histories of reaction products in plasma etching re-
actors.  Laser  sensors  in  semiconductor  applications  have  reached  a 

Fig. 27. Top: experimental setup for a sensitive acetylene sensor based on the 
WMS-2f technique. Bottom: 2f-WMS signal of acetylene in an ethylene/ethane 
mixture [517]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099736A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 28. Left: industry rack for an H2S sensor and associated components. Right: schematic of a sensor used for H2S measurements [520].  

mature stage because of the availability of several commercial sensors 
for tracking contaminants such as ammonia and moisture. 

5.8. Corrosion detection and prevention 

Corrosion refers to the undesired conversion of a metal into its more 
chemically stable form via a chemical/electrochemical reaction with its 
surroundings. Corrosion can seriously undermine the structural integrity 
of  critical  infrastructure,  such  as  oil  and  gas  pipelines  and  steel- 
reinforcing  bars.  Moreover,  it  can  damage  expensive  hardware,  such 
as  turbine  blades.  Timely  corrosion  detection  ability  is  essential  to 
ensure corrective and/or preventive measures. Furthermore, identifying 
and understanding corrosion are important for eliminating/minimizing 
corrosion. 

Coal and high-alkali biofuels contain small amounts of alkali atoms, 
such as sodium and potassium, inducing high-temperature corrosion in 
combustion chambers [560]. The continued interest in coal combustion 
and the increasing contribution of biofuels toward energy needs neces-
sitate the careful monitoring of fuel feedstocks because the presence of 
even small traces of alkali atoms (< 25 ppb) in flue gases can cause the 
hot corrosion of  expensive turbine blades, damaging them.  Typically, 
hot  gas  filters  are  used  to  maintain  alkali  concentrations  below  the 
turbine manufacturer specified limit of 6.5 ppb in the flue gas. However, 
sensitive  gas  sensors  with  a  fast  response  time  may  be  employed  to 
analyze the performance of gas filters in real time and avoid damage to 
turbine blades during the malfunctioning of filters. Compared with the 
conventional  extraction  methods,  laser  absorption  sensors  provide  a 
promising  option  for  alkali  atom  detection  [561].  Schlosser  et  al. 
developed a direct LAS sensor to monitor trace levels of potassium in 
high-temperature flue gases of two coal-fired power plants [561]. Two 
VCSELs were time-multiplexed to simultaneously probe two transitions 
of  potassium  near  the  769.9-  and  767.5-  nm  bands,  achieving  a  time 
resolution  of  1.7  s  and  a  detection  limit  of  < 100  ppt.  VCSELs  were 
(cid:0) 1  to scan the 
selected to achieve tuning ranges of the order of 20 cm
broadened absorption lines of potassium. Potassium concentrations of 
~1 ppb were detected in flue gases in both the coal-fired power plants, 
with  the  maximum  concentration  reaching  15  ppb  depending  on  the 

type  of  fuel  used.  Measurements  were  performed  continuously  over 
several days, demonstrating the use of laser sensors in the detection of 
highly reactive atoms, such potassium, which are difficult to measure 
accurately using extraction techniques. 

The effect of corrosion on the structural integrity of pipelines and 
steel bars is a serious concern, necessitating the development of several 
sensors for its early detection. Corrosion sensors can be broadly cate-
gorized into direct and indirect corrosion sensors; indirect sensors are 
used to monitor corrosion causes or consequences. Each type of sensing 
method  offers  advantages  and  challenges,  with  the  weight-loss  mea-
surement technique being the common standard to monitor corrosion 
rates in the industry. Among optical techniques, sensors based on fiber 
Bragg gratings and IR thermographic techniques are the most commonly 
used methods for external corrosion detection on pipelines for structural 
health  monitoring.  The  interest  in  drone-based  corrosion  sensors  for 
monitoring critical infrastructure in remote or difficult-to-access loca-
tions, such as off-shore oil and gas platforms and transport bridges, is 
growing.  Multispectral  imaging  and  IR  thermography  have  shown 
considerable  potential  for  drone-based  sensors  owing  to  their  high 
sensitivity  and  specificity  to  corrosion  signs/products,  large  fields  of 
view,  and  reasonable  cost.  Other  techniques  for  corrosion  detection 
include Raman spectroscopy and FTIR spectroscopy, which enable the 
characterization of corrosion products. However, these techniques have 
primarily been employed in laboratory environments [562]. 

6. Conclusions and future outlook 

The field of laser spectroscopy has evolved tremendously over the 
last few decades because of the emergence of new laser sources, new 
sensing  strategies,  advancements  in  optical  engineering,  and  applica-
tions in practical systems. These developments have been accompanied 
by  the  ever-increasing  requirement  for  measurements,  quantification, 
and sensing in the modern world. Laser-based sensors have numerous 
advantages over other sensing solutions, rendering them highly desir-
able in various applications. Some key features of laser sensors include 
high sensitivity, high selectivity, fast response time, high spatial reso-
lution, nonintrusiveness, calibration-free characteristics, compact size, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099737A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 5.6 
Summary of notable implementations of laser diagnostics in the steel industry.  

Reference 

Quantity 

Laser and wavelength 

Key features 

Allendorf et al  

[531]. 

Nikkari et al  

[545]. 

CO, CO2, and gas temperature; 
field measurements 
CO, H2O, and gas temperature; lab 
demonstration 

Lead–salt diode laser, 4545–5263 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser, 1577.96 nm (CO), 1577.8 
and 1578.1 nm (temperature and H2O) 

Von Drasek et al  

[533]. 

O2, CO, H2O, and gas temperature; 
field measurements 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser near 760 nm (O2), near 
1500 nm (H2O, CO, and temperature) 

Sandstr¨om et al  

[546]. 

O2 and gas temperature; field 
measurements 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser, 760 nm (O2 and 
temperature) 

Allendorf et al  

[532]. 

Von Drasek et al  

[534]. 

CO and gas temperature; field 
demonstration 
O2, CO, H2O, and gas temperature; 
field measurements 

Lead–salt diode laser, near 4830 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser, near 760 nm (O2) and near 
1500 nm (H2O, CO, and temperature) 

Wu et al [547]. 

CO, H2O, and gas temperature; lab 
demonstration 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser, 1559.6 nm (CO) and 1559.5 
and 1559.7 nm (temperature and H2O) 

Von Drasek et al  

[535]. 

CO, H2O, and gas temperature; 
field measurements 

Fiber coupled DFB laser near 1500 nm (H2O, CO & 
temperature) 

Sandl¨obes et al  

[548]. 

Yoo et al [549]. 

T, CO, and CO2; field 
measurements 
T and O2; lab demonstration 

FTIR spectrometer, near 2692 nm and 4255 nm for 
CO2, near 4762 nm for CO 
DFB laser near 760 nm 

◦

C, temperature measurement 

*Ratio of CO/CO2 monitored, 3–4 s response time 
*2f-WMS; off-gases from a BOF 
*1σ: 0.47% CO, 36-K temperature, 3.4% H2O; response time <1 s 
*Two-tone frequency modulation, Herriot cell; exhaust gas region 
above flat-flame methane/propane lab flames 
*Laser scanned across selected absorption transition; reference 
signal used for noise cancelation 
*Exhaust gases from an oxy-fuel pilot furnace 
*Detection limit: 1% O2, ±25 
limited to >3% O2, <2-s response time 
*2f-WMS; exhaust gas of a steel reheating furnace 
*CO measurement: 5–35%, T: 1400–1900 K 
*2f-WMS; off-gases from an EAF 
*Laser scanned across selected absorption transitions, reference 
signal used for noise cancelation, ~1-s averaging time 
*Combustion atmosphere near the surface of steel billets in a 
reheating furnace 
*1σ: 0.8% CO, 30-K temperature, 3% H2O; response time <1 s 
*Two-tone frequency modulation, Herriot cell; exhaust gas region 
above flat-flame methane/propane lab flame 
*Variable laser power delivery (2–248 mW) with constant 
reference power 
*Exhaust gases from an oxy-fuel pilot furnace 
*Time resolution of ~1 s for CO, CO2, and temperature 
*Real-time measurements of off-gases from an industrial BOF 
*O2 concentration range of 2.7–6.5% measured in a temperature 
range of 319–803 K 
*Temperature binning used to estimate actual temperature 
distribution using line-of-sight measurements  

portability,  and  low  cost.  These  characteristics  vary  to  some  extent 
among the various laser sensing strategies. In this review, we discussed 
five laser sensing techniques: LAS, PAS, CARS, LIF, and LIBS. With the 
objective  of  highlighting  the  applications  of  laser  sensors  to  energy 
systems and process industries, we primarily focused on LAS because its 
simple architecture and easy implementation render it more amenable 
for  implementation  in  harsh  environments  and  practical  systems 
compared  with  the  other  aforementioned  techniques.  Thus,  we 
attempted  to  compare  LAS  with  other  sensing  techniques  to  give  the 
readers a fair view of the differences among these options and enable 
them to make the best choice for their specific application . 

6.1. Key takeaways 

Some key takeaways and conclusions of this review are listed below. 

Ø LAS is perhaps the simplest and most versatile laser sensing strate-
gies.  It  has  been  used  to  measure  the  species  concentration,  gas 
temperature, pressure, velocity, flux, and other flow parameters. The 
availability of tunable diode lasers, ICLs, and QCLs has enabled the 
development of laser absorption sensors in a wide wavelength range 
in  the  IR  spectral  region  (0.8–15.0  µm).  In  addition  to  fixed- 
wavelength  and  scanned-wavelength  absorption,  these  lasers  can 
be  operated  in  the  pulsed  mode  to  perform  rapid-tuning  chirped- 
pulse absorption.  

Ø  Several advancements have been made in LAS in the last decade to 
enhance  sensing  performance  and  overcome  measurement  chal-
lenges. Widely tunable laser sources, such as supercontinuum lasers, 
external  cavity  sources,  and  frequency  combs,  have  become 
increasingly popular for multispecies/parameter measurements and 
absorption  monitoring  in  nonuniform  conditions.  In  this  context, 
significant progress has also been made in LAT, such as the use of 
new laser sources and implementation of ML algorithms, to improve 
the spatial resolution of LAS. Numerous theoretical and experimental 
studies  on  WMS  have  simplified  its  usage  and  have  further 

Fig. 29. Top: schematic of a multigas sensor (MGS) used for multispecies (CO, 
H2O, and O2) concentration measurements in an industrial reheating furnace. 
Bottom: real-time measurements of the oxygen concentration and gas temper-
ature in the heat zone of a furnace using the MGS [534]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099738A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 5.7 
Summary of notable implementations of laser diagnostics in the semiconductor industry.  

Reference 

Quantity 

Laser 

Key features 

Wu et al [551]. 

Kessler et al  
[552]. 

H2O in pure N2 and NH3 gases; lab 
demonstration 
H2O in pure N2 and NH3 gases; lab 
demonstration 

DFB laser, 1370.93–1371.99 
nm 
Fiber-coupled DFB laser, 
1392–1393 nm 

Chou et al [559]. 

HBr and rotational temperature; 
field measurement 

DFB lasers near 1950 and 
2000 nm 

Pushkarsky et al  

NH3 in N2 gas; lab demonstration 

CO2 laser, near 9220 nm 

[555]. 

Dudek et al  
[553]. 

Crosson et al  

[556]. 
Stancu et al  
[557]. 

H2O in N2 gas temperature; lab 
demonstration 
NH3 in N2 gas; lab demonstration 

SiF4 and NF3; field measurements 

Lang et al [558]. 

SiF4; field measurements 

Hashiguchi et al  

[550]. 

Pal et al [554]. 

H2O in pure N2 gas; lab 
demonstration 
H2O in pure He and air; lab 
demonstration 

DFB laser, 1396.1–1398.4 nm 

DFB laser, near 1527 nm 

Fiber-coupled pulsed QCL, 
near 9727 nm 

Fiber-coupled pulsed QCL, 
near 9727 nm 

Fiber-coupled DFB laser, near 
1393 nm 
DFB laser, 1877–1877.4 nm 

(cid:0) 7/Hz1/2, response time: 1 s 

*H2O detection limit: 4 ppb in N2 and 12 ppb in NH3 
*Dual-cell detection, 92 cm single-pass absorption at 66.7 mbar pressure 
*H2O detection limit: 13 ppb in N2 and 21 ppb in semiconductor grade NH3; response 
time: 1 s 
*Dual-beam absorption, multipass Herriott cell, <55 Torr pressure 
*Detection limit: 3 × 10
*Time-division-multiplexed 2f-WMS; monitoring HBr concentration in an industrial 
wafer etching reactor 
*Detection limit: 220 ppt, response time: 200 s 
*PAS; optically multiplexed configuration for simultaneous measurement in four gas 
cells 
*Detection limit: 2 ppt in N2, response time <120 s 
*Cw-CRDS; stainless steel cell containing trace H2O diluted in N2 
*Detection limit: <200 ppt in NH3, response time: 120 s 
*cw-CRDS; trace NH3 mixtures in a gas cell and NH3 filter saturation measurements 
*SiF4 detection limit: 300–3000 ppm, 0.066–0.66 mbar, response time: 1 s 
*Two-pass path length of 108 cm, common-mode noise cancelation; SiF4 concentration 
monitoring in an industrial plasma etching reactor 
*SiF4 detection limit: 300–3000 ppm, 0.066–0.66, response time: 1 s 
*Two-pass path length of 108 cm, common-mode noise cancelation; SiF4 concentration 
monitoring in a Si etching process for feedback control 
*Detection limit: 0.012 ppb 
*Frequency-stabilized CRDS/wavelength–controlled CRDS 
*Detection limit: 4 ppm, 100 mbar, response time: 1.63 ms 
*Dual-beam 2f-WMS, common-mode noise cancelation, 50 cm path length  

demonstrated  its  advantages  under  extremely  harsh  conditions.  In 
some  cases,  the  issue  of  absorption  interference  has  recently  been 
addressed by the implementation of FRS for the sensitive detection of 
paramagnetic species.  

Ø  Sensors based on CEAS and CRDS have become quite widespread for 
trace  species  measurements,  thereby  achieving  very  low  detection 
limits. These sensors have been used in research studies as well as 
field applications. 

Ø Frequency comb sources have matured further and are used in ap-
plications  beyond  precision  laboratory  spectroscopic  studies  for 
environmental  monitoring  and  chemical  kinetic  investigations. 
Owing  to  its  wide  wavelength  coverage,  high  spectral  resolution, 
absolute  frequency  axis,  and  high  SNR,  DCS  is  highly  suitable  for 
numerous sensing solutions.  

Ø  Sensors  based  on  other  laser  techniques  may  be  implemented  for 
specific  applications  to  overcome  the  limitations  of  LAS  and/or 
complement LAS measurements. In this context, four other potential 
techniques were discussed and compared in this review.  

Ø  PAS provides a versatile method for ultrasensitive trace gas detection 
by  exploiting laser absorption–induced acoustic signals.  This tech-
nique  has  recently  been  demonstrated  for  combustion  exhaust 
monitoring,  process  control,  and  environmental  sensing.  Advance-
ments in semiconductor lasers have made this technique suitable for 
field applications, enabling more portable and compact sensor con-
figurations.  The  detection  sensitivity  of  PAS  may  be  enhanced  by 
merging it with external optical cavities because the photoacoustic 
signal is directly proportional to the optical power.  

Ø  LIF is widely used for 2D/3D/4D combustion diagnostics because of 
its robustness and high spatial resolution. With the commercializa-
tion of state-of-the-art pulse-burst lasers, ultrafast LIF measurements 
of many species are becoming feasible, with repetition rates ranging 
from kHz to MHz. However, this diagnostic capability may be limited 
to centralized research facilities owing to the high system cost and 
maintenance requirements associated with LIF.  

Ø  Unlike linear spectroscopy (LAS, PAS, and LIF) that involve single- 
photon  excitation,  CARS  is  a  nonlinear  spectroscopic  technique 
used  for  temperature  and  species  concentration  measurements  in 
reacting  flows.  CARS  provides  pointwise  measurements  with  high 

spectral  selectivity  and  laser-like  directional  signals.  Recent  ad-
vancements in fs laser technologies have extended the application of 
CARS  to  single-shot  diagnostics  under  high-pressure  conditions. 
Notably, CARS measurements generally require high energy lasers, 
complex optical setups, and elaborate data processing. 

Ø As  a  complement  to  the  previously  discussed  spectroscopic  tech-
niques,  LIBS  is  a  powerful  tool  for  pointwise,  fast,  and  nearly 
nondestructive elemental analysis. It requires a simple experimental 
setup and can be adapted to gas, liquid, and solid samples. We expect 
increased applications of this technique based on additional quan-
titative measurements.  

Ø  Laser-based  sensors  have  been  applied  employed  in  various  field 
applications, including energy systems and process industries. These 
sensors have enabled the measurements of critical species and pro-
cess parameters under harsh conditions, facilitated us to gain further 
insights  on  the  underlying  physical  and  chemical  processes,  and 
allowed  process  optimization  for  increased  efficiency  and  reduced 
emissions.  

Ø  Laser diagnostics have matured in several applications and are used 
for improved fuel injection timing in combustion engines, optimized 
operation of  power plants,  enhanced natural gas  leak detection in 
vast areas, improved quality and yield in petrochemical industries, 
improved  feedback  and  process  control  in  the  semiconductor  in-
dustry, and enhanced trace contaminant and pollution monitoring in 
various industries and environments. 

Ø In addition to field applications, laser diagnostics employed in lab-
oratory applications have played a crucial role in isolating complex 
multiphysical processes, deepening our understanding of individual 
components, developing computational tools, and designing robust 
systems. 

6.2. Needs, challenges, and opportunities 

Although the field of laser-based sensing has advanced significantly 
in  recent  years,  numerous  challenges  and  opportunities  persist  in  the 
research,  development,  and  implementation  of  such  sensors.  Some 
future directions are presented below. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099739A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 30. Experimental setup for monitoring SiF4  concentrations in an industrial plasma etching reactor [557].  

• The cost of laser-based sensors remains relatively high compared to 
other  sensing  technologies.  Although  laser-based  sensors  offer 
unique  advantages,  they  must  be  economical  for  their  further 
widespread usage. The high costs associated with these sensors are 
driven primarily by expensive hardware, particularly for lasers and 
photodetectors. A significant price reduction has been observed in 
NIR  hardware,  and  the  same  can  be  expected  to  occur  for  MIR 
hardware in the next few decades. Economically viable sensor de-
signs that leverage scale economies to drastically reduce costs may 
eventually become ubiquitous in various future sensing applications. 
In  production  engines,  gas  turbine  combustors,  and  power  plants, 
these sensors could be used to perform complete exhaust gas moni-
toring (CO, unburnt hydrocarbons, NOx, and PM) and to be a part of a 
feedback  loop  for  optimizing  combustor  operations  and  exhaust 
aftertreatments. 

• The portability of laser-based sensors also requires further optimi-
zation.  The  footprint  and  weight  of  these  sensors  are  usually  not 
small. The development of smaller and more portable sensors would 
require efforts in several cross-cutting areas, such as high-efficiency 
lasers,  low-power  photodetectors,  miniature  optical  components, 
and lightweight materials. Some progress has been made to develop 
on-chip laser-based sensors; however, their performance has not yet 
reached the desired levels. The development of more portable laser 
sensors will also increase the deployment of drones for emission/leak 
quantification,  particularly  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry,  thereby 
enabling the cost-effective monitoring of vast areas and difficult-to- 
access locations.  

• Sensor  fusion  and  integration  are  also  important  future  drivers. 
Several  different  sensors  must  be  integrated  with  each  other  to 
provide the needed data for effective feedback control and process 
optimization. In this context, research must be performed to combine 
the pros and cons of LAS sensors with conventional pressure, tem-
perature, concentration, and velocity sensors, as well as with sensors 
based on other laser-based techniques, such as PAS, LIF, CARS, and 
LIBS.  

• To exploit of the rapid growth of ML/artificial intelligent methods, 
addition  information  must  be  extracted  from  data  obtained  using 
laser-based sensors. Small signal perturbations previously ignored as 
noise may now be modeled to achieve further insights into processes. 
Spectral data analysis can also be expedited using ML. Readers may 
pay  attention  to  recent  advancements  in  computational  imaging 

systems,  which  can  overcome  hardware  limitations  by  relying  on 
numerical processing power [563].  

• Although  spectral  databases  have  matured  for  room-temperature 
applications, significant research efforts are needed to improve and 
achieve fundamental spectral information at high temperatures and 
the MIR region. In particular, our knowledge of the high-temperature 
spectra  of  large  molecules  is  quite  limited,  which  is  essential  for 
species concentration monitoring in high-temperature applications, 
including  IC  engines,  power  plants,  and  gas  turbines.  Overcoming 
this challenge would require simultaneous efforts in terms of large- 
molecule spectral theory and novel experimental methods.  

• We significantly focused on the MIR spectral region because of large 
absorption strengths and small spectral interferences. This trend will 
continue further in the future as MIR hardware matures further and 
becomes  more  affordable.  The  advancement  of  MIR  sensors  is 
particularly  relevant  for  combustion  applications,  including  those 
with respect to engines, power plants, and gas turbines, because the 
plethora  of  intermediates  and  products  offers  distinct  absorption 
features in the MIR region. High sensitivity and selectivity offered by 
MIR  laser  sensors  are  also  paramount  in  detecting  trace  contami-
nants  in  petrochemical  and  semiconductor  industries  for  process 
optimization and control. 

• The development  of  modern energy systems  will  benefit  consider-
ably from innovations achieved in research laboratories, where laser- 
based diagnostics facilitate insights into the underlying physical and 
chemical  processes.  Advancements  in  laser  diagnostics  will  accel-
erate the investigation and deployment of new energy-efficient sys-
tems. In particular, the diagnostic development for high pressures, 
high speed, multiparameter detection and enhanced spatial resolu-
tion must receive attention.  

• Spectroscopists  and sensor developers  have always  benefited from 
innovations in the field of laser science, and the coming years will be 
no different. We expect to see new sources with the desirable features 
of  extremely  wide  spectral  tunability,  enhanced  tuning  speeds, 
increased  spectral  acquisition  rates,  improved  spectral  resolution, 
decreased  power  consumption,  reduced  footprints,  and  reduced 
costs. Frequency combs and dual-comb spectrometers are destined to 
be further deployed in fields, particularly in cases where multispe-
cies/multiparameter  measurements  are  crucial.  Miniature  on-chip 
laser  systems  will  also  become  more  widely  available  and  attract 
considerable attention for portable laser sensors. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099740A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

• We  observed  that  most,  if  not  all,  breakthroughs  in  modern  spec-
troscopic  techniques  are  accompanied  by  advancements  in  laser 
sources,  such  as  the  invention  of  MIR  QCLs  and  ICLs,  optical  fre-
quency combs, and high-energy burst-mode lasers. Although these 
lasers cover almost the entire spectral range (from UV to IR regions), 
scientists are pushing to even shorter (i.e., X-ray spectroscopy) and 
longer wavelengths (i.e., THz spectroscopy) to extend our diagnostic 
capabilities.  Recent  breakthroughs  in  THz  laser  sources  based  on 
QCLs [564] and difference frequency generation technologies [565] 
may open up a new window for exploring the pure-rotational spectra 
of many new species.  

• Laser-based  sensors  have  been  widely  used  in  various  industries. 
However, a considerable gap persists between industrial needs and 
laboratory  research.  Close  interactions  between  industries  and 
research laboratories are encouraged to explore further the possible 
usage  and  field  deployment  of  laboratory  laser-based  sensor 
prototypes. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare no conflicts of interests. 

Acknowledgments 

We would like to acknowledge funding support from King Abdullah 
University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia. The work 
of  the  Chinese  University  of  Hong  Kong  authors  was  funded  by  the 
National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  (NSFC)  (Project  No. 
51776179),  Research  Grants  Council  of  the  Hong  Kong  SAR,  China 
(Project  No.  14209220),  and  the  Natural  Science  Foundation  of 
Guangdong  Province,  China  (Project  No.  2019A1515011372).  Awad 
Alquaity acknowledges support provided by the Mechanical Engineering 
Department at King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi 
Arabia.  Shunchun  Yao  acknowledges  support  provided  by  the  Key 
Project  of  Intergovernmental  International  Cooperation  on  Scientific 
and Technological Innovation from the Ministry of Science and Tech-
nology,  China  (Project  No.  2019YFE0109700).  The  authors  acknowl-
edge Ruohong Shen’s effort in checking the format of all references. 

References 

[1] Hanson RK. Applications of quantitative laser sensors to kinetics, propulsion and 

practical energy systems. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1–40. 

[2] Newton I. Hydrostatics, optics, sound and heat. England: Cambridge University 

Library; 1700. 

[3] Kirchhoff GI. On the relation between the radiating and absorbing powers of 

different bodies for light and heat. Lond Edinb Dublin Philos Mag J Sci 1860;20: 
1–21. 

[4] Kirchhoff G. Über das Verh¨altnis zwischen dem Emissionsverm¨ogen und dem 

absorptionsverm¨ogen der K¨orper für W¨arme und Licht. Von Kirchhoff bis Planck: 
Springer; 1978. p. 131–51. 

[5] Planck M. The theory of heat radiation. Blakiston: Courier Corporation; 1914. 
[6] Einstein A. Zur quantentheorie der strahlung. Phys Zeitschrift 1917;18:124. 
[7] Gould RG. The LASER, light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. In: 

Proceedings of the Ann Arbor conference on optical pumping; 1959. p. 92. the 
University of Michigan. 

[8] Sch¨afer FP. Dye lasers. Berlin: New York: Springer-Verlag; 1990. 
[9] McCubbin T, Darone R, Sorrell J. Determination of vibration-rotational line 

strengths and widths in CO2 using a CO2-N2 laser. Appl Phys Lett 1966;8:118–9. 
[10] Hinkley E. High-resolution infrared spectroscopy with a tunable diode laser. Appl 

Phys Lett 1970;16:351–4. 

[11] Sulzmann K, Bien F, Penner S. Intensity and collision half-width measurements 
using a laser source-II. Continuum and line absorption of Br2 at 6328 A. J Quant 
Spectrosc Radiat Transf 1967;7:969–77. 

[12] Hinkley E, Kelley P. Detection of air pollutants with tunable diode lasers. Science 

1971;171:635–9. 

[13] Ku R, Hinkley E, Sample J. Long-path monitoring of atmospheric carbon 
monoxide with a tunable diode laser system. Appl Opt 1975;14:854–61. 
[14] Hanson R, Kuntz P, Kruger C. High-resolution spectroscopy of combustion gases 

using a tunable IR diode laser. Appl Opt 1977;16:2045–8. 

[15] Hanson RK. Shock tube spectroscopy: advanced instrumentation with a tunable 

diode laser. Appl Opt 1977;16:1479–81. 

[16] Adams AR, Elliott CT, Krier A, Murdin BN, Tacke M. Lead–salt lasers. Philos Trans 

R Soc Lond Ser A Math Phys Eng Sci 2001;359:547–66. 

[17] Reekie L. Overview of fiber laser techniques. Advanced solid state lasers. 

Williamsburg, Virginia: Optical Society of America; 1987WD1. 

[18] Garbuzov DZ, Menna RJ, Maiorov MA, Lee H, Khalfin V, DiMarco LA, et al. 2.3- to 

2.7-μm room-temperature cw operation of InGaAsSb/AlGaAsSb broad-contact 
and single-mode ridge-waveguide SCH-QW diode lasers: in-plane semiconductor 
lasers. Int Soc Opt Photonics 1999. 

[19] Vurgaftman I, Weih R, Kamp M, Meyer JR, Canedy CL, Kim CS, et al. Interband 

cascade lasers. J Phys D Appl Phys 2015;48:123001. 

[20] Gmachl C, Capasso F, Sivco DL, Cho AY. Recent progress in quantum cascade 

lasers and applications. Rep Prog Phys 2001;64:1533–601. 

[21] Feh´er M, Martin PA. Tunable diode laser monitoring of atmospheric trace gas 

constituents. Spectrochim Acta Part A 1995;51:1579–99. 

[22] Werle P. A review of recent advances in semiconductor laser based gas monitors. 

Spectrochim Acta Part A 1998;54:197–236. 

[23] Allen MG. Diode laser absorption sensors for gas-dynamic and combustion flows. 

Meas Sci Technol 1998;9:545–62. 

[24] Werle P, Slemr F, Maurer K, Kormann R, Mücke R, J¨anker B. Near- and mid- 

infrared laser-optical sensors for gas analysis. Opt Lasers Eng 2002;37:101–14. 

[25] Willer U, Saraji M, Khorsandi A, Geiser P, Schade W. Near- and mid-infrared laser 

monitoring of industrial processes, environment and security applications. Opt 
Lasers Eng 2006;44:699–710. 

[26] Lackner M. Tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy (TDLAS) in the process 

industries: a review. Rev Chem Eng 2007;23:65–147. 

[27] Hodgkinson J, Tatam RP. Optical gas sensing: a review. Meas Sci Technol 2012; 

24:012004. 

[28] Zhang L, Tian G, Li J, Yu B. Applications of absorption spectroscopy using 

quantum cascade lasers. Appl Spectrosc 2014;68:1095–107. 

[29] Bolshov MA, Kuritsyn YA, Romanovskii YV. Tunable diode laser spectroscopy as a 
technique for combustion diagnostics. Spectrochim Acta Part B 2015;106:45–66. 
[30] Goldenstein CS, Spearrin RM, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Infrared laser-absorption 
sensing for combustion gases. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;60:132–76. 
[31] Tam AC. Applications of photoacoustic sensing techniques. Rev Mod Phys 1986; 

58:381–431. 

[32] Schmid T. Photoacoustic spectroscopy for process analysis. Anal Bioanal Chem 

2006;384:1071–86. 

[33] Haisch C. Photoacoustic spectroscopy for analytical measurements. Meas Sci 

Technol 2011;23:012001. 

[34] Li J, Chen W, Yu B. Recent progress on infrared photoacoustic spectroscopy 

techniques. Appl Spectrosc Rev 2011;46:440–71. 

[35] Patimisco P, Scamarcio G, Tittel FK, Spagnolo V. Quartz-enhanced photoacoustic 

spectroscopy: a review. Sensors 2014;14:6165–206. 

[36] Manohar S, Razansky D. Photoacoustics: a historical review. Adv Opt Photonics 

2016;8:586–617. 

[37] Yang T, Chen W, Wang P. A review of all-optical photoacoustic spectroscopy as a 

gas sensing method. Appl Spectrosc Rev 2021;56:143–70. 

[38] Ald´en M, Bood J, Li Z, Richter M. Visualization and understanding of combustion 

processes using spatially and temporally resolved laser diagnostic techniques. 
Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:69–97. 

[39] Tango WJ, Link JK, Zare RN. Spectroscopy of K2 using laser-induced fluorescence. 

J Chem Phys 1968;49:4264–8. 

[40] Smyth KC, Crosley DR. Detection of minor species with laser techniques. Appl 

Combust Diagn 2002:9–68. 

[41] D¨obele HF, Mosbach T, Niemi K, Gathen VS. Laser-induced fluorescence 

measurements of absolute atomic densities: concepts and limitations. Plasma 
Sources Sci Technol 2005;14:S31–41. 

[42] Ruan C, Chen F, Cai W, Qian Y, Yu L, Lu X. Principles of non-intrusive diagnostic 
techniques and their applications for fundamental studies of combustion 
instabilities in gas turbine combustors: a brief review. Aerosp Sci Technol 2019; 
84:585–603. 

[43] Roy S, Meyer TR, Lucht RP, Belovich VM, Corporan E, Gord JR. Temperature and 
CO2  concentration measurements in the exhaust stream of a liquid-fueled 
combustor using dual-pump coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) 
spectroscopy. Combust Flame 2004;138:273–84. 

[44] Raja SS, Cheng CW, Sang Y, Chen CA, Zhang XQ, Dubey A, et al. Epitaxial 

aluminum surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy substrates for large-scale 2D 
material characterization. ACS Nano 2020;14:8838–45. 

[45] McCreery RL. Raman spectroscopy for chemical analysis. Meas Sci Technol 2001; 

12:653–4. 

[46] Terhune RW, Maker PD, Savage CM. Measurements of nonlinear light scattering. 

Phys Rev Lett 1965;14:681–4. 

[47] Roy S, Gord JR, Patnaik AK. Recent advances in coherent anti-Stokes Raman 

scattering spectroscopy: fundamental developments and applications in reacting 
flows. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2010;36:280–306. 

[48] Das RS, Agrawal Y. Raman spectroscopy: recent advancements, techniques and 

applications. Vib Spectrosc 2011;57:163–76. 

[49] Kiefer J, Ewart P. Laser diagnostics and minor species detection in combustion 

using resonant four-wave mixing. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:525–64. 

[50] Lempert WR, Adamovich IV. Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering and 

spontaneous Raman scattering diagnostics of nonequilibrium plasmas and flows. 
J Phys D Appl Phys 2014;47:433001. 

[51] Noll R, Fricke-Begemann C, Connemann S, Meinhardt C, Sturm V. LIBS analyses 

for industrial applications: an overview of developments from 2014 to 2018. 
J Anal At Spectrom 2018;33:945–56. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099741A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[52] Gottfried JL, De Lucia FC, Munson CA, Miziolek AW. Laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy for detection of explosives residues: a review of recent advances, 
challenges, and future prospects. Anal Bioanal Chem 2009;395:283–300. 

ˇ
Cerm´ak P, Musset O, Veis P. A review of the development of portable 

[53] Rakovský J, 

laser induced breakdown spectroscopy and its applications. Spectrochim Acta 
Part B 2014;101:269–87. 

[54] Lin QY, Duan YX. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: from experimental 

platform to field instrument. Chin J Anal Chem 2017;45:1405–14. 

[84] Chrystie RS, Nasir EF, Farooq A. Ultra-fast and calibration-free temperature 

sensing in the intrapulse mode. Opt Lett 2014;39:6620–3. 

[85] Nasir EF, Farooq A. Intra-pulse laser absorption sensor with cavity enhancement 
for oxidation experiments in a rapid compression machine. Opt Express 2018;26: 
14601–9. 

[86] Nair AP, Lee DD, Pineda DI, Kriesel J, Hargus WA, Bennewitz JW, et al. MHz laser 
absorption spectroscopy via diplexed RF modulation for pressure, temperature, 
and species in rotating detonation rocket flows. Appl Phys B 2020;126:138. 

[55] Lee WB, Wu J, Lee YI, Sneddon J. Recent applications of laser induced breakdown 

[87] Grouiez B, Zeninari V, Joly L, Parvitte B. Pulsed quantum-cascade-laser 

spectrometry: a review of material approaches. Appl Spectrosc Rev 2004;39: 
27–97. 

[56] Hahn DW, Omenetto N. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), part I: 

review of basic diagnostics and plasma-particle interactions: still challenging 
issues within the analytical plasma community. Appl Spectrosc 2010;64:335–66. 

[57] Singh VK, Rai AK. Prospects for laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for 
biomedical applications: a review. Lasers Med Sci 2011;26:673–87. 

[58] Hahn DW, Omenetto N. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), part II: 
review of instrumental and methodological approaches to material analysis and 
applications to different fields. Appl Spectrosc 2012;66:347–419. 
[59] Galb´acs G. A critical review of recent progress in analytical laser induced 
breakdown spectroscopy. Anal Bioanal Chem 2015;407:7537–62. 

spectroscopy with intermediate-size pulses: application to NH3 in the 10 μm 
region. Appl Phys B 2010;100:265–73. 

[88] Nwaboh JA, Werhahn O, Schiel D. Measurement of CO amount fractions using a 
pulsed quantum-cascade laser operated in the intrapulse mode. Appl Phys B 2011; 
103:947–57. 

[89] Francis D, Hodgkinson J, Walton C, Sizer J, Black P, Livingstone B, et al. Mid-IR 

spectroscopic instrumentation for point-of-care diagnosis using a hollow silica 
waveguide gas cell. Optical diagnostics and sensing XVII: toward point-of-care 
diagnostics. Int Soc Opt Photonics 2017:1007209. 

[90] Chrystie RSM, Nasir EF, Farooq A. Towards simultaneous calibration-free and 
ultra-fast sensing of temperature and species in the intrapulse mode. Proc 
Combust Inst 2015;35:3757–64. 

[60] Shah SKH, Iqbal J, Ahmad P, Khandaker MU, Haq S, Naeem M. Laser induced 

[91] Nasir EF, Farooq A. Time-resolved temperature measurements in a rapid 

breakdown spectroscopy methods and applications: a comprehensive review. 
Radiat Phys Chem 2020;170:108666. 

[61] Senesi GS, Harmon RS, Hark RR. Field-portable and handheld laser-induced 

breakdown spectroscopy: Historical review, current status and future prospects. 
Spectrochim Acta, Part B 2021;175:106013. 

[62] Campbell M, Cosgrove JA, Greated CA, Jack S, Rockliff D. Review of LDA and PIV 
applied to the measurement of sound and acoustic streaming. Opt Laser Technol 
2000;32:629–39. 

[63] Sommerfeld M, Qiu HH. Characterization of particle-laden, confined swirling 
flows by phase-doppler anemometry and numerical calculation. Int J Multiph 
Flow 1993;19:1093–127. 

[64] Ehn A, Zhu J, Li X, Kiefer J. Advanced laser-based techniques for gas-phase 

diagnostics in combustion and aerospace engineering. Appl Spectrosc 2017;71: 
341–66. 

[65] Hall G, Whitaker BJ. Laser-induced grating spectroscopy. J Chem Soc Faraday 

Trans 1994;90:1–16. 

[66] Ma L, Wang Z, Cheong KP, Ning H, Ren W. Mid-infrared heterodyne phase- 
sensitive dispersion spectroscopy in flame measurements. Proc Combust Inst 
2019;37:1329–36. 

[67] Katz J, Sheng J. Applications of holography in fluid mechanics and particle 

dynamics. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 2010;42:531–55. 

[68] Consolino L, Cappelli F, de Cumis MS, Natale PD. QCL-based frequency metrology 
from the mid infrared to the THz range: a review. Nanophotonics 2019;8: 
181–204. 

[69] Farooq A, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. High-pressure measurements of CO2 absorption 
near 2.7μm: line mixing and finite duration collision effects. J Quant Spectrosc 
Radiat Transf 2010;111:949–60. 

[70] Hanson RK, Spearrin RM, Goldenstein CS. Spectroscopy and optical diagnostics 

for gases. Switzerland: Springer; 2016. 

[71] Wei R, Davidson DF, Hanson RK. IR laser absorption diagnostic for C2H4 in shock 

tube kinetics studies. Int J Chem Kinet 2012;44:423–32. 

[72] Philippe LC, Hanson RK. Laser diode wavelength-modulation spectroscopy for 

simultaneous measurement of temperature, pressure, and velocity in shock 
heated oxygen flows. Appl Opt 1993;32:6090–103. 

[73] Goldenstein CS, Strand CL, Schultz IA, Sun K, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Fitting of 
calibration-free scanned-wavelength-modulation spectroscopy spectra for 
determination of gas properties and absorption line shapes. Appl Opt 2014;53: 
356–67. 

[74] Lyle KH, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK, Winter M. Diode-laser sensor for air-mass flux 2: 
non-uniform flow modeling and aeroengine tests. AIAA J 2007;45:2213–23. 
[75] Gu C, Zou X, Zuo Z, Peng D, Di Y, Liu Y, et al. Doppler velocimeter based on dual- 

comb absorption spectroscopy. Photonics Res 2020;8:1895–903. 

[76] Hanson RK, Davidson DF. Recent advances in laser absorption and shock tube 

methods for studies of combustion chemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;44: 
103–14. 

[77] Li H, Rieker GB, Liu X, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Extension of wavelength- 

modulation spectroscopy to large modulation depth for diode laser absorption 
measurements in high-pressure gases. Appl Opt 2006;45:1052–61. 

[78] KC U, Nasir EF, Farooq A. A mid-infrared absorption diagnostic for acetylene 

detection. Appl Phys B 2015;120:223–32. 

[79] Chrystie RS, Nasir EF, Farooq A. Propene concentration sensing for combustion 
gases using quantum-cascade laser absorption near 11 μm. Appl Phys B 2015;120: 
317–27. 

[80] McCulloch MT, Normand EL, Langford N, Duxbury G, Newnham DA. Highly 

sensitive detection of trace gases using the time-resolved frequency downchirp 
from pulsed quantum-cascade lasers. J Opt Soc Am B 2003;20:1761–8. 

[81] Manne J, J¨ager W, Tulip J. Sensitive detection of ammonia and ethylene with a 

pulsed quantum cascade laser using intra and interpulse spectroscopic 
techniques. Appl Phys B 2008;94:337. 

compression machine using quantum cascade laser absorption in the intrapulse 
mode. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:4453–60. 

[92] Sanders ST, Wang J, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Diode-laser absorption sensor for 
line-of-sight gas temperature distributions. Appl Opt 2001;40:4404–15. 

[93] Liu X, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Measurement of non-uniform temperature 

distributions using line-of-sight absorption spectroscopy. AIAA J 2007;45:411–9. 
[94] Liu C, Xu L, Cao Z. Measurement of nonuniform temperature and concentration 

distributions by combining line-of-sight tunable diode laser absorption 
spectroscopy with regularization methods. Appl Opt 2013;52:4827–42. 

[95] Goldenstein CS, Schultz IA, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Two-color absorption 
spectroscopy strategy for measuring the column density and path average 
temperature of the absorbing species in nonuniform gases. Appl Opt 2013;52: 
7950–62. 

[96] Ma LH, Lau LY, Ren W. Non-uniform temperature and species concentration 
measurements in a laminar flame using multi-band infrared absorption 
spectroscopy. Appl Phys B 2017;123:83. 

[97] Ma L, Cheong KP, Ning H, Ren W. An improved study of the uniformity of laminar 

premixed flames using laser absorption spectroscopy and CFD simulation. Exp 
Therm Fluid Sci 2020;112:110013. 

[98] Malarich N, Rieker G. Resolving gas temperature distributions with single-beam 
dual-comb absorption spectroscopy. In: Proceedings of the conference on lasers 
and electro-optics (CLEO); 2017. p. 1–2. IEEE. 

[99] Schroeder PJ, Wright RJ, Coburn S, Sodergren B, Cossel KC, Droste S, et al. Dual 
frequency comb laser absorption spectroscopy in a 16 MW gas turbine exhaust. 
Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:4565–73. 

[100] Alquaity AB, Al-Saif B, Farooq A. A widely-tunable and sensitive optical sensor for 
multi-species detection in the mid-IR. Meas Sci Technol 2017;29:015201. 

[101] Kessler W, Allen M, Lo E, Miller M. Tomographic reconstruction of air 
temperature and density profiles using tunable diode laser absorption 
measurements on O2. In: Proceedings of the 26th plasmadynamics and lasers 
conference; 1995. p. 1953. 

[102] Melin ST, Sanders ST. H2O absorption thermometry accuracy in the 7321-7598 
cm-1 range studied in a heated static cell at temperatures up to 1723K. J Quant 
Spectrosc Radiat Transf 2018;214:1–7. 

[103] Sanders ST. Wavelength-agile fiber laser using group-velocity dispersion of pulsed 
super-continua and application to broadband absorption spectroscopy. Appl Phys 
B 2002;75:799–802. 

[104] Jahromi KE, Nematollahi M, Pan Q, Abbas MA, Cristescu SM, Harren FJ, et al. 

Sensitive multi-species trace gas sensor based on a high repetition rate mid- 
infrared supercontinuum source. Opt Express 2020;28:26091–101. 

[105] Werblinski T, Engel SR, Engelbrecht R, Zigan L, Will S. Temperature and multi- 
species measurements by supercontinuum absorption spectroscopy for IC engine 
applications. Opt Express 2013;21:13656–67. 

[106] Werblinski T, Fendt P, Zigan L, Will S. High-speed combustion diagnostics in a 
rapid compression machine by broadband supercontinuum absorption 
spectroscopy. Appl Opt 2017;56:4443–53. 

[107] Werblinski T, Kleindienst S, Engelbrecht R, Zigan L, Will S. Supercontinuum 

based absorption spectrometer for cycle-resolved multiparameter measurements 
in a rapid compression machine. Appl Opt 2016;55:4564–74. 

[108] Blume NG, Ebert V, Dreizler A, Wagner S. Broadband fitting approach for the 

application of supercontinuum broadband laser absorption spectroscopy to 
combustion environments. Meas Sci Technol 2015;27:015501. 

[109] Blume NG, Wagner S. Broadband supercontinuum laser absorption spectrometer 
for multiparameter gas phase combustion diagnostics. Opt Lett 2015;40:3141–4. 
[110] Werblinski T, Mittmann F, Altenhoff M, Seeger T, Zigan L, Will S. Temperature 
and water mole fraction measurements by time-domain-based supercontinuum 
absorption spectroscopy in a flame. Appl Phys B 2015;118:153–8. 
[111] Stauffer HU, Walsh PS, Schumaker SA, Roy S. Broadband, background-free, 

single-laser-shot absorption. Optica 2020;7:847–53. 

[82] Ren W, Farooq A, Davidson DF, Hanson RK. CO concentration and temperature 
sensor for combustion gases using quantum-cascade laser absorption near 4.7 μm. 
Appl Phys B 2012;107:849–60. 

[83] Zhang G, Khabibullin K, Farooq A. An IH-QCL based gas sensor for simultaneous 
detection of methane and acetylene. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:1445–52. 

[112] Stauffer HU, Grib SW, Schumaker SA, Roy S. Broadband, background-free 

methane absorption in the mid-infrared. Opt Express 2021;29:21011–9. 
[113] Tancin RJ, Goldenstein CS. Ultrafast-laser-absorption spectroscopy in the mid- 

infrared for single-shot, calibration-free temperature and species measurements in 
low- and high-pressure combustion gases. Opt Express 2021;29:30140–54. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099742A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[114] Loparo ZE, Ninnemann E, Ru Q, Vodopyanov KL, Vasu SS. Broadband mid- 

[144] Nations M, Wang S, Goldenstein CS, Sun K, Davidson DF, Jeffries JB, et al. Shock- 

infrared optical parametric oscillator for dynamic high-temperature multi-species 
measurements in reacting systems. Opt Lett 2020;45:491–4. 

tube measurements of excited oxygen atoms using cavity-enhanced absorption 
spectroscopy. Appl Opt 2015;54:8766–75. 

[115] Hult J, Watt RS, Kaminski CF. High bandwidth absorption spectroscopy with a 

dispersed supercontinuum source. Opt Express 2007;15:11385–95. 

[116] Kranendonk LA, An X, Caswell AW, Herold RE, Sanders ST, Huber R, et al. High 
speed engine gas thermometry by Fourier-domain mode-locked laser absorption 
spectroscopy. Opt Express 2007;15:15115–28. 

[117] Emmert J, Blume NG, Dreizler A, Wagner S. Data analysis and uncertainty 

estimation in supercontinuum laser absorption spectroscopy. Sci Rep 2018;8: 
10312. 

[118] Foo J, Martin P. Tomographic imaging of reacting flows in 3D by laser absorption 

spectroscopy. Appl Phys B 2017;123:160. 

[119] Cai W, Kaminski CF. Tomographic absorption spectroscopy for the study of gas 
dynamics and reactive flows. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;59:1–31. 
[120] Liu C, Xu L. Laser absorption spectroscopy for combustion diagnosis in reactive 

flows: a review. Appl Spectrosc Rev 2018;54:1–44. 

[121] Ma L. Nonintrusive and multidimensional optical diagnostics and their 

applications in the study of thermal-fluid systems. Heat Transf Eng 2016;37: 
359–68. 

[122] McCann H, Wright P, Daun K, Wang M. Chemical species tomography. Industrial 

tomography: systems and applications. Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Publishing; 
2015. p. 135–74. 

[123] Cai W, Kaminski CF. A tomographic technique for the simultaneous imaging of 
temperature, chemical species, and pressure in reactive flows using absorption 
spectroscopy with frequency-agile lasers. Appl Phys Lett 2014;104:034101. 

[124] Tsekenis SA, Polydorides N. Optical access schemes for high speed and spatial 

resolution optical absorption tomography in energy engineering. IEEE Sens J 
2017;17:8072–80. 

[125] Liu C, Cao Z, Lin Y, Xu L, McCann H. Online cross-sectional monitoring of a 
swirling flame using TDLAS tomography. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 2018;67: 
1338–48. 

[126] Ma L, Li X, Sanders ST, Caswell AW, Roy S, Plemmons DH, et al. 50-kHz-rate 2D 

imaging of temperature and H2O concentration at the exhaust plane of a J85 
engine using hyperspectral tomography. Opt Express 2013;21:1152–62. 
[127] Schwarm KK, Wei C, Pineda DI, Spearrin RM. Time-resolved laser absorption 

imaging of ethane at 2 kHz in unsteady partially premixed flames. Appl Opt 2019; 
58:5656–62. 

[128] Wei C, Pineda DI, Goldenstein CS, Spearrin RM. Tomographic laser absorption 
imaging of combustion species and temperature in the mid-wave infrared. Opt 
Express 2018;26:20944–51. 

[129] Tancin RJ, Spearrin RM, Goldenstein CS. 2D mid-infrared laser-absorption 

imaging for tomographic reconstruction of temperature and carbon monoxide in 
laminar flames. Opt Express 2019;27:14184–98. 

[130] Liu X, Wang G, Zheng J, Xu L, Wang S, Li L, et al. Temporally resolved two 

dimensional temperature field of acoustically excited swirling flames measured 
by mid-infrared direct absorption spectroscopy. Opt Express 2018;26:31983–94. 

[131] Wei C, Pineda DI, Paxton L, Egolfopoulos FN, Spearrin RM. Mid-infrared laser 
absorption tomography for quantitative 2D thermochemistry measurements in 
premixed jet flames. Appl Phys B 2018;124:123. 

[132] Cheong KP, Ma L, Wang Z, Ren W. Influence of line pair selection on flame 

tomography using infrared absorption spectroscopy. Appl Spectrosc 2018;73: 
529–39. 

[133] Stritzke F, van der Kley S, Feiling A, Dreizler A, Wagner S. Ammonia 

concentration distribution measurements in the exhaust of a heavy duty diesel 
engine based on limited data absorption tomography. Opt Express 2017;25: 
8180–91. 

[134] Grauer SJ, Emmert J, ST S, Wagner S, Daun KJ. Multiparameter gas sensing with 
linear hyperspectral absorption tomography. Meas Sci Technol 2019;30:105401. 

[135] Jiang Y, Si J, Zhang R, Enemali G, Zhou B, McCann H, et al. CSTNet: a dual- 

branch convolutional network for imaging of reactive flows using chemical 
species tomography. arXiv Image Video Process 2020. 

[136] Wei C, Schwarm KK, Pineda DI, Spearrin RM. Deep neural network inversion for 

3D laser absorption imaging of methane in reacting flows. Opt Lett 2020;45: 
2447–50. 

[137] Deng A, Huang J, Liu H, Cai W. Deep learning algorithms for temperature field 

reconstruction of nonlinear tomographic absorption spectroscopy. Meas Sens 
2020;10-12:100024. 

[145] Wang S, Sun K, Davidson DF, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Cavity-enhanced absorption 
spectroscopy with a ps-pulsed UV laser for sensitive, high-speed measurements in 
a shock tube. Opt Express 2016;24:308–18. 

[146] Alquaity ABS, KC U, Popov A, Farooq A. Detection of shock-heated hydrogen 

peroxide (H2O2) by off-axis cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy (OA-CEAS). 
Appl Phys B 2017;123:280. 

[147] Wang S, Davidson DF, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Time-resolved sub-ppm CH3 

detection in a shock tube using cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy with a 
ps-pulsed UV laser. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:4549–56. 

[148] O’Keefe A, Scherer JJ, Paul JB. CW integrated cavity output spectroscopy. Chem 

Phys Lett 1999;307:343–9. 

[149] Moyer EJ, Sayres DS, Engel GS, St Clair JM, Keutsch FN, Allen NT, et al. Design 
considerations in high-sensitivity off-axis integrated cavity output spectroscopy. 
Appl Phys B 2008;92:467. 

[150] Werblinski T, L¨ammlein B, Huber FJT, Zigan L, Will S. Supercontinuum high- 
speed cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy for sensitive multispecies 
detection. Opt Lett 2016;41:2322–5. 

[151] Engel GS, Drisdell WS, Keutsch FN, Moyer EJ, Anderson JG. Ultrasensitive near- 
infrared integrated cavity output spectroscopy technique for detection of CO at 
1.57 μm: new sensitivity limits for absorption measurements in passive optical 
cavities. Appl Opt 2006;45:9221–9. 

[152] Sayres DS, Moyer EJ, Hanisco TF, Clair JMS, Keutsch FN, O’Brien A, et al. A new 

cavity based absorption instrument for detection of water isotopologues in the 
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. Rev Sci Instrum 2009;80:044102. 

[153] Morville J, Romanini D, Kachanov A, Chenevier M. Two schemes for trace 

detection using cavity ringdown spectroscopy. Appl Phys B 2004;78:465–76. 
[154] Foltynowicz A, Schmidt FM, Ma W, Axner O. Noise-immune cavity-enhanced 

optical heterodyne molecular spectroscopy: current status and future potential. 
Appl Phys B 2008;92:313. 

[155] Alquaity ABS, Utsav KC, Popov A, Farooq A. Detection of shock-heated hydrogen 
peroxide (H2O2) by off-axis cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy (OA-CEAS). 
Appl Phys B 2017;123:280. 

[156] Matsugi A, Shiina H, Oguchi T, Takahashi K. Time-resolved broadband cavity- 

enhanced absorption spectroscopy behind shock waves. J Phys Chem A 2016;120: 
2070–7. 

[157] Cassidy D, Reid J. Harmonic detection with tunable diode lasers—two-tone 

modulation. Appl Phys B 1982;29:279–85. 

[158] Farooq A, Jeffries J, Hanson R. Sensitive detection of temperature behind 

reflected shock waves using wavelength modulation spectroscopy of CO2 near 2.7 
μm. Appl Phys B 2009;96:161–73. 

[159] Reid J, Labrie D. Second-harmonic detection with tunable diode lasers: 

comparison of experiment and theory. Appl Phys B 1981;26:203–10. 

[160] Cassidy DT, Reid J. Atmospheric pressure monitoring of trace gases using tunable 

diode lasers. Appl Opt 1982;21:1185–90. 

[161] Wang L-g, Riris H, Carlisle CB, Gallagher TF. Comparison of approaches to 

modulation spectroscopy with GaAlAs semiconductor lasers: application to water 
vapor. Appl Opt 1988;27:2071–7. 

[162] Silver JA. Frequency-modulation spectroscopy for trace species detection: theory 
and comparison among experimental methods. Appl Opt 1992;31:707–17. 
[163] Kluczynski P, Axner O. Theoretical description based on Fourier analysis of 
wavelength-modulation spectrometry in terms of analytical and background 
signals. Appl Opt 1999;38:5803–15. 

[164] Weidmann D, Tittel F, Aellen T, Beck M, Hofstetter D, Faist J, et al. Mid-infrared 
trace-gas sensing with a quasi-continuous-wave Peltier-cooled distributed 
feedback quantum cascade laser. Appl Phys B 2004;79:907–13. 

[165] Hancock G, Van Helden J, Peverall R, Ritchie G, Walker R. Direct and wavelength 
modulation spectroscopy using a cw external cavity quantum cascade laser. Appl 
Phys Lett 2009;94:201110. 

[166] Rieker GB, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Calibration-free wavelength-modulation 

spectroscopy for measurements of gas temperature and concentration in Harsh 
environments. Appl Opt 2009;48:5546–60. 

[167] Farooq A, Jeffries J, Hanson R. Measurements of CO2  concentration and 

temperature at high pressures using 1f-normalized wavelength modulation 
spectroscopy with second harmonic detection near 2.7 μm. Appl Opt 2009;48: 
6740–53. 

[138] Wei C, Schwarm KK, Pineda DI. Mitchell spearrin R. Physics-trained neural 
network for sparse-view volumetric laser absorption imaging of species and 
temperature in reacting flows. Opt Express 2021;29:22553–66. 

[139] Wei C, Schwarm KK, Pineda DI, Spearrin RM. Physics-trained neural network for 

[168] Sun K, Chao X, Sur R, Goldenstein C, Jeffries J, Hanson R. Analysis of calibration- 
free wavelength-scanned wavelength modulation spectroscopy for practical gas 
sensing using tunable diode lasers. Meas Sci Technol 2013;24:125203. 
[169] Sun K, Chao X, Sur R, Jeffries J, Hanson R. Wavelength modulation diode laser 

sparse-view volumetric laser absorption imaging of species and temperature in 
reacting flows. Opt Express 2021;29:22553–66. 

absorption spectroscopy for high-pressure gas sensing. Appl Phys B 2013;110: 
497–508. 

[140] Van Helden J, Peverall R, Ritchie G. Cavity enhanced techniques using continuous 

wave lasers. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009. 

[141] Van Helden JH, Peverall R, Ritchie GAD. Cavity enhanced techniques using 
continuous wave lasers. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009. p. 27–56. 

[142] Sun K, Wang S, Sur R, Chao X, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Sensitive and rapid laser 
diagnostic for shock tube kinetics studies using cavity-enhanced absorption 
spectroscopy. Opt Express 2014;22:9291–300. 

[170] Klein A, Witzel O, Ebert V. Rapid, time-division multiplexed, direct absorption- 
and wavelength modulation-spectroscopy. Sensors 2014;14:21497–513. 
[171] Qu Z, Ghorbani R, Valiev D, Schmidt FM. Calibration-free scanned wavelength 

modulation spectroscopy–application to H2O and temperature sensing in flames. 
Opt Express 2015;23:16492–9. 

[172] Upadhyay A, Chakraborty AL. Calibration-free 2f WMS with in situ real-time laser 

characterization and 2f RAM nulling. Opt Lett 2015;40:4086–9. 

[143] Sun K, Wang S, Sur R, Chao X, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Time-resolved in situ 

[173] Mei L, Svanberg S. Wavelength modulation spectroscopy-digital detection of gas 

detection of CO in a shock tube using cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy 
with a quantum-cascade laser near 4.6µm. Opt Express 2014;22:24559–65. 

absorption harmonics based on Fourier analysis. Appl Opt 2015;54:2234–43. 

[174] Du Y, Peng Z, Ding Y. Wavelength modulation spectroscopy for recovering 

absolute absorbance. Opt Express 2018;26:9263–72. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099743A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[175] Wang G, Mei J, Tian X, Liu K, Tan T, Chen W, et al. Laser frequency locking and 
intensity normalization in wavelength modulation spectroscopy for sensitive gas 
sensing. Opt Express 2019;27:4878–85. 

[209] Rossi A, Buffa R, Scotoni M, Bassi D, Iannotta S, Boschetti A. Optical enhancement 
of diode laser-photoacoustic trace gas detection by means of external Fabry-Perot 
cavity. Appl Phys Lett 2005;87:041110. 

[176] Wei W, Peng WY, Wang Y, Choudhary R, Wang S, Shao J, et al. Demonstration of 
non-absorbing interference rejection using wavelength modulation spectroscopy 
in high-pressure shock tubes. Appl Phys B 2018;125:9. 

[177] Mathews G, Goldenstein C. Near-GHz scanned-wavelength-modulation 

spectroscopy for MHz thermometry and H2O measurements in aluminized 
fireballs of energetic materials. Appl Phys B 2020;126:189. 

[178] Reichert J, Holzwarth R, Udem T, H¨ansch TW. Measuring the frequency of light 

with mode-locked lasers. Opt Commun 1999;172:59–68. 

[179] Schliesser A, Picqu´e N, H¨ansch TW. Mid-infrared frequency combs. Nat Photonics 

2012;6:440. 

[210] Borri S, Patimisco P, Galli I, Mazzotti D, Giusfredi G, Akikusa N, et al. Intracavity 
quartz-enhanced photoacoustic sensor. Appl Phys Lett 2014;104:091114. 

[211] Wang Q, Wang Z, Chang J, Ren W. Fiber-ring laser-based intracavity 

photoacoustic spectroscopy for trace gas sensing. Opt Lett 2017;42:2114–7. 

[212] Wang Z, Wang Q, Zhang W, Wei H, Li Y, Ren W. Ultrasensitive photoacoustic 

detection in a high-finesse cavity with Pound-Drever-Hall locking. Opt Lett 2019; 
44:1924–7. 

[213] Stenberg J, Hernberg R, Vattulainen J. Analysis of pollutant chemistry in 

combustion by in situ pulsed photoacoustic laser diagnostics. Appl Opt 1995;34: 
8400–8. 

[180] Coddington I, Newbury N, Swann W. Dual-comb spectroscopy. Optica 2016;3: 

[214] Hao LY, Ren Z, Shi Q, Wu JL, Zheng Y, Zheng J-J, et al. A new cylindrical 

414–26. 

photoacoustic cell with improved performance. Rev Sci Instrum 2002;73:404–10. 

[181] Villares G, Hugi A, Blaser S, Faist J. Dual-comb spectroscopy based on quantum- 

[215] Li J, Gao X, Li W, Cao Z, Deng L, Zhao W, et al. Near-infrared diode laser 

cascade-laser frequency combs. Nat Commun 2014;5:1–9. 

[182] Kippenberg TJ, Holzwarth R, Diddams SA. Microresonator-based optical 

frequency combs. Science 2011;332:555–9. 

[183] Lamperti M, AlSaif B, Gatti D, Fermann M, Laporta P, Farooq A, et al. Absolute 
spectroscopy near 7.8 μm with a comb-locked extended-cavity quantum-cascade- 
laser. Sci Rep 2018;8:1292. 

[184] Shimizu Y, Okubo S, Onae A, Yamada KMT, Inaba H. Molecular gas thermometry 
on acetylene using dual-comb spectroscopy: analysis of rotational energy 
distribution. Appl Phys B 2018;124:71. 

[185] Draper AD, Cole RK, Makowiecki AS, Mohr J, Zdanowicz A, Marchese A, et al. 
Broadband dual-frequency comb spectroscopy in a rapid compression machine. 
Opt Express 2019;27:10814–25. 

[186] Xu K, Ma L, Chen J, Zhao X, Wang Q, Kan R, et al. Dual-comb spectroscopy for 

laminar premixed flames with a free-running fiber laser. Combust Sci Technol 
2021:1–16. 

[187] Zhang G, Horvath R, Liu D, Geiser M, Farooq A. QCL-based dual-comb 

spectrometer for multi-species measurements at high temperatures and high 
pressures. Sensors 2020;20:3602. 

[188] Pinkowski NH, Ding Y, Strand CL, Hanson RK, Horvath R, Geiser M. Dual-comb 
spectroscopy for high-temperature reaction kinetics. Meas Sci Technol 2020;31: 
055501. 

[189] Thorpe MJ, Ye J. Cavity-enhanced direct frequency comb spectroscopy. Appl Phys 

B 2008;91:397–414. 

[190] Yu M, Okawachi Y, Griffith AG, Picqu´e N, Lipson M, Gaeta AL. Silicon-chip-based 

mid-infrared dual-comb spectroscopy. Nat Commun 2018;9:1–6. 

[191] Bjork BJ, Bui TQ, Heckl OH, Changala PB, Spaun B, Heu P, et al. Direct frequency 
comb measurement of OD+ CO→ DOCO kinetics. Science 2016;354:444–8. 
[192] Abbas M, Khodabakhsh A, Mandon J, Pan Q, Harren F. Static and dynamic 

measurements in an electrical discharge using mid-infrared dual-comb 
spectroscopy. In: Proceedings of the conference on lasers and electro-optics 
Europe & European quantum electronics conference IEEE; 2019. p. 1. 
[193] Fritsch T, Horstjann M, Halmer D, Sabana HP, Mürtz M. Magnetic Faraday 

modulation spectroscopy of the 1-0 band of 14NO and 15NO. Appl Phys B 2008; 
93:713–23. 

wavelength modulation-based photoacoustic spectrometer. Spectrochim Acta 
Part A 2006;64:338–42. 

[216] Wojcik MD, Phillips MC, Cannon BD, Taubman MS. Gas-phase photoacoustic 

sensor at 8.41 μm using quartz tuning forks and amplitude-modulated quantum 
cascade lasers. Appl Phys B 2006;85:307–13. 

[217] Rey JM, Marinov D, Vogler DE, Sigrist MW. Investigation and optimisation of a 

multipass resonant photoacoustic cell at high absorption levels. Appl Phys B 
2005;80:261–6. 

[218] Sampaolo A, Patimisco P, Giglio M, Zifarelli A, Wu H, Dong L, et al. Quartz- 
enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy for multi-gas detection: a review. Anal 
Chim Acta 2021:338894. 

[219] Tomberg T, Vainio M, Hieta T, Halonen L. Sub-parts-per-trillion level sensitivity 

in trace gas detection by cantilever-enhanced photo-acoustic spectroscopy. Sci 
Rep 2018;8:1848. 

[220] Harren FJ, Mandon J, Cristescu SM, Meyers RA. Photoacoustic spectroscopy in 
trace gas monitoring. editor. Encyclopedia of analytical chemistry. John Wiley & 
Sons; 2012. 

[221] Zheng H, Liu Y, Lin H, Kan R, Patimisco P, Sampaolo A, et al. Sub-ppb-level CH4 

detection by exploiting a low-noise differential photoacoustic resonator with a 
room-temperature interband cascade laser. Opt Express 2020;28:19446–56. 

[222] Rouxel J, Coutard J-G, Gidon S, Lartigue O, Nicoletti S, Parvitte B, et al. 

Miniaturized differential Helmholtz resonators for photoacoustic trace gas 
detection. Sens Actuators, B 2016;236:1104–10. 

[223] Bauer R, Stewart G, Johnstone W, Boyd E, Lengden M. 3D-printed miniature gas 

cell for photoacoustic spectroscopy of trace gases. Opt Lett 2014;39:4796–9. 
[224] Koskinen V, Fonsen J, Roth K, Kauppinen J. Progress in cantilever enhanced 

photoacoustic spectroscopy. Vib Spectrosc 2008;48:16–21. 

[225] Koskinen V, Fonsen J, Roth K, Kauppinen J. Cantilever enhanced photoacoustic 
detection of carbon dioxide using a tunable diode laser source. Appl Phys B 2007; 
86:451–4. 

[226] Fonsen J, Koskinen V, Roth K, Kauppinen J. Dual cantilever enhanced 

photoacoustic detector with pulsed broadband IR-source. Vib Spectrosc 2009;50: 
214–7. 

[227] Adamson BD, Sader JE, Bieske EJ. Photoacoustic detection of gases using 

[194] Zhang EJ, Brumfield B, Wysocki G. Hybrid Faraday rotation spectrometer for sub- 

microcantilevers. J Appl Phys 2009;106:114510. 

ppm detection of atmospheric O2. Opt Express 2014;22:15957–68. 

[195] Lewicki R, Doty JH, Curl RF, Tittel FK, Wysocki G. Ultrasensitive detection of 
nitric oxide at 5.33 μm by using external cavity quantum cascade laser-based 
Faraday rotation spectroscopy. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2009;106:12587–92. 
[196] Brumfield B, Wysocki G. Faraday rotation spectroscopy based on permanent 

magnets for sensitive detection of oxygen at atmospheric conditions. Opt Express 
2012;20:29727–42. 

[197] Brumfield B, Sun W, Wang Y, Ju Y, Wysocki G. Dual modulation Faraday rotation 

spectroscopy of HO2  in a flow reactor. Opt Lett 2014;39:1783–6. 

[198] Zhong H, Yan C, Teng CC, Ma G, Wysocki G, Ju Y. Kinetic study of reaction C2H5  
+ HO2 in a photolysis reactor with time-resolved Faraday rotation spectroscopy. 
Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:871–80. 

[199] Westberg J, Wysocki G. Cavity ring-down Faraday rotation spectroscopy for 

oxygen detection. Appl Phys B 2017;123:168. 

[200] Johansson AC, Westberg J, Wysocki G, Foltynowicz A. Optical frequency comb 

Faraday rotation spectroscopy. Appl Phys B 2018;124:79. 

[201] Zhao W, Wysocki G, Chen W, Fertein E, Le Coq D, Petitprez D, et al. Sensitive and 
selective detection of OH radicals using Faraday rotation spectroscopy at 2.8 µm. 
Opt Express 2011;19:2493–501. 

[202] Bell AG. The production of sound by radiant energy. Science 1881;2:242–53. 
[203] Viegerov ML. Eine methode der gasanalyse, beruhend auf der optisch-akustischen 

tyndall-r¨ontgenerscheinung. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 1938;19:687–8. 

[204] Luft KF. Uber eine neue methode der registrierenden gas analyse mit hilfe der 
absorption ¨ultraroter strahlen ohne spectrale zerlegung. J Phys 1943;5:915–21. 
[205] Kerr EL, Atwood JG. The laser illuminated absorptivity spectrophone: a method 

for measurement of weak absorptivity in gases at laser wavelengths. Appl Opt 
1968;7:915–21. 

[206] Kreuzer LB. Ultralow gas concentration infrared absorption spectroscopy. J Appl 

Phys 1971;42:2934–43. 

[228] Chen K, Zhang B, Liu S, Yu Q. Parts-per-billion-level detection of hydrogen sulfide 
based on near-infrared all-optical photoacoustic spectroscopy. Sens Actuators B 
2019;283:1–5. 

[229] Karhu J, Philip H, Baranov A, Teissier R, Hieta T. Sub-ppb detection of benzene 

using cantilever-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy with a long-wavelength 
infrared quantum cascade laser. Opt Lett 2020;45:5962–5. 

[230] Chen K, Yu Q, Gong Z, Guo M, Qu C. Ultra-high sensitive fiber-optic Fabry-Perot 
cantilever enhanced resonant photoacoustic spectroscopy. Sens Actuators B 2018; 
268:205–9. 

[231] Wang Z, Li Z, Ren W. Quartz-enhanced photoacoustic detection of ethylene using 

a 10.5 μm quantum cascade laser. Opt Express 2016;24:4143–54. 

[232] Duquesnoy M, Aoust G, Melkonian JM, L´evy R, Raybaut M, Godard A. Quartz 
enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy based on a custom quartz tuning Fork. 
Sensors 2019;19:1362. 

[233] Li Z, Shi C, Ren W. Mid-infrared multimode fiber-coupled quantum cascade laser 
for off-beam quartz-enhanced photoacoustic detection. Opt Lett 2016;41:4095–8. 
[234] Li Z, Wang Z, Qi Y, Jin W, Ren W. Improved evanescent-wave quartz-enhanced 
photoacoustic CO sensor using an optical fiber taper. Sens Actuators B 2017;248: 
1023–8. 

[235] Spagnolo V, Patimisco P, Borri S, Scamarcio G, Bernacki BE, Kriesel J. Part-per- 
trillion level SF6  detection using a quartz enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy- 
based sensor with single-mode fiber-coupled quantum cascade laser excitation. 
Opt Lett 2012;37:4461–3. 

[236] Waclawek JP, Moser H, Lendl B. Compact quantum cascade laser based quartz- 

enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy sensor system for detection of carbon 
disulfide. Opt Express 2016;24:6559–71. 

[237] Wang Z, Geng J, Ren W. Quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy (QEPAS) 
detection of the ν7  band of ethylene at low pressure with CO2  interference 
analysis. Appl Spectrosc 2017;71:1834–41. 

[207] Kosterev AA, Bakhirkin YA, Curl RF, Tittel FK. Quartz-enhanced photoacoustic 

[238] Wang Z, Yang M, Fu L, Chen C, You R, Ren W. Rapid field measurement of 

spectroscopy. Opt Lett 2002;27:1902–4. 

[208] Kauppinen J, Wilcken K, Kauppinen I, Koskinen V. High sensitivity in gas analysis 

with photoacoustic detection. Microchem J 2004;76:151–9. 

ventilation rate using a quartz-enhanced photoacoustic SF6 gas sensor. Meas Sci 
Technol 2020;31:085105. 

[239] Shi C, Wang D, Wang Z, Ma L, Wang Q, Xu K, et al. A mid-infrared fiber-coupled 
QEPAS nitric oxide sensor for real-time engine exhaust monitoring. IEEE Sens J 
2017;17:7418–24. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099744A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[240] Wang Z, Wang Q, Ching JYL, Wu JCY, Zhang G, Ren W. A portable low-power 
QEPAS-based CO2  isotope sensor using a fiber-coupled interband cascade laser. 
Sens Actuators B 2017;246:710–5. 

[241] Lassen M, Lamard L, Feng Y, Peremans A, Petersen JC. Off-axis quartz-enhanced 
photoacoustic spectroscopy using a pulsed nanosecond mid-infrared optical 
parametric oscillator. Opt Lett 2016;41:4118–21. 

[242] Zhang Q, Chang J, Cong Z, Feng Y, Wang Z, Wang F, et al. Pptv-level intra-cavity 
QEPAS sensor for acetylene detection using a high power Q-switched fiber laser. 
IEEE Sens J 2019;19:6181–6. 

[243] Patimisco P, Sampaolo A, Dong L, Giglio M, Scamarcio G, Tittel F, et al. Analysis 
of the electro-elastic properties of custom quartz tuning forks for optoacoustic gas 
sensing. Sens Actuators B Chem 2016;227:539–46. 

[244] Li S, Dong L, Wu H, Sampaolo A, Patimisco P, Spagnolo V, et al. Ppb-level quartz- 
enhanced photoacoustic detection of carbon monoxide exploiting a surface 
grooved tuning fork. Anal Chem 2019;91:5834–40. 

[245] Ma Y, He Y, Yu X, Zhang J, Sun R, Tittel FK. Compact all-fiber quartz-enhanced 

photoacoustic spectroscopy sensor with a 30.72 kHz quartz tuning fork and 
spatially resolved trace gas detection. Appl Phys Lett 2016;108:091115. 
[246] Guo M, Chen K, Gong Z, Yu Q. Trace ammonia detection based on near-infrared 
fiber-optic cantilever-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy. Photonic Sens 2019; 
9:293–301. 

[247] Wu H, Dong L, Zheng H, Liu X, Yin X, Ma W, et al. Enhanced near-infrared QEPAS 
sensor for sub-ppm level H2S detection by means of a fiber amplified 1582nm DFB 
laser. Sens Actuators B 2015;221:666–72. 

[270] Halls BR, Hsu PS, Jiang N, Legge ES, Felver JJ, Slipchenko MN, et al. kHz-rate 
four-dimensional fluorescence tomography using an ultraviolet-tunable 
narrowband burst-mode optical parametric oscillator. Optica 2017;4:897–902. 
[271] Xu W, Carter CD, Hammack S, Ma L. Analysis of 3D combustion measurements 

using CH-based tomographic VLIF (volumetric laser induced fluorescence). 
Combust Flame 2017;182:179–89. 

[272] St¨ohr M, Sadanandan R, Meier W. Experimental study of unsteady flame 

structures of an oscillating swirl flame in a gas turbine model combustor. Proc 
Combust Inst 2009;32:2925–32. 

[273] St¨ohr M, Boxx I, Carter CD, Meier W. Experimental study of vortex-flame 

interaction in a gas turbine model combustor. Combust Flame 2012;159:2636–49. 

[274] Barwey S, Hassanaly M, Raman V, Steinberg A. Using machine learning to 

construct velocity fields from OH-PLIF images. Combust Sci Technol 2019:1–24. 
[275] Caux-Brisebois V, Steinberg AM, Arndt CM, Meier W. Thermo-acoustic velocity 
coupling in a swirl stabilized gas turbine model combustor. Combust Flame 2014; 
161:3166–80. 

[276] Hartung G, Hult J, Balachandran R, Mackley MR, Kaminski CF. Flame front 

tracking in turbulent lean premixed flames using stereo PIV and time-sequenced 
planar LIF of OH. Appl Phys B 2009;96:843–62. 

[277] Peterson B, Baum E, Dreizler A, B¨ohm B. An experimental study of the detailed 
flame transport in a SI engine using simultaneous dual-plane OH-LIF and 
stereoscopic PIV. Combust Flame 2019;202:16–32. 

[278] Slipchenko MN, Meyer TR, Roy S. Advances in burst-mode laser diagnostics for 

reacting and nonreacting flows. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:1533–60. 

[248] Hippler M, Mohr C, Keen KA, McNaghten ED. Cavity-enhanced resonant 

[279] Thurow B, Jiang N, Lempert W. Review of ultra-high repetition rate laser 

photoacoustic spectroscopy with optical feedback cw diode lasers: a novel 
technique for ultratrace gas analysis and high-resolution spectroscopy. J Chem 
Phys 2010;133:044308. 

[249] Wang Z, Wei H, Li Y, Kan R, Ren W. Active modulation of intracavity laser 

intensity with the Pound–Drever–Hall locking for photoacoustic spectroscopy. 
Opt Lett 2020;45:1148–51. 

[250] Starovoitov VS, Kischkat JF, Semtsiv MP, Masselink WT. Intracavity 

photoacoustic sensing of water vapor with a continuously tunable external-cavity 
quantum-cascade laser operating near 5.5 μm. Opt Lett 2016;41:4955–8. 
[251] Wang Q, Wang Z, Ren W. Theoretical and experimental investigation of fiber-ring 

laser intracavity photoacoustic spectroscopy (FLI-PAS) for acetylene detection. 
J Lightwave Technol 2017;35:4519–25. 

[252] Wang Q, Wang Z, Ren W, Patimisco P, Sampaolo A, Spagnolo V. Fiber-ring laser 
intracavity QEPAS gas sensor using a 7.2 kHz quartz tuning fork. Sens Actuators B 
2018;268:512–8. 

[253] Pushkarsky M, Tsekoun A, Dunayevskiy IG, Go R, Patel CKN. Sub-parts-per-billion 
level detection of NO2 using room-temperature quantum cascade lasers. Proc Nat 
Acad Sci USA 2006;103:10846–9. 

[254] Elia A, Di Franco C, Spagnolo V, Lugar`a PM, Scamarcio G. Quantum cascade laser- 
based photoacoustic sensor for trace detection of formaldehyde gas. Sensors 
2009;9:2697–705 (Basel, Switzerland). 

[255] Wojtas J, Gluszek A, Hudzikowski A, Tittel FK. Mid-infrared trace gas sensor 
technology based on intracavity quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy. 
Sensors 2017;17:513. 

[256] Westblom U, Ald´en M. Simultaneous multiple species detection in a flame using 

laser-induced fluorescence. Appl Opt 1989;28:2592–9. 

diagnostics for fluid dynamic measurements. Meas Sci Technol 2012;24:012002. 
[280] Lempert W, Wu PF, Miles R, Zhang B, Lowrance J, Mastrocola V, et al. Pulse-burst 
laser system for high-speed flow diagnostics. In: Proceedings of the34th aerospace 
sciences meeting and exhibit: American institute of aeronautics and astronautics; 
1996. p. 179. 

[281] Fugger CA, Hsu PS, Jiang N, Yi T, Slipchenko MN, Felver JJ, et al. 10-kHz 

simultaneous dual-plane stereo-PIV and OH-PLIF imaging. Appl Phys B 2020;126: 
167. 

[282] Paul S, Hsu MNS, Jiang N, Fugger CA, Webb AM, Athmanathan V, Meyer TR, 

Roy S. Megahertz-rate OH planar laser-induced fluorescence imaging in a rotating 
detonation combustor. Opt Lett 2020;45:5776–9. 

[283] Jiang N, Bruzzese J, Patton R, Sutton J, Yentsch R, Gaitonde DV, et al. NO PLIF 
imaging in the CUBRC 48-inch shock tunnel. Exp Fluids 2012;53:1637–46. 

[284] Hsu PS, Slipchenko MN, Jiang N, Fugger CA, Webb AM, Athmanathan V, et al. 

Megahertz-rate OH planar laser-induced fluorescence imaging in a rotating 
detonation combustor. Opt Lett 2020;45:5776–9. 

[285] Bokor J, Freeman RR, White JC, Storz RH. Two-photon excitation of the n=3 level 

in H and D atoms. Phys Rev A 1981;24:612–4. 

[286] Bischel WK, Perry BE, Crosley DR. Two-photon laser-induced fluorescence in 

oxygen and nitrogen atoms. Chem Phys Lett 1981;82:85–8. 

[287] Ald´en M, Edner H, Grafstr¨om P, Svanberg S. Two-photon excitation of atomic 

oxygen in a flame. Opt Commun 1982;42:244–6. 

[288] Niemi K, Schulz-von der Gathen V, D¨obele HF. Absolute atomic oxygen density 
measurements by two-photon absorption laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy 
in an RF-excited atmospheric pressure plasma jet. Plasma Sources Sci Technol 
2005;14:375–86. 

[257] Kychakoff G, Howe RD, Hanson RK, McDaniel JC. Quantitative visualization of 

[289] Richardson DR, Roy S, Gord JR. Femtosecond, two-photon, planar laser-induced 

combustion species in a plane. Appl Opt 1982;21:3225–7. 

fluorescence of carbon monoxide in flames. Opt Lett 2017;42:875–8. 

[258] Daily JW. Laser induced fluorescence spectroscopy in flames. Prog Energy 

[290] Rahman KA, Patel KS, Slipchenko MN, Meyer TR, Zhang Z, Wu Y, et al. 

Combust Sci 1997;23:133–99. 

[259] Kirby B, Hanson R. Infrared PLIF imaging of gaseous flows. In: Proceedings of the 

Femtosecond, two-photon, laser-induced fluorescence (TP-LIF) measurement of 
CO in high-pressure flames. Appl Opt 2018;57:5666–71. 

36th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit; 1998. p. 307. 

[291] Kulatilaka WD, Gord JR, Katta VR, Roy S. Photolytic-interference-free, 

[260] Kirby BJ. Infrared planar laser -induced fluorescence imaging and applications to 

imaging of carbon monoxide and carbon doxide. Stanford University.; 2001. 
Doctoral dissertation. 

[261] Rothamer DA, Hanson RK. Temperature and pressure imaging using infrared 

planar laser-induced fluorescence. Appl Opt 2010;49:6436–47. 

[262] Zetterberg J, Blomberg S, Gustafson J, Sun ZW, Li ZS, Lundgren E, et al. An in situ 
set up for the detection of CO2 from catalytic CO oxidation by using planar laser- 
induced fluorescence. Rev Sci Instrum 2012;83:053104. 

[263] Zhou J, Pfaff S, Lundgren E, Zetterberg J. A convenient setup for laser-induced 
fluorescence imaging of both CO and CO2  during catalytic CO oxidation. Appl 
Phys B 2017;123:87. 

[264] Li ZS, Rupinski M, Zetterberg J, Ald´en M. Mid-infrared PS and LIF detection of 
CH4  and C2H6  in cold flows and flames at atmospheric pressure. Proc Combust 
Inst 2005;30:1629–36. 

[265] Rosell J, Bai XS, Sjoholm J, Zhou B, Li Z, Wang Z, et al. Multi-species PLIF study of 
the structures of turbulent premixed methane/air jet flames in the flamelet and 
thin-reaction zones regimes. Combust Flame 2017;182:324–38. 

[266] Li B, Jonsson M, Algotsson M, Bood J, Li ZS, Johansson O, et al. Quantitative 
detection of hydrogen peroxide in an HCCI engine using photofragmentation 
laser-induced fluorescence. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:3573–81. 

[267] Li B, Li X, Yao M, Li Z. Methyl radical imaging in methane–air flames using laser 
photofragmentation-induced fluorescence. Appl Spectrosc 2015;69:1152–6. 

[268] Ma L, Lei Q, Ikeda J, Xu W, Wu Y, Carter CD. Single-shot 3D flame diagnostic 

based on volumetric laser induced fluorescence (VLIF). Proc Combust Inst 2017; 
36:4575–83. 

femtosecond two-photon fluorescence imaging of atomic hydrogen. Opt Lett 
2012;37:3051–3. 

[292] B¨ohm B, Heeger C, Gordon RL, Dreizler A. New perspectives on turbulent 

combustion: multi-parameter high-speed planar laser diagnostics. Flow Turbul 
Combust 2011;86:313–41. 

[293] Wan M, Sun M, Wu G, Gao Q, Li B, Wang H, et al. Quantitative feature extraction 
of turbulent premixed flames by photofragmentation laser-induced fluorescence. 
Opt Eng 2021;60:023108. 

[294] Skiba AW, Wabel TM, Carter CD, Hammack SD, Temme JE, Driscoll JF. Premixed 
flames subjected to extreme levels of turbulence part I: flame structure and a new 
measured regime diagram. Combust Flame 2018;189:407–32. 

[295] Johchi A, Pareja J, B¨ohm B, Dreizler A. Quantitative mixture fraction imaging of a 

synthetic biogas turbulent jet propagating into a NO-vitiated air co-flow using 
planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF). Exp Fluids 2019;60:82. 

[296] Bennett AM, Liu P, Li Z, Kharbatia NM, Boyette W, Masri AR, et al. Soot formation 
in laminar flames of ethylene/ammonia. Combust Flame 2020;220:210–8. 
[297] Jain A, Wang Y, Kulatilaka WD. Three-photon-excited laser-induced fluorescence 

detection of atomic hydrogen in flames. Opt Lett 2019;44:5945–8. 

[298] Benabid F, Knight JC, Antonopoulos G, Russell PSJ. Stimulated Raman scattering 

in hydrogen-filled hollow-core photonic crystal fiber. Science 2002;298:399. 

[299] Kojima J, Nguyen QV. Single-shot rotational Raman thermometry for turbulent 
flames using a low-resolution bandwidth technique. Meas Sci Technol 2007;19: 
015406. 

[300] Moore DS, McGrane SD. Raman temperature measurement. J Phys Conf Ser 2014; 

500:192011. 

[269] Wu Y, Xu W, Ma L. Kilohertz VLIF (volumetric laser induced fluorescence) 

[301] El-Diasty F. Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering: Spectroscopy and 

measurements in a seeded free gas-phase jet in the transitionally turbulent flow 
regime. Opt Lasers Eng 2018;102:52–8. 

microscopy. Vib Spectrosc 2011;55:1–37. 

[302] Maker PD, Terhune RW. Study of optical effects due to an induced polarization 
third order in the electric field strength. Phys Rev 1965;137:A801–18. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099745A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[303] Giordmaine JA, Kaiser W. Light scattering by coherently driven lattice vibrations. 

Phys Rev 1966;144:676–88. 

[304] Alfano RR, Shapiro SL. Optical phonon lifetime measured directly with 

picosecond pulses. Phys Rev Lett 1971;26:1247–51. 

[305] Von der Linde D, Laubereau A, Kaiser W. Molecular vibrations in liquids: direct 

measurement of the molecular dephasing time; determination of the shape of 
picosecond light pulses. Phys Rev Lett 1971;26:954–7. 

[333] Escofet-Martin D, Ojo AO, Collins J, Mecker NT, Linne M, Peterson B. Dual-probe 
1D hybrid fs/ps rotational CARS for simultaneous single-shot temperature, 
pressure, and O2/N2  measurements. Opt Lett 2020;45:4758–61. 

[334] Retter JE, Elliott GS, Kearney SP. Dielectric-barrier-discharge plasma-assisted 

hydrogen diffusion flame. Part 1: temperature, oxygen, and fuel measurements by 
one-dimensional fs/ps rotational CARS imaging. Combust Flame 2018;191: 
527–40. 

[306] Akhmanov S, Dmitriev V, Kovrigin A, Koroteev N, Tunkin V, Kholodnykh A. 

[335] Castellanos L, Mazza F, Kliukin D, Bohlin A. Pure-rotational 1D-CARS 

Active spectroscopy of Raman scattering of light with the aid of a 
quasicontinuously tunable parametric generator. Soviet J Exp Theor Phys Lett 
1972;15:425. 

[307] Thariyan MP, Ananthanarayanan V, Bhuiyan AH, Naik SV, Gore JP, Lucht RP. 

Dual-pump CARS temperature and major species concentration measurements in 
counter-flow methane flames using narrowband pump and broadband stokes 
lasers. Combust Flame 2010;157:1390–9. 

[308] Han D, Satija A, Kim J, Weng Y, Gore JP, Lucht RP. Dual-pump vibrational CARS 
measurements of temperature and species concentrations in turbulent premixed 
flames with CO2  addition. Combust Flame 2017;181:239–50. 

[309] Cutler AD, Gallo ECA, Cantu LML, Rockwell RD, Goyne CP. Coherent anti-Stokes 
Raman spectroscopy of a premixed ethylene–air flame in a dual-mode scramjet. 
Combust Flame 2018;189:92–105. 

[310] Satija A, Chang Z, Lowe A, Thomas LM, Masri AR, Lucht RP. CARS thermometry 

in laminar sooting ethylene-air co-flow diffusion flames with nitrogen dilution. 
Combust Flame 2019;208:37–44. 

[311] Roy S, Meyer TR, Brown MS, Velur VN, Lucht RP, Gord JR. Triple-pump coherent 
anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS): temperature and multiple-species 
concentration measurements in reacting flows. Opt Commun 2003;224:131–7. 

[312] Satija A, Arendt M, Chai N, Lucht RP. Dual-broadband coherent anti-Stokes raman 

scattering for investigating pure rotational raman spectra of nitric oxide. In: 
Proceedings of the AIAA scitech 2019 forum: American institute of aeronautics 
and astronautics; 2019. p. 1087. 

[313] Rock N, Hsu PS, Lauriola D, Rahman N, Estevadeordal J, Grib SW, et al. 

WIDECARS multi-parameter measurements in premixed ethylene–air flames 
using a wavelength stable ultrabroadband dye laser. Appl Opt 2020;59:2649–55. 

[314] Meyer TR, Roy S, Lucht RP, Gord JR. Dual-pump dual-broadband CARS for 

exhaust-gas temperature and CO2–O2–N2  mole-fraction measurements in model 
gas-turbine combustors. Combust Flame 2005;142:52–61. 

[315] Attal-Tr´etout B, Schmidt SC, Cr´et´e E, Dumas P, Taran JP. Resonance cars of OH in 
high-pressure flames. J Quant Spectrosc Radiat Transf 1990;43:351–64. 
[316] Chai N, Naik SV, Laurendeau NM, Lucht RP, Roy S, Gord JR. Single-laser-shot 
detection of nitric oxide in reacting flows using electronic resonance enhanced 
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering. Appl Phys Lett 2008;93:091115. 

[317] Lauriola DK, Rahman KA, Stauffer HU, Slipchenko MN, Meyer TR, Roy S. 
Concentration and pressure scaling of CH2O electronicresonance-enhanced 
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering signal. Appl Opt 2021;60:1051–8. 
[318] Laubereau A, Kaiser W. Vibrational dynamics of liquids and solids investigated by 

picosecond light pulses. Rev Mod Phys 1978;50:607–65. 

[319] Roy S, Hsu PS, Jiang N, Slipchenko MN, Gord JR. 100-kHz-rate gas-phase 

thermometry using 100-ps pulses from a burst-mode laser. Opt Lett 2015;40: 
5125–8. 

[320] Beaud P, Frey HM, Lang T, Motzkus M. Flame thermometry by femtosecond 

CARS. Chem Phys Lett 2001;344:407–12. 

[321] Lowe A, Thomas LM, Satija A, Lucht RP, Masri AR. Chirped-probe-pulse 

femtosecond CARS thermometry in turbulent spray flames. Proc Combust Inst 
2019;37:1383–91. 

[322] Pestov D, Wang X, Ariunbold GO, Murawski RK, Sautenkov VA, Dogariu A, et al. 
Single-shot detection of bacterial endospores via coherent Raman spectroscopy. 
Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2008;105:422–7. 

[323] Dedic CE, Meyer TR, Michael JB. Single-shot ultrafast coherent anti-Stokes Raman 
scattering of vibrational/rotational nonequilibrium. Optica 2017;4:563–70. 
[324] Kearney SP. Hybrid fs/ps rotational CARS temperature and oxygen measurements 
in the product gases of canonical flat flames. Combust Flame 2015;162:1748–58. 

[325] Richardson DR, Kearney SP, Guildenbecher DR. Post-detonation fireball 

thermometry via femtosecond-picosecond coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering 
(CARS). Proc Combust Inst 2019;38:1657–64. 

[326] Kearney SP, Guildenbecher DR. Temperature measurements in metalized 

propellant combustion using hybrid fs/ps coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering. 
Appl Opt 2016;55:4958–66. 

[327] Stauffer HU, Rahman KA, Slipchenko MN, Roy S, Gord JR, Meyer TR. 

Interference-free hybrid fs/ps vibrational CARS thermometry in high-pressure 
flames. Opt Lett 2018;43:4911–4. 

spatiotemporal thermometry with a single regenerative amplifier system. Opt Lett 
2020;45:4662–5. 

[336] Bohlin A, Kliewer CJ. Communication: two-dimensional gas-phase coherent anti- 
Stokes Raman spectroscopy (2D-CARS): simultaneous planar imaging and 
multiplex spectroscopy in a single laser shot. J Chem Phys 2013;138:221101. 
[337] Miller JD, Slipchenko MN, Mance JG, Roy S, Gord JR. 1-kHz two-dimensional 
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (2D-CARS) for gas-phase thermometry. 
Opt Express 2016;24:24971–9. 

[338] Kulatilaka WD, Stauffer HU, Gord JR, Roy S. One-dimensional single-shot 

thermometry in flames using femtosecond-CARS line imaging. Opt Lett 2011;36: 
4182–4. 

[339] Kliewer CJ, Gao Y, Seeger T, Patterson BD, Farrow RL, Settersten TB. Quantitative 
one-dimensional imaging using picosecond dual-broadband pure-rotational 
coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy. Appl Opt 2011;50:1770–8. 
[340] Kliewer CJ. High-spatial-resolution one-dimensional rotational coherent anti- 

Stokes Raman spectroscopy imaging using counterpropagating beams. Opt Lett 
2012;37:229–31. 

[341] Hosseinnia A, Nordstr¨om E, Fatehi H, Bood J, Bengtsson PE. Rotational CARS 

thermometry and concentration measurements in ethane-nitrogen mixtures using 
Fourier analysis. J Raman Spectrosc 2018;49:1096–108. 

[342] Thomas LM, Lowe A, Satija A, Masri AR, Lucht RP. Five kHz thermometry in 

turbulent spray flames using chirped-probe pulse femtosecond CARS, part I: 
processing and interference analysis. Combust Flame 2019;200:405–16. 
[343] Santagata R, Scherman M, Toubeix M, Nafa M, Tretout B, Bresson A. Ultrafast 

background-free ro-vibrational fs/ps-CARS thermometry using an Yb:YAG crystal- 
fiber amplified probe. Opt Express 2019;27:32924–37. 

[344] Barros J, Scherman M, Lin E, Fdida N, Santagata R, Attal-Tretout B, et al. 5 kHz 
single shot hybrid fs/ps-CARS thermometry in an atmospheric flame. Opt Express 
2020;28:34656–64. 

[345] Rahman KA, Braun EL, Slipchenko MN, Roy S, Meyer TR. Flexible chirp-free 

probe pulse amplification for kHz fs/ps rotational CARS. Opt Lett 2020;45:503–6. 

[346] Yao S, Qin H, Wang Q, Lu Z, Yao X, Yu Z, et al. Optimizing analysis of coal 
property using laser-induced breakdown and near-infrared reflectance 
spectroscopies. Spectrochim Acta Part A 2020;239:118492. 

[347] Cremers DA, Radziemski LJ. Handbook of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. 

John Wiley & Sons; 2006. 

[348] Cui MC, Deguchi Y, Wang ZZ, Fujita Y, Liu RW, Shiou FJ, et al. Enhancement and 

stabilization of plasma using collinear long-short double-pulse laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2018;142:14–22. 

[349] Nicolodelli G, Senesi GS, Ranulfi AC, Marangoni BS, Watanabe A, Benites VD, 
et al. Double-pulse laser induced breakdown spectroscopy in orthogonal beam 
geometry to enhance line emission intensity from agricultural samples. 
Microchem J 2017;133:272–8. 

[350] Prochazka D, Porizka P, Novotny J, Hrdlicka A, Novotny K, Sperka P, et al. Triple- 
pulse LIBS: laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy signal enhancement by 
combination of pre-ablation and re-heating laser pulses. J Anal At Spectrom 2020; 
35:293–300. 

[351] Galbacs G, Jedlinszki N, Metzinger A. Analysis and discrimination of soldering tin 
samples by collinear multi-pulse laser induced breakdown spectrometry, 
supported by inductively coupled plasma optical emission and mass spectrometry. 
Microchem J 2013;107:17–24. 

[352] Tang Y, Li JM, Hao ZQ, Tang SS, Zhu ZH, Guo LB, et al. Multielemental self- 
absorption reduction in laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy by using 
microwave-assisted excitation. Opt Express 2018;26:12121–30. 

[353] Viljanen J, Sun ZW, Alwahabi ZT. Microwave assisted laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy at ambient conditions. Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2016; 
118:29–36. 

[354] Guo J, Wang TF, Shao JF, Chen AM, Jin MX. Emission enhancement of laser- 
induced breakdown spectroscopy by increasing sample temperature combined 
with spatial confinement. J Anal At Spectrom 2018;33:2116–23. 

[355] Wang Y, Chen AM, Sui LZ, Li SY, Liu DL, Wang XW, et al. Persistence of atomic 
spectral line on laser-induced Cu plasma with spatial confinement. Phys Plasmas 
2016;23:113105. 

[328] Bohlin A, Patterson BD, Kliewer CJ. Communication: Simplified two-beam 

[356] Wang QY, Chen AM, Zhang D, Wang Y, Sui LZ, Li SY, et al. The role of cavity 

rotational CARS signal generation demonstrated in 1D. J Chem Phys 2013;138: 
081102. 

shape on spatially confined laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Phys Plasmas 
2018;25:073301. 

[329] Bohlin A, Kliewer CJ. Direct coherent Raman temperature imaging and wideband 
chemical detection in a hydrocarbon flat flame. J Phys Chem Lett 2015;6:643–9. 
[330] Bohlin A, Jainski C, Patterson BD, Dreizler A, Kliewer CJ. Multiparameter spatio- 

thermochemical probing of flame–wall interactions advanced with coherent 
Raman imaging. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:4557–64. 

[331] Bohlin A, Mann M, Patterson BD, Dreizler A, Kliewer CJ. Development of two- 
beam femtosecond/picosecond one-dimensional rotational coherent anti-Stokes 
Raman spectroscopy: time-resolved probing of flame wall interactions. Proc 
Combust Inst 2015;35:3723–30. 

[332] Escofet-Martin D, Ojo AO, Mecker NT, Linne MA, Peterson B. Simultaneous 1D 

hybrid fs/ps rotational CARS, phosphor thermometry, and CH* imaging to study 
transient near-wall heat transfer processes. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:1579–87. 

[357] Waheed S, Bashir S, Dawood A, Anjum S, Akram M, Hayat A, et al. Effect of 

magnetic field on laser induced breakdown spectroscopy of zirconium dioxide 
(ZrO2) plasma. Int J Light Electron Opt 2017;140:536–44. 

[358] Akhtar M, Jabbar A, Mehmood S, Ahmed N, Ahmed R, Baig MA. Magnetic field 
enhanced detection of heavy metals in soil using laser induced breakdown 
spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2018;148:143–51. 

[359] Hao ZQ, Guo LB, Li CM, Shen M, Zou XH, Li XY, et al. Sensitivity improvement in 

the detection of V and Mn elements in steel using laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy with ring-magnet confinement. J Anal At Spectrom 2014;29: 
2309–14. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099746A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[360] Bae D, Nam SH, Han SH, Yoo J, Lee Y. Spreading a water droplet on the laser- 
patterned silicon wafer substrate for surface-enhanced laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2015;113:70–8. 

[361] Yang XY, Hao ZQ, Shen M, Yi RX, Li JM, Yu HW, et al. Simultaneous 

determination of La, Ce, Pr, and Nd elements in aqueous solution using surface- 
enhanced laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Talanta 2017;163:127–31. 
[362] De Giacomo A, Koral C, Valenza G, Gaudiuso R, Dell’Aglio M. Nanoparticle 
enhanced laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for microdrop analysis at 
subppm level. Anal Chem 2016;88:5251–7. 

[363] Koral C, Dell’Aglio M, Gaudiuso R, Alrifai R, Torelli M, De Giacomo A. 

Nanoparticle-enhanced laser induced breakdown spectroscopy for the 
noninvasive analysis of transparent samples and gemstones. Talanta 2018;182: 
253–8. 

[364] Lednev VN, Pershin SM, Sdvizhenskii PA, Grishin MY, Fedorov AN, Bukin VV, 
et al. Combining Raman and laser induced breakdown spectroscopy by double 
pulse lasing. Anal Bioanal Chem 2018;410:277–86. 

[365] Moros J, ElFaham MM, Laserna JJ. Dual-spectroscopy platform for the 

surveillance of mars mineralogy using a decisions fusion architecture on 
simultaneous LIBS-Raman data. Anal Chem 2018;90:2079–87. 

multi-elemental determination of micro- and macronutrients in vegetable 
samples. Anal Chim Acta 2019;1062:28–36. 

[388] Qin HQ, Lu ZM, Yao SC, Li ZH, Lu JD. Combining laser-induced breakdown 

spectroscopy and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy for the analysis of coal 
properties. J Anal At Spectrom 2019;34:347–55. 

[389] Xu XB, Du CW, Ma F, Shen YZ, Wu K, Liang D, et al. Detection of soil organic 

matter from laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) and mid-infrared 
spectroscopy (FTIR-ATR) coupled with multivariate techniques. Geoderma 2019; 
355:113905. 

[390] Tognoni E, Cristoforetti G, Legnaioli S, Palleschi V. Calibration-free laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy: state of the art. Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 
2010;65:1–14. 

[391] Li TQ, Hou ZY, Fu YT, Yu JL, Gu WL, Wang Z. Correction of self-absorption effect 
in calibration-free laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (CF-LIBS) with 
blackbody radiation reference. Anal Chim Acta 2019;1058:39–47. 

[392] Yang JH, Li XM, Xu JW, Ma XH. A calibration-free laser-induced breakdown 

spectroscopy (CF-LIBS) quantitative analysis method based on the auto-selection 
of an internal reference line and optimized estimation of plasma temperature. 
Appl Spectrosc 2018;72:129–40. 

[366] Clegg SM, Wiens R, Misra AK, Sharma SK, Lambert J, Bender S, et al. Planetary 

[393] Dong J, Liang L, Wei J, Tang HS, Zhang TL, Yang XF, et al. A method for 

geochemical investigations using Raman and laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy. Appl Spectrosc 2014;68:925–36. 

[367] Subedi K, Trejos T, Almirall J. Forensic analysis of printing inks using tandem 
laser induced breakdown spectroscopy and laser ablation inductively coupled 
plasma mass spectrometry. Spectrochim Acta Part B 2015;103:76–83. 

[368] Dong MR, Oropeza D, Chirinos J, Gonzalez JJ, Lu JD, Mao XL, et al. Elemental 

analysis of coal by tandem laser induced breakdown spectroscopy and laser 
ablation inductively coupled plasma time of flight mass spectrometry. 
Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2015;109:44–50. 

[369] Chirinos JR, Oropeza DD, Gonzalez JJ, Hou HM, Morey M, Zorba V, et al. 

Simultaneous 3-dimensional elemental imaging with LIBS and LA-ICP-MS. J Anal 
At Spectrom 2014;29:1292–8. 

[370] Gavrilovic MR, Cvejic M, Lazic V, Jovicevic S. Secondary plasma formation after 
single pulse laser ablation underwater and its advantages for laser induced 
breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). Phys Chem Chem Phys 2016;18:14629–37. 

[371] Glaus R, Hahn DW. Double-pulse laser ablation coupled to laser-induced 

breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2014;98:48–53. 

[372] Yi RX, Li JM, Yang XY, Zhou R, Yu HW, Hao ZQ, et al. Spectral interference 

elimination in soil analysis using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy assisted 
by laser-induced fluorescence. Anal Chem 2017;89:2334–7. 

[373] Li JM, Guo LB, Zhao N, Yang XY, Yi RX, Li KH, et al. Determination of cobalt in 

low-alloy steels using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy combined with 
laser-induced fluorescence. Talanta 2016;151:234–8. 

[374] Li JM, Hao ZQ, Zhao N, Zhou R, Yi RX, Tang SS, et al. Spatially selective 

excitation in laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy combined with laser-induced 
fluorescence. Opt Express 2017;25:4945–51. 

[375] Guezenoc J, Gallet-Budynek A, Bousquet B. Critical review and advices on 

spectral-based normalization methods for LIBS quantitative analysis. Spectrochim 
Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2019;160:105688. 

improving the accuracy of calibration-free laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
(CF-LIBS) using determined plasma temperature by genetic algorithm (GA). 
J Anal At Spectrom 2015;30:1336–44. 

[394] Hall MJ, Koenig M. A fiber-optic probe to measure precombustion in-cylinder 

fuel-air ratio fluctuations in production engines. Symp (Int) Combust 1996: 
2613–8. Elsevier. 

[395] Rieker G, Li H, Liu X, Liu J, Jeffries J, Hanson R, et al. Rapid measurements of 

temperature and H2O concentration in IC engines with a spark plug-mounted 
diode laser sensor. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31:3041–9. 

[396] Mattison D, Jeffries J, Hanson R, Steeper R, De Zilwa S, Dec J, et al. In-cylinder 
gas temperature and water concentration measurements in HCCI engines using a 
multiplexed-wavelength diode-laser system: sensor development and initial 
demonstration. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31:791–8. 

[397] Kranendonk LA, Walewski JW, Kim T, Sanders ST. Wavelength-agile sensor 

applied for HCCI engine measurements. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:1619–27. 
[398] Witzel O, Klein A, Wagner S, Meffert C, Schulz C, Ebert V. High-speed tunable 
diode laser absorption spectroscopy for sampling-free in-cylinder water vapor 
concentration measurements in an optical IC engine. Appl Phys B 2012;109: 
521–32. 

[399] Witzel O, Klein A, Meffert C, Wagner S, Kaiser S, Schulz C, et al. VCSEL-based, 
high-speed, in situ TDLAS for in-cylinder water vapor measurements in IC 
engines. Opt Express 2013;21:19951–65. 

[400] Witzel O, Klein A, Meffert C, Schulz C, Kaiser S, Ebert V. Calibration-free, high- 
speed, in-cylinder laser absorption sensor for cycle-resolved, absolute H2O 
measurements in a production IC engine. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:3653–61. 
[401] Jatana GS, Magee M, Fain D, Naik SV, Shaver GM, Lucht RP. Simultaneous high- 
speed gas property measurements at the exhaust gas recirculation cooler exit and 
at the turbocharger inlet of a multicylinder diesel engine using diode-laser- 
absorption spectroscopy. Appl Opt 2015;54:1220–31. 

[376] Feng J, Wang Z, Li Z, Ni WD. Study to reduce laser-induced breakdown 

[402] Terzija N, Karagiannopoulos S, Begg S, Wright P, Ozanyan K, McCann H. 

spectroscopy measurement uncertainty using plasma characteristic parameters. 
Spectrochim Acta Part B At Spectrosc 2010;65:549–56. 

Tomographic imaging of the liquid and vapour fuel distributions in a single- 
cylinder direct-injection gasoline engine. Int J Engine Res 2015;16:565–79. 

[377] Wang Z, Li LZ, West L, Li Z, Ni WD. A spectrum standardization approach for 

[403] Yoo J, Prikhodko V, Parks JE, Perfetto A, Geckler S, Partridge WP. High-speed 

laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy measurements. Spectrochim Acta Part B 
At Spectrosc 2012;68:58–64. 

[378] Yaroshchyk P, Eberhardt JE. Automatic correction of continuum background in 

laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy using a model-free algorithm. 
Spectrochim Acta Part B 2014;99:138–49. 

[379] Schlenke J, Hildebrand L, Moros J, Laserna JJ. Adaptive approach for variable 

noise suppression on laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy responses using 
stationary wavelet transform. Anal Chim Acta 2012;754:8–19. 

[380] Guo GM, Niu GH, Shi Q, Lin QY, Tian D, Duan YX. Multi-element quantitative 
analysis of soils by laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) coupled with 
univariate and multivariate regression methods. Anal Methods 2019;11:3006–13. 

multiplexed spatiotemporally resolved measurements of exhaust gas recirculation 
dynamics in a multi-cylinder engine using laser absorption spectroscopy. Appl 
Spectrosc 2016;70:572–84. 

[404] Diemel O, Honza R, Ding CP, B¨ohm B, Wagner S. In situ sensor for cycle-resolved 
measurement of temperature and mole fractions in IC engine exhaust gases. Proc 
Combust Inst 2019;37:1453–60. 

[405] Peterson B, Reuss DL, Sick V. On the ignition and flame development in a spray- 
guided direct-injection spark-ignition engine. Combust Flame 2014;161:240–55. 
[406] Wang Z, Lonn S, Matamis A, Andersson O, Tun´er M, Ald´en M, et al. Transition 

from HCCI to PPC: investigation of fuel distribution by planar laser induced 
fluorescence (PLIF). SAE Int J Engines 2017;10:1465–81. 

[381] Speranca MA, Andrade DF, Castro JP, Pereira ER. Univariate and multivariate 

[407] Wang Z, Stamatoglou P, Lundgren M, Luise L, Vaglieco B, Andersson A, et al. 

calibration strategies in combination with laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
(LIBS) to determine Ti on sunscreen: a different sample preparation procedure. 
Opt Laser Technol 2019;109:648–53. 

Ultra-high speed fuel tracer PLIF imaging in a heavy-duty optical PPC engine. SAE 
Tech Pap 2018:0904. 

[408] Peterson B, Baum E, B¨ohm B, Sick V, Dreizler A. Evaluation of toluene LIF 

[382] Tiwari PK, Awasthi S, Kumar R, Anand RK, Rai PK, Rai AK. Rapid analysis of 

pharmaceutical drugs using LIBS coupled with multivariate analysis. Lasers Med 
Sci 2018;33:263–70. 

[383] Yao SC, Zhang LF, Zhu YM, Wu JY, Lu ZM, Lu JD. Evaluation of heavy metal 
element detection in municipal solid waste incineration fly ash based on LIBS 
sensor. Waste Manag 2020;102:492–8 (Oxford). 

[384] Sun C, Tian Y, Gao L, Niu YS, Zhang TL, Li H, et al. Machine learning allows 
calibration models to predict trace element concentration in soils with 
generalized LIBS spectra. Sci Rep 2019;9:1–18. 

thermometry detection strategies applied in an internal combustion engine. Appl 
Phys B 2014;117:151–75. 

[409] Ding CP, Peterson B, Schmidt M, Dreizler A, B¨ohm B. Flame/flow dynamics at the 
piston surface of an IC engine measured by high-speed PLIF and PTV. Proc 
Combust Inst 2019;37:4973–81. 

[410] Peterson B, Baum E, B¨ohm B, Dreizler A. Early flame propagation in a spark- 

ignition engine measured with quasi 4D-diagnostics. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35: 
3829–37. 

[411] Badawy T, Bao X, Xu H. Impact of spark plug gap on flame kernel propagation and 

[385] Li KH, Guo LB, Li JM, Yang XY, Yi RX, Li XY, et al. Quantitative analysis of steel 

engine performance. Appl Energy 2017;191:311–27. 

samples using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy with an artificial neural 
network incorporating a genetic algorithm. Appl Opt 2017;56:935–41. 

[386] Yao SC, Qin HQ, Wang Q, Lu ZM, Yao XY, Yu ZY, et al. Optimizing analysis of coal 
property using laser -induced breakdown and near -infrared reflectance 
spectroscopies. Spectrochim Acta Part A Mol Biomol Spectrosc 2020;239:118492. 

[387] de Oliveira DM, Fontes LM, Pasquini C. Comparing laser induced breakdown 

spectroscopy, near infrared spectroscopy, and their integration for simultaneous 

[412] Matamis A, Lonn S, Luise L, Vaglieco BM, Tuner M, Andersson O, et al. Optical 
characterization of methanol compression-ignition combustion in a heavy-duty 
engine. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:5509–17. 

[413] Bengtsson PE, Martinsson L, Ald´en M, Johansson B, Lassesson B, Marforio K, et al. 
Dual-broadband rotational cars measurements in an IC engine. Symp (Int) 
Combust 1994;25:1735–42. 

[414] Weikl MC, Beyrau F, Leipertz A. Simultaneous temperature and exhaust-gas 
recirculation-measurements in a homogeneous charge-compression ignition 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099747A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

engine by use of pure rotational coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy. Appl 
Opt 2006;45:3646–51. 

[415] Nishiyama A, Kawahara N, Tomita E, Fujiwara M, Ishikawa N, Kamei K, et al. In- 
situ fuel concentration measurement near spark plug by 3.392 μm infrared 
absorption method-application to a port injected lean-burn engine. SAE Technical 
Paper 2004:1353. 

[442] Hermann J, Greifenstein M, Boehm B, Dreizler A. Experimental investigation of 
global combustion characteristics in an effusion cooled single sector model gas 
turbine combustor. Flow Turbul Combust 2019;102:1025–52. 

[443] Paa W, Müller D, Stafast H, Triebel W. Flame turbulences recorded at 1 kHz using 
planar laser induced fluorescence upon hot band excitation of OH radicals. Appl 
Phys B 2007;86:1–5. 

[416] Cundy M, Schucht T, Thiele O, Sick V. High-speed laser-induced fluorescence and 

[444] Cundy ME, Sick V. Hydroxyl radical imaging at kHz rates using a frequency- 

spark plug absorption sensor diagnostics for mixing and combustion studies in 
engines. Appl Opt 2009;48:B94–104. 

[417] Jeffries JB, Porter JM, Pyun SH, Hanson RK, Sholes KR, Shouji K, et al. An in- 

cylinder laser absorption sensor for crank-angle-resolved measurements of 
gasoline concentration and temperature. SAE Int J Engines 2010;3:373–82. 
[418] Wright P, Terzija N, Davidson JL, Garcia-Castillo S, Garcia-Stewart C, Pegrum S, 

et al. High-speed chemical species tomography in a multi-cylinder automotive 
engine. Chem Eng J 2010;158:2–10. 

[419] Golzke H, Holler H, Friedrich W, Leick P, Schoenauer U, Dreizler A. 2D residual 
gas visualization in an optical direct injection spark ignition engine with IR laser 
absorption. SAE Tech Pap 2015:1648. 

[420] ACARE. Flightpath 2050: Europe’s vision for aviation. European Union; 2011. 
[421] Lefebvre AH. Gas turbine combustion. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1998. Taylor & 

Francis. 

[422] Lee JG, Kim K, Santavicca DA. Measurement of equivalence ratio fluctuation and 
its effect on heat release during unstable combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28: 
415–21. 

[423] Tomita E, Kawahara N, Shigenaga M, Nishiyama A, Dibble RW. In 

situmeasurement of hydrocarbon fuel concentration near a spark plug in an 
engine cylinder using the 3.392μm infrared laser absorption method: discussion 
of applicability with a homogeneous methane–air mixture. Meas Sci Technol 
2003;14:1350–6. 

[424] Hinckley K, Dean A. Time-resolved measurements of fuel-air stoichiometry in 

pulse detonation engines using a non-intrusive laser sensor. In: Proceedings of the 
43rd AIAA aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit; 2005. p. 628. 

[425] Brown M, Herring G, Cabell K, Hass N, Barhorst T, Gruber M. Optical 

quadrupled Nd:YLF laser. Appl Phys B 2009;96:241–5. 

[445] O’Byrne S, Danehy PM, Tedder SA, Cutler AD. Dual-pump coherent anti-Stokes 

Raman scattering measurements in a supersonic combustor. AIAA J 2007;45: 
922–33. 

[446] Read RW, Rogerson JW, Hochgreb S. Planar laser-induced fluorescence fuel 
imaging during gas-turbine relight. J Propul Power 2013;29:961–74. 
[447] Cantu LML, Gallo ECA, Cutler AD, Bathel BF, Danehy PM, Rockwell RD, et al. 

Visualization of simulated fuel–air mixing in a dual-mode scramjet. J Propul 
Power 2016;32:373–82. 

[448] Sopek T, Brieschenk S, Vanyai T, Morgan RG, McIntyre TJ. Single-shot 

temperature measurements in a scramjet combustor using thermally assisted 
laser-induced fluorescence. AIAA J 2020;58:3486–98. 

[449] Peng J, Cao Z, Yu X, Yang S, Yu Y, Ren H, et al. Analysis of combustion instability 

of hydrogen fueled scramjet combustor on high-speed OH-PLIF measurements 
and dynamic mode decomposition. Int J Hydrog Energy 2020;45:13108–18. 

[450] Fang S, Wang Z, Lin X, Li F, Li R, Li J, et al. Characterizing combustion of a hybrid 
rocket using laser absorption spectroscopy. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2021;127: 
110411. 

[451] Enerdata. Global Energy Statistical Yearbook. Enerdata; 2019. 2019 Edition. 

Global Energy Statistical Yearbook. 

[452] Liu X, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK, Hinckley KM, Woodmansee MA. Development of a 
tunable diode laser sensor for measurements of gas turbine exhaust temperature. 
Appl Phys B 2006;82:469–78. 

[453] Kiel B. Review of advances in combustion control, actuation, sensing, modeling 

and related technologies for air breathing gas turbines. In: Proceedings of the 
39th aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit; 2001. p. 2001–481. 

measurements at the combustor exit of the HIFiRE 2 ground test engine. In: 
Proceedings of the 50th AIAA aerospace sciences meeting including the new 
horizons forum and aerospace exposition; 2012. p. 857. 

[454] Peng WY, Sur R, Strand CL, Spearrin RM, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. High-sensitivity 
in situ QCLAS-based ammonia concentration sensor for high-temperature 
applications. Appl Phys B 2016;122:188. 

[426] Busa KM, Rice BE, McDaniel JC, Goyne CP, Rockwell RD, Fulton JA, et al. 

Scramjet combustion efficiency measurement via tomographic absorption 
spectroscopy and particle image velocimetry. AIAA J 2016;54:2463–71. 
[427] Jenkins T, DeBarber P, Yoshimura T, Shen J, McDonell V. Development of a non- 
intrusive temperature sensor in a model gas turbine combustor. In: Proceedings of 
the 42nd AIAA aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit; 2004. p. 546. 
[428] Wang J, ST S, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Oxygen measurements at high pressures 
with vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers. Appl Phys B 2001;72:865–72. 
[429] Li H, Zhou X, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Active control of lean blowout in a swirl- 

stabilized combustor using a tunable diode laser. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31: 
3215–23. 

[430] Ma L, Sanders ST, Jeffries JB, Hanson RK. Monitoring and control of a pulse 

detonation engine using a diode-laser fuel concentration and temperature sensor. 
Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:161–6. 

[431] Nair AP, Lee DD, Pineda DI, Kriesel J, Hargus WA, Bennewitz JW, et al. Methane- 
oxygen rotating detonation exhaust thermodynamics with variable mixing, 
equivalence ratio, and mass flux. Aerosp Sci Technol 2021;113:106683. 

[432] Bendana FA, Lee DD, Schumaker SA, Danczyk SA, Spearrin RM. Cross-band 
infrared laser absorption of carbon monoxide for thermometry and species 
sensing in high-pressure rocket flows. Appl Phys B 2019;125:204. 

[433] Lee DD, Bendana FA, Nair AP, Danczyk SA, Hargus WA, Spearrin RM. Exploiting 

line-mixing effects for laser absorption spectroscopy at extreme combustion 
pressures. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:1685–93. 

[434] Zarzalis N, Ripplinger T, Hohmann S, Hettel M, Merkle K, Leuckel W, et al. Low- 
NOx  combustor development pursued within the scope of the engine 3E german 
national research program in a cooperative effort among engine manufacturer 
MTU, university of Karlsruhe and DLR german aerospace research center. Aerosp 
Sci Technol 2002;6:531–44. 

[455] Qiu X, Sun D, Guo X, Li N, Li C, Wei J, et al. Investigation of in situ high 
temperature sensor based on the direct absorption spectroscopy signal of 
ammonia gas for coal-fired power plant. Opt Quantum Electron 2019;51:79. 
[456] Guo X, Zheng F, Li C, Yang X, Li N, Liu S, et al. A portable sensor for in-situ 

measurement of ammonia based on near-infrared laser absorption spectroscopy. 
Opt Lasers Eng 2019;115:243–8. 

[457] Wysocki G, Kosterev AA, Tittel FK. Spectroscopic trace-gas sensor with rapidly 

scanned wavelengths of a pulsed quantum cascade laser for in situ NO monitoring 
of industrial exhaust systems. Appl Phys B 2005;80:617–25. 

[458] Raza M, Ma L, Yao S, Chen L, Ren W. High-temperature dual-species (CO/NH3) 
detection using calibration-free scanned-wavelength-modulation spectroscopy at 
2.3 μm. Fuel 2021;305:121591. 

[459] Chao X, Jeffries J, Hanson R. Wavelength-modulation-spectroscopy for real-time, 
in situ NO detection in combustion gases with a 5.2 μm quantum-cascade laser. 
Appl Phys B 2012;106:987–97. 

[460] Nelson DD, Shorter JH, McManus JB, Zahniser MS. Sub-part-per-billion detection 

of nitric oxide in air using a thermoelectrically cooled mid-infrared quantum 
cascade laser spectrometer. Appl Phys B 2002;75:343–50. 

[461] Rao GN, Karpf A. High sensitivity detection of NO2 employing off-axis integrated 

cavity output spectroscopy coupled with multiple line integrated spectroscopy. 
SPIE Def Secur Sens 2011:80240Q. 

[462] Tittel FK, Dong L, Lewicki R, Lee G, Peralta A, Spagnolo V. Sensitive detection of 
nitric oxide using a 5.26μm external cavity quantum cascade laser based QEPAS 
sensor. SPIE; 2012. 

[463] Reidl-Leuthner C, Viernstein A, Wieland K, Tomischko W, Sass L, Kinger G, et al. 

Quasi-simultaneous in-line flue gas monitoring of NO and NO2  emissions at a 
caloric power plant employing mid-IR laser spectroscopy. Anal Chem 2014;86: 
9058–64. 

[435] Grisch F, Bouchardy P, Clauss W. CARS thermometry in high pressure rocket 

[464] Chao X. Development of laser absorption sensors for combustion gases. Stanford 

combustors. Aerosp Sci Technol 2003;7:317–30. 

University; 2012. Doctoral dissertation. 

[436] Habiballah* M, Orain M, Grisch F, Vingert L, Gicquel P. Experimental studies of 

[465] Sigrist MW. Laser photoacoustic spectrometry for trace gas monitoring. Analyst 

high-pressure cryogenic flames on the mascotte facility. Combust Sci Technol 
2006;178:101–28. 

1994;119:525–31. 

[466] Sigrist MW. Trace gas monitoring by laser photoacoustic spectroscopy and related 

[437] Thariyan MP, Bhuiyan AH, Meyer SE, Naik SV, Gore JP, Lucht RP. Dual-pump 

techniques (plenary). Rev Sci Instrum 2003;74:486–90. 

coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering system for temperature and species 
measurements in an optically accessible high-pressure gas turbine combustor 
facility. Meas Sci Technol 2010;22:015301. 

[467] Redoglio D, Golinelli E, Musazzi S, Perini U, Barberis F. A large depth of field LIBS 
measuring system for elemental analysis of moving samples of raw coal. 
Spectrochim Acta Part B 2016;116:46–50. 

[438] Giezendanner-Thoben R, Meier U, Meier W, Heinze J, Aigner M. Phase-locked 
two-line OH planar laser-induced fluorescence thermometry in a pulsating gas 
turbine model combustor at atmospheric pressure. Appl Opt 2005;44:6565–77. 

[439] Meier UE, Wolff-Gaßmann D, Stricker W. LIF imaging and 2D temperature 

mapping in a model combustor at elevated pressure. Aerosp Sci Technol 2000;4: 
403–14. 

[440] Heinze J, Meier U, Behrendt T, Willert C, Geigle KP, Lammel O, et al. PLIF 
thermometry based on measurements of absolute concentrations of the OH 
radical. Zeitschrift für Phys Chem 2011;225:1315–41. 

[441] Steinberg AM, Boxx I, St¨ohr M, Carter CD, Meier W. Flow–flame interactions 
causing acoustically coupled heat release fluctuations in a thermo-acoustically 
unstable gas turbine model combustor. Combust Flame 2010;157:2250–66. 

[468] Ottesen DK, Wang JCF, Radziemski LJ. Real-time laser spark spectroscopy of 

particulates in combustion environments. Appl Spectrosc 1989;43:967–76. 

[469] Dong M, Lu J, Yao S, Li J, Li J, Zhong Z, et al. Application of LIBS for direct 

determination of volatile matter content in coal. J Anal At Spectrom 2011;26: 
2183–8. 

[470] Yao S, Lu J, Dong M, Chen K, Li J, Li J. Extracting coal ash content from laser- 
induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) spectra by multivariate analysis. Appl 
Spectrosc 2011;65:1197–201. 

[471] Yao S, Mo J, Zhao J, Li Y, Zhang X, Lu W, et al. Development of a rapid coal 
analyzer using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). Appl Spectrosc 
2018;72:1225–33. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099748A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[472] Windom BC, Hahn DW. Laser ablation—laser induced breakdown spectroscopy 
(LA-LIBS): a means for overcoming matrix effects leading to improved analyte 
response. J Anal At Spectrom 2009;24:1665–75. 

[501] Tuzson B, Graf M, Ravelid J, Scheidegger P, Kupferschmid A, Looser H, et al. 

A compact QCL spectrometer for mobile, high-precision methane sensing aboard 
drones. Atmos Meas Tech 2020;13:4715–26. 

[473] Yao S, Zhao J, Wang Z, Deguchi Y, Lu Z, Lu J. Analysis of spectral properties for 

[502] Zhu F, Bicer A, Askar R, Bounds J, Kolomenskii A, Kelessides V, et al. Mid-infrared 

coal with different volatile contents by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. 
Spectrochim Acta Part B 2018;149:249–55. 

dual frequency comb spectroscopy based on fiber lasers for the detection of 
methane in ambient air. Laser Phys Lett 2015;12:095701. 

[474] Noda M, Deguchi Y, Iwasaki S, Yoshikawa N. Detection of carbon content in a 

high-temperature and high-pressure environment using laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta Part B 2002;57:701–9. 

[475] Deguchi Y, Noda M, Fukuda Y, Ichinose Y, Endo Y, Inada M, et al. Industrial 
applications of temperature and species concentration monitoring using laser 
diagnostics. Meas Sci Technol 2002;13:R103–15. 

[476] Zhang L, Ma W, Dong L, Yan X, Hu Z, Li Z, et al. Development of an apparatus for 

on-line analysis of unburned carbon in fly ash using laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy (LIBS). Appl Spectrosc 2011;65:790–6. 

[477] Zhang L, Hu ZY, Yin WB, Huang D, Ma WG, Dong L, et al. Recent progress on 
laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for the monitoring of coal quality and 
unburned carbon in fly ash. Front Phys 2012;7:690–700. 

[478] Wang Z, Deguchi Y, Watanabe H, Kurose R, Yan J, Liu J. Improvement on 

quantitative measurement of fly ash contents using laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy. J Flow Control Meas Vis 2015;03:10–21. 

[479] Shen Y, Li X, Liu Y, Fan J, Chen Q, Lu J, et al. Study on plasma characteristics of 

fly ash in different gas environments. Chin J Las 2014;41:0515002. 

[480] Shen Y, Yao S, Pan G, Xu Q, Li X, Fan J, et al. Influence of binder on laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy measurement of unburned carbon in fly ash. Chin J Las 
2014;41:0315003. 

[481] Yao S, Xu J, Zhao J, Bai K, Lu J, Lu Z. Characterization of fly ash laser-induced 
plasma for improving the on-line measurement of unburned carbon in gas–solid 
flow. Energy Fuels 2017;31:4681–6. 

[482] Legnaioli S, Campanella B, Pagnotta S, Poggialini F, Palleschi V. Determination of 
ash content of coal by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta 
Part B 2019;155:123–6. 

[483] Li S, Dong M, Luo F, Li W, Wei L, Lu J. Experimental investigation of combustion 

characteristics and NOx formation of coal particles using laser induced 
breakdown spectroscopy. J Energy Inst 2020;93:52–61. 

[484] Wang Z, Kamimoto T, Deguchi Y, Zhou W, Yan J, Tainaka K, et al. Two 
dimensional temperature measurement characteristics in pulverized coal 
combustion field by computed tomography-tunable diode laser absorption 
spectroscopy. Appl Therm Eng 2020;171:115066. 

[485] Cooper J, Stamford L, Azapagic A. Shale gas: a review of the economic, 
environmental, and social sustainability. Energy Technol 2016;4:772–92. 
[486] Agency UEP. Inventory of US greenhouse gas emissions and sinks: 1990–2019. 

Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency; 2021. EPA 430-R-21-005. 

[487] Ravikumar AP, Sreedhara S, Wang J, Englander J, Roda-Stuart D, Bell C, et al. 

Single-blind inter-comparison of methane detection technologies–results from the 
Stanford/EDF mobile monitoring challenge. Elem Sci Anthr 2019;7. 

[488] Moore CB. Gas-laser frequency selection by molecular absorption. Appl Opt 1965; 

4:252–3. 

[489] Reid J, Sinclair R, Grant W, Menzies R. High sensitivity detection of trace gases at 
atmospheric pressure using tunable diode lasers. Opt Quantum Electron 1985;17: 
31–9. 

[490] van Well B, Murray S, Hodgkinson J, Pride R, Strzoda R, Gibson G, et al. An open- 
path, hand-held laser system for the detection of methane gas. J Opt A Pure Appl 
Opt 2005;7:S420. 

[491] Gao X, Fan H, Huang T, Wang X, Bao J, Li X, et al. Natural gas pipeline leak 

detector based on NIR diode laser absorption spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta Part 
A 2006;65:133–8. 

[492] Paige M, Silver JA, Petroski D, Bomse DS. Portable natural gas leak detector for 

survey inspections. In: Proceedings of the chemical and biological sensors for 
industrial and environmental monitoring II: international society for optics and 
photonics; 2006. 63780Z. 

[493] Allen DT, Torres VM, Thomas J, Sullivan DW, Harrison M, Hendler A, et al. 

Measurements of methane emissions at natural gas production sites in the United 
States. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2013;110:17768–73. 

[494] Allen DT, Sullivan DW, Zavala-Araiza D, Pacsi AP, Harrison M, Keen K, et al. 

Methane emissions from process equipment at natural gas production sites in the 
United States: liquid unloadings. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:641–8. 

[495] Subramanian R, Williams LL, Vaughn TL, Zimmerle D, Roscioli JR, Herndon SC, 
et al. Methane emissions from natural gas compressor stations in the transmission 
and storage sector: measurements and comparisons with the EPA greenhouse gas 
reporting program protocol. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:3252–61. 

[496] Tan D, Xu B, Xu X, Wang H, Yu D, Tian S. Research on airborne infrared leakage 
detection of natural gas pipeline. In: Proceedings of the MIPPR: remote sensing 
image processing, geographic information systems, and other applications: 
international society for optics and photonics; 2011. 80062B. 

[497] Nathan BJ, Golston LM, O’Brien AS, Ross K, Harrison WA, Tao L, et al. Near-field 
characterization of methane emission variability from a compressor station using 
a model aircraft. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:7896–903. 

[498] Golston LM, Aubut NF, Frish MB, Yang S, Talbot RW, Gretencord C, et al. Natural 

gas fugitive leak detection using an unmanned aerial vehicle: localization and 
quantification of emission rate. Atmosphere 2018;9:333. 

[499] Yang S, Talbot RW, Frish MB, Golston LM, Aubut NF, Zondlo MA, et al. Natural 

gas fugitive leak detection using an unmanned aerial vehicle: measurement 
system description and mass balance approach. Atmosphere 2018;9:383. 

[503] Alden CB, Ghosh S, Coburn S, Sweeney C, Karion A, Wright R, et al. Methane leak 
detection and sizing over long distances using dual frequency comb laser 
spectroscopy and a bootstrap inversion technique. Atmos Meas Tech 2017;2017: 
1–34. 

[504] Coburn S, Alden CB, Wright R, Cossel K, Baumann E, Truong GW, et al. Regional 
trace-gas source attribution using a field-deployed dual frequency comb 
spectrometer. Optica 2018;5:320–7. 

[505] Alden CB, Coburn SC, Wright RJ, Baumann E, Cossel K, Perez E, et al. Single-blind 

quantification of natural gas leaks from 1 km distance using frequency combs. 
Environ Sci Technol 2019;53:2908–17. 

[506] Waxman EM, Cossel KC, Truong GW, Giorgetta FR, Swann WC, Coburn S, et al. 
Intercomparison of open-path trace gas measurements with two dual frequency 
comb spectrometers. Atmos Meas Tech 2017;10:3295. 

[507] Grossel A, Zeninari V, Parvitte B, Joly L, Courtois D. Optimization of a compact 
photoacoustic quantum cascade laser spectrometer for atmospheric flux 
measurements: application to the detection of methane and nitrous oxide. Appl 
Phys B 2007;88:483–92. 

[508] Jahjah M, Jiang W, Sanchez NP, Ren W, Patimisco P, Spagnolo V, et al. 

Atmospheric CH4  and N2O measurements near greater houston area landfills 
using a QCL-based QEPAS sensor system during DISCOVER-AQ 2013. Opt Lett 
2014;39:957–60. 

[509] Knobelspies S, Bierer B, Perez AO, W¨ollenstein J, Kneer J, Palzer S. Low-cost gas 

sensing system for the reliable and precise measurement of methane, carbon 
dioxide and hydrogen sulfide in natural gas and biomethane. Sens Actuators, B 
2016;236:885–92. 

[510] Zheng H, Lou M, Dong L, Wu H, Ye W, Yin X, et al. Compact photoacoustic 

module for methane detection incorporating interband cascade light emitting 
device. Opt Express 2017;25:16761–70. 

[511] Fox TA, Barchyn TE, Risk D, Ravikumar AP, Hugenholtz CH. A review of close- 

range and screening technologies for mitigating fugitive methane emissions in 
upstream oil and gas. Environ Res Lett 2019;14:053002. 

[512] Patel P. Monitoring methane. ACS Publications; 2017. 
[513] Iseki T, Tai H, Kimura K. A portable remote methane sensor using a tunable diode 

laser. Meas Sci Technol 2000;11:594. 

[514] Tombez L, Zhang E, Orcutt J, Kamlapurkar S, Green W. Methane absorption 

spectroscopy on a silicon photonic chip. Optica 2017;4:1322–5. 

[515] Heinrich R, Popescu A, Hangauer A, Strzoda R, H¨ofling S. High performance 

direct absorption spectroscopy of pure and binary mixture hydrocarbon gases in 
the 6–11 μm range. Appl Phys B 2017;123:223. 

[516] Vogler D, Sigrist M. Near-infrared laser based cavity ringdown spectroscopy for 

applications in petrochemical industry. Appl Phys B 2006;85:349–54. 

[517] Kluczynski P, Jahjah M, N¨ahle L, Axner O, Belahsene S, Fischer M, et al. Detection 

of acetylene impurities in ethylene and polyethylene manufacturing processes 
using tunable diode laser spectroscopy in the 3-μm range. Appl Phys B 2011;105: 
427. 

[518] Kluczynski P, Lundqvist S, Belahsene S, Rouillard Y, N¨ahle L, Fischer M, et al. 
Detection of propane using tunable diode laser spectroscopy at 3.37 μm. Appl 
Phys B 2012;108:183–8. 

[519] da Silveira Petruci JF, Fortes PR, Kokoric V, Wilk A, Raimundo IM, Cardoso AA, 
et al. Monitoring of hydrogen sulfide via substrate-integrated hollow waveguide 
mid-infrared sensors in real-time. Analyst 2014;139:198–203. 

[520] Moser H, P¨olz W, Waclawek JP, Ofner J, Lendl B. Implementation of a quantum 
cascade laser-based gas sensor prototype for sub-ppmv H2S measurements in a 
petrochemical process gas stream. Anal Bioanal Chem 2017;409:729–39. 

[521] Gallegos J, Benyon R, Avila S, Benito A, Gavioso R, Mitter H, et al. An 

investigation of the comparative performance of diverse humidity sensing 
techniques in natural gas. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2015;23:407–16. 

[522] Buchholz B, B¨ose N, Ebert V. Absolute validation of a diode laser hygrometer via 
intercomparison with the German national primary water vapor standard. Appl 
Phys B 2014;116:883–99. 

[523] Nwaboh JA, Werhahn O, Ebert V. Line strength and collisional broadening 

coefficients of H2O at 2.7 μm for natural gas quality assurance applications. Mol 
Phys 2014;112:2451–61. 

[524] Pog´any A, Wagner S, Werhahn O, Ebert V. Development and metrological 
characterization of a tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy (TDLAS) 
spectrometer for simultaneous absolute measurement of carbon dioxide and 
water vapor. Appl Spectrosc 2015;69:257–68. 

[525] Nwaboh JA, Pratzler S, Werhahn O, Ebert V. Tunable diode laser absorption 

spectroscopy sensor for calibration free humidity measurements in pure methane 
and low CO2  natural gas. Appl Spectrosc 2017;71:888–900. 

[526] Kosterev AA, Tittel FK, K¨ohler R, Gmachl C, Capasso F, Sivco DL, et al. 

Thermoelectrically cooled quantum-cascade-laser-based sensor for the continuous 
monitoring of ambient atmospheric carbon monoxide. Appl Opt 2002;41: 
1169–73. 

[527] Wang Y, Wei Y, Chang J, Zhang T, Liu T, Sun T, et al. Tunable diode laser 

absorption spectroscopy-based detection of propane for explosion early warning 
by using a vertical cavity surface enhanced laser source and principle component 
analysis approach. IEEE Sens J 2017;17:4975–82. 

[500] Martinez B, Miller TW, Yalin AP. Cavity ring-down methane sensor for small 

[528] Moser H, Waclawek JP, Genner A, Gasser C, Lendl B. A triple quantum cascade 

unmanned aerial systems. Sensors 2020;20:454. 

laser based sulfur species sensor for H2S, CH3SH and COS in petrochemical 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099749A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

process streams. In: Proceedings of the conference on lasers and electro-optics 
(CLEO); 2018. p. 1–2. IEEE. 

[529] Scheuermann J, Kluczynski P, Siembab K, Straszewski M, Kaczmarek J, Weih R, 
et al. Interband cascade laser arrays for simultaneous and selective analysis of C1- 
C5 hydrocarbons in petrochemical industry. Appl Spectrosc 2021;75:336–42. 
[530] Von Drasek W., Pubill-Melsio A., Fauve E., Mulderink K. Tunable diode laser 

sensors for monitoring and control of harsh combustion environments. American 
Air Liquide 2006. 

[531] Allendorf S., Ottensen D., Hahn D.W., Kulp T.J., Goers U.B.. Optical sensors for 
process control and emissions monitoring in industry. Sandia National Lab. (SNL- 
NM), Albuquerque, NM (United States); Sandia National Lab. (SNL-CA), 
Livermore, CA (United States); 1999. 

[556] Crosson E, Nishimura K, Sakaguchi Y, Rella CW, Wahl E. Real-time ultra-sensitive 

ambient ammonia monitor for advanced lithography. In: Proceedings of the 
photomask technology: SPIE; 2006. 63492R. 

[557] Stancu GD, Lang N, R¨opcke J, Reinicke M, Steinbach A, Wege S. In-situ monitoring 
of silicon plasma etching using a quantum cascade laser arrangement. Chem Vap 
Depos 2007;13:351–60. 

[558] Lang N, R¨opcke J, Zimmermann H, Steinbach A, Wege S. In situ monitoring of 

plasmaetch processes with a quantum cascade laser arrangement in 
semiconductor industrial environment. J Phys Conf Ser 2009;157:012007. 
[559] Chou SI, Baer DS, Hanson RK, Collison WZ, Ni TQ. HBr concentration and 

temperature measurements in a plasma etch reactor using diode laser absorption 
spectroscopy. J Vac Sci Technol A Vac Surf Films 2001;19:477–84. 

[532] Allendorf S.W., Ottesen D.K., Green R.W., Hardesty D.R., Kolarik R., Goodfellow 

[560] Glazer MP. Alkali metals in combustion of biomass with coal. Delft University of 

Technology; 2007. Doctoral dissertation. 

[561] Schlosser E, Fernholz T, Teichert H, Ebert V. In situ detection of potassium atoms 

in high-temperature coal-combustion systems using near-infrared-diode lasers. 
Spectrochim Acta Part A 2002;58:2347–59. 

[562] Kerdoncuff H, Lin WI, Wacker LJ. Spectroscopic techniques for corrosion 
detection using drones. Danish National Metrology Institute; 2017. 
[563] Edgar MP, Gibson GM, Padgett MJ. Principles and prospects for single-pixel 

imaging. Nat Photonics 2019;13:13–20. 

[564] Lu Q, Wang F, Wu D, Slivken S, Razeghi M. Room temperature terahertz 

semiconductor frequency comb. Nat Commun 2019;10:2403. 

[565] Khalatpour A, Paulsen AK, Deimert C, Wasilewski ZR, Hu Q. High-power portable 

terahertz laser systems. Nat Photonics 2021;15:16–20.  

Aamir  Farooq  Dr.  Farooq  received  his  Ph.D.  in  Mechanical 
Engineering from Stanford University in 2010, and then joined 
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST). 
He is the principal investigator of the Chemical Kinetics and 
Laser  Sensors  Laboratory  in  the  Clean  Combustion  Research 
Center (CCRC) at KAUST. His research interests are in the areas 
of  energy,  chemical  kinetics,  spectroscopy,  and  laser-based 
sensors.  He  has  authored  over  150  refereed  journal  articles 
and has given invited talks at a number of international con-
ferences.  At  KAUST,  he  won  the  Distinguished  Teaching 
Award, given to the best instructor over a period of two years. 
In 2019, Dr. Farooq was awarded the prestigious Hiroshi Tsuji 
Early  Career  Research  Award  by  Elsevier  and  the  Combustion  Institute.  In  2020,  he 
received Research Excellence award by the Combustion Institute.  

Awad Alquaity Dr. Awad Alquaity holds an M.S. in Mechanical 
Engineering  from  KFUPM  (2011)  and  a  Ph.D.  in  Mechanical 
Engineering  from  KAUST  (2016),  where  he  was  part  of  the 
Clean  Combustion  Research  Center.  At  KAUST,  his  research 
focused  primarily  on  developing  and  using  sensitive  laser 
sensors and mass spectrometers to investigate the combustion 
chemistry  of  fuels  in  different  fundamental  combustion  re-
actors. Dr. Alquaity worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the 
Institute  for  Combustion  Technology  at  RWTH  Aachen  Uni-
versity  in  Germany  before  joining  KFUPM  as  an  Assistant 
Professor  in  the  Mechanical  Engineering  Department  in 
September 2019. At Aachen University, he performed simula-
tions and experiments to investigate the combustion chemistry of novel sustainable fuels as 
part of a larger effort to identify future fuels for the German market. He has co-authored 17 
international journal publications, 1 book chapter and was granted a US patent for his 
work on sensitive laser sensor development. He works in the areas of combustion, spec-
troscopy, and heat transfer.  

Mohsin  Raza  Mohsin  Raza  received  the  B.Sc.  degree  in  Me-
chanical  engineering  in  2014  from  the  University  of  Engi-
neering  and  Technology,  Lahore,  and  the  Master’s  degree  in 
Thermal power engineering in 2018 from Beihang University, 
Beijing. He is currently a Postgraduate Student in the Depart-
ment of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong. His current research interests include 
optical sensing and tunable direct absorption spectroscopy.  

H., et al. Optical sensors for post combustion control in electric arc furnace 
steelmaking. AISI/DOE Technology Roadmap Program; 2003. 

[533] Von Drasek W, Mulderink K, Charon O, Champinot C, Wehe S, Allen M. Tunable 
diode laser sensor characterization for harsh combustion monitoring. In: 
Proceedings of the joint international combustion symposium, AFRCJFRC-IEA; 
2001. 

[534] Von Drasek WA, Wehe S, Allen M. Tunable diode laser sensor for multiple species 
monitoring in harsh atmospheres. Ind Highw Sens Technol Int Soc Opt Photonics 
2004:30–40. 

[535] Von Drasek W, Melsi´o AP, Wehe S, Allen M. A novel variable power diode laser 
sensor for harsh process monitoring. Sens Harsh Environ II Int Soc Opt Photonics 
2005:59980E. 

[536] Sappey AD. Diode laser spectroscopy for optimization of boilers and furnaces. In: 
Proceedings of the conference on lasers and electro-optics (CLEO); 2019. p. 1–2. 
IEEE. 

[537] Loh JA. Measuring gas composition and temperature in highly particle laden flow 
using terahertz spectroscopy. University of Toronto; 2016. Doctoral dissertation. 
[538] Zeng Q, Li X, Guo L, Shen M, Zhu Y, Li J, et al. Quantitative analyses of Mn, V, and 

Si elements in steels using a portable laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
system based on a fiber laser. J Anal At Spectrom 2016;31:767–72. 

[539] Zhang Y, Sun C, Gao L, Yue Z, Shabbir S, Xu W, et al. Determination of minor 
metal elements in steel using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy combined 
with machine learning algorithms. Spectrochim Acta Part B 2020;166:105802. 

[540] Sun LX, Wang WY, Guo MT, Tian XY, Zhang P, Qi LF, et al. Small-invasive 
determination of iron content in coating of galvanized steel sheets by laser- 
induced breakdown spectroscopy. J Iron Steel Res Int 2019;26:1137–46. 
[541] Xin Y, Sun LX, Yang ZJ, Zeng P, Cong ZB, Qi LF. In situ analysis of magnesium 
alloy using a standoff and double-pulse laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
system. Front Phys 2016;11:1–10. 

[542] Pacher U, Dinu M, Nagy TO, Radvan R, Kautek W. Multiple wavelength 

stratigraphy by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy of Ni-Co alloy coatings on 
steel. Spectrochim Acta Part B 2018;146:36–40. 

[543] Gudmundsson SH, Matthiasson J, Bj¨ornsson BM, Gudmundsson H, Leosson K. 
Quantitative in-situ analysis of impurity elements in primary aluminum 
processing using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim Acta Part B 
2019;158:105646. 

[544] Sturm V, Erben B, Fleige R, Wirz W. Carbon analysis of steel using compact 

spectrometer and passively Q-switched laser for laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy. Opt Express 2019;27:36855–63. 

[545] Nikkari JJ, Thomson MJ. Near-IR optical process sensor for electric arc furnace 

pollution control and energy efficiency. Opt Methods Ind Process Int Soc Opt 
Photonics 2001:150–8. 

[546] Sandl¨obes S, Senk D, Sancho L, Diaz A. In-situ measurement of CO- and CO2- 

concentrations in BOF off-gas. Steel Res Int 2011;82:632–7. 

[547] Wu Q, Thomson MJ, Chanda A. Tunable diode laser measurements of CO, H2O, 

and temperature near 1.56 µm for steelmaking furnace pollution control and 
energy efficiency. Metall Mater Trans B 2005;36:53–7. 

[548] Sandl¨obes S, Senk D, Sancho L, Diaz A. In-situ measurement of CO- and CO2- 

concentrations in BOF off-gas. Steel Res Int 2011;82:632–7. 

[549] Yoo M, Kim S, Lee C. Study on O2  concentration and temperature measurement 
with 760 nm diode laser in ununiform distributed condition. Int J Mater Mech 
Manuf 2015;3:179–82. 

[550] Hashiguchi K, Lisak D, Cygan A, Ciuryło R, Abe H. Wavelength-meter controlled 
cavity ring-down spectroscopy: high-sensitivity detection of trace moisture in N2 
at sub-ppb levels. Sens Actuators A 2016;241:152–60. 

[551] Wu SQ, Morishita JI, Masusaki H, Kimishima T. Quantitative analysis of trace 

moisture in N2 and NH3 gases with dual-cell near-infrared diode laser absorption 
spectroscopy. Anal Chem 1998;70:3315–21. 

[552] Kessler WJ, Allen MG, Davis SJ, Mulhall PA, Polex JA. Near-IR diode-laser-based 
sensor for parts-per-billion-level water vapor in industrial gases. In: Proceedings 
of the electro-optic, integrated optic, and electronic technologies for online 
chemical process monitoring: international society for optics and photonics; 
1999. p. 139–49. 

[553] Dudek JB, Tarsa PB, Velasquez A, Wladyslawski M, Rabinowitz P, Lehmann KK. 
Trace moisture detection using continuous-wave cavity ring-down spectroscopy. 
Anal Chem 2003;75:4599–605. 

[554] Pal S, Das A, Nandy S, Kar R, Ghosh J. Development of a near-infrared tunable 
diode laser absorption spectrometer for trace moisture measurements in helium 
gas. Rev Sci Instrum 2019;90:103105. 

[555] Pushkarsky MB, Webber ME, Baghdassarian O, Narasimhan LR, Patel CKN. Laser- 

based photoacoustic ammonia sensors for industrial applications. Appl Phys B: 
Lasers Opt 2002;75:391–6. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099750A. Farooq et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Shunchun Yao Dr. Shunchun Yao is currently a professor in the 
School of Electric Power Engineering, South China University 
of Technology, China. He is also a deputy director of Guang-
dong Energy Efficient and Low Pollution Conversion Technol-
ogy  Research  Center.  He  obtained  his  doctoral  degree  from 
South  China  University  of  Technology  in  2011.  He  has  pub-
lished  over  70  papers  in  the  research  areas  of  intelligent 
sensing, state diagnosis and process optimization methods for 
energy  efficient  and  clean  utilization.  His  research  was  sup-
ported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, 
National  Key  Research  and  Development  Program  of  China, 
Fund  of  Fok  Ying  Tung  Education  Foundation  and  Natural 
Science  Foundation  for  Distinguished  Young  Scholars  of  Guangdong  Province.  He  was 
awarded Guangdong Science and Technology Innovation Young Talents, Guangzhou Pearl 
River Technology Rising Star, and LIBS Young Scientist of Chinese Optical Engineering 
Society.  

Wei Ren Dr. Wei Ren received the B.S. degree in Mechanical 
Engineering  and  M.S.  degree  in  Optical  Engineering  from 
Tsinghua  University  in  2006  and  2008,  respectively.  He 
received  the  Ph.D.  degree  in  Mechanical  Engineering  from 
Stanford  University  in  2013.  He  was  awarded  the  Robert  A. 
Welch  Foundation  postdoctoral  fellowship  to  work  in  the 
Department  of  Electrical  and  Computer  Engineering  at  Rice 
University in 2013-14. Dr. Ren is now an associate professor in 
the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering at 
the Chinese University of Hong Kong. His research to date has 
resulted in more than 70 peer-reviewed journal publications in 
laser spectroscopy, optical sensing, and chemical kinetics. He is 
currently  the  co-editor  of  Springer  journal  Applied  Physics  B.  Prof.  Ren  is  the  senior 
member of OSA, and member of SPIE and the Combustion Institute. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10099751