Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress  in  Energy  and  Combustion  Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Bioelectrochemical  element  conversion  reactions  towards  generation
of  energy  and  value-added  chemicals

Min Sun a , b , Lin-Feng Zhai a , Yang Mu b , ∗, Han-Qing Yu b , ∗
a
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Advanced Catalytic Materials and Reaction Engineering, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hefei University
of Technology, Hefei 230 0 09, China
b
CAS Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion, Department of Applied Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 10 April 2019
Accepted 15 November 2019
Available online 21 November 2019

Keywords:
Bioelectrochemical system (BES)
Platform
Value-added element conversion reaction
Electron transfer
Energy generation
Chemical production

Contents

In the past decades, the bioelectrochemical system (BES) has developed into a versatile platform to sus-
tain the conversion of various substances for the generation of energy and energy-efficient production of
chemicals. Taking advantage of microbial extracellular electron transfer, the BES is able to perform a va-
riety of value-added element conversion reactions, including production of electric energy from organic
carbon, synthesis of chemicals from carbon dioxide, oxidation of sulfide into element sulfur, reduction
of nitrate/nitrite into nitrous oxide and reduction of metal ions into solid metals and/or metal oxides.
While the potential for using BES as an energy and resource factory has been fully recognized, governing
the element conversion pathways into the desired energy and products in BES is still a great challenge.
This review provides comprehensive insights into the microbial extracellular electron transfer principles
as well as behaviors of key chemical elements in BESs. Individual element conversion processes and their
integrations on the BES platform are analyzed. The physicochemical, chemical and microbial mechanisms
involved in these processes are explored, and the coupling patterns of electron transfer and element
conversion reactions are elucidated. Furthermore, the challenges to design, construct and operate a BES
with improved electron transfer efficiency and product specificity are discussed, and research needs are
proposed. Additionally, BES technologies from the perspectives of waste remediation, energy production,
resource recovery and chemical synthesis are envisaged.

© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1.
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
2.  Microbial extracellular electron transfer: the fundament of element conversion reactions in BES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
2.1.  Microbial electron donation to the anode electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
2.2.  Microbial electron collection from the cathodic electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
3.  Element conversion reactions at the anode—from chemical energy to electric energy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
3.1.  Degradation of organic carbon coupled with energy production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
3.1.1.  Biodegradable small-molecular compounds as substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
3.1.2.  Biorefractory compounds as substrate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
3.1.3.  Macromolecular polymers as substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
0 ) and energy production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
4.  Element conversion at the cathode—utilization of electric energy for value-added chemical production. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
4.1.  Microbial electrosynthesis for the production of organic chemicals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
4.2.  Reduction of metal ions for heavy metal recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
2 O production. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
4.3.  Spontaneous bio-electrochemical autotrophic denitrification for N
5.  Challenges and opportunities for BES towards improved product specificity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

3.2.  Oxidation of sulfide coupled with the recovery of element sulfur (S

2 and N

∗ Corresponding authors.

E-mail addresses: yangmu@ustc.edu.cn (Y. Mu), hqyu@ustc.edu.cn (H.-Q. Yu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.100814
0360-1285/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

2

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

6.  Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Declaration of Competing Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19

1. Introduction

Electron transfer is the fundamental part of the chemical and
biological redox reactions responsible for the conversions of ele-
ments in the exploitation of natural resources [1] . This basic chem-
ical event creates different valence states by changing the electron
densities of the electron donor-acceptor pair. Inorganic redox reac-
tions are characterized by electron transfers between linked metal
sites,  and  electron  transfers  in  organic  reactions  directly  cause
bond fracture and bond making [2] . In particular, microorganisms
gain energy basically through electron transfers in their biological
metabolism. Various microorganisms are able to perform extracel-
lular electron transfer, either through donating electrons to a solid
electron acceptor or accepting them from a solid electron donor,
to sustain their energy demands [ 3 , 4 ]. This ability has been uti-
lized to facilitate the redox reactions in systems containing insol-
uble oxidants or reductants [5–7] . One representative application
is the bioelectrochemical system (BES), which makes use of micro-
bial catalysis to perform pollutant removal, electric energy produc-
tion and chemical synthesis. In BES, microbial extracellular electron
transfer can be used to assist either the anodic or the cathodic re-
actions. The former produces electrons, while the latter consumes
electrons. The basic form of BES is the microbial fuel cell (MFC),
which directly extracts electric energy from organic and/or inor-
ganic substances by virtue of the so-called “exoelectrogenesis” that
occurs at the anode electrode [8] . When an external power source
is supplied, the system becomes a microbial electrolysis cell (MEC)
and value-added chemicals are produced at the cathode electrode.
The removal of pollutants from wastewater is a global concern
regarding  water  recycling  and  environmental  sustainability.  The
currently used activated sludge processes are successful in remov-
ing organic carbon to satisfy the stringent water quality require-
ments [ 9 , 10 ]. However, they consume a substantial amount of en-
ergy. Therefore, the capture of chemical energy stored in wastewa-
ter has been pursued as a complementary goal to offset the en-
ergy  consumption  in  wastewater  treatment  [11] .  In  this  respect,
the ability of BES to produce energy from the organic fraction in
wastewater with little  energy expenditure is desirable. A  variety
of organic pollutants ranging from small-molecular compounds to
macromolecular polymers can be used as the fuel of the BES. To
date, advancements in the reactor architecture, material and mi-
crobiology have remarkably improved the energy-producing capac-
ity  of  the  BES,  and  the  opportunities  for  further  improvement
have not been exhausted yet [12–14] . The applications of BES are
not  limited  to  the  removal  of  organic  pollutants  and  production
of energy, but are extended to the remediation of environments
polluted by nitrogen, sulfur and heavy metals, as well as the syn-
thesis  of  multicarbon  compounds  and  methane  (CH
4 )  from  car-
bon dioxide (CO
2 ). Taking advantage of microbial metabolism with
a solid electrode as the electron acceptor or electron donor, BES
is able to accommodate the value-added conversions of a variety
of elements in wastes. Basically, the oxidations of organic carbon
and  sulfide  at  the  anode  are  directly  involved  in  the  processes
contributing to electricity generation. Electrons or protons gener-
ated at the anode can be further used at the cathode to reduce
−) to nitrous oxide (N
−)/nitrite (NO
the nitrate (NO
2 O) and the
2
3
metal ions to solid metals and/or metal oxides. Moreover, microbe-
mediated electron transfer from the cathode electrode to inorganic
and/or organic carbons makes BES extraordinarily convenient for
synthesizing fuels and commodity chemicals from CO

2 [ 15 , 16 ].

Over the past decades, the BES technology has been developed
into a versatile platform sustaining value-added conversions of var-
ious  chemical  elements.  While  great  research  effort s  have  been
concentrated  on  the  production  of  energy  from  organic  carbon,
there is growing awareness that the potential of BES in resource
recovery and chemical synthesis should be fully exploited to maxi-
mize its energy and environmental benefits. In any case, governing
the element conversion routes into the desired products is a pre-
requisite for real-world applications of such a technology. There-
fore, in the near future, effort s should be devoted to manipulating
the electron transfer pathway for improved reaction efficiency and
selectivity on BES platform. In view of the urgency of such a need,
this review presents critical insights into the microbial extracellu-
lar electron transfer principles and the behaviors of key chemical
elements in BES. The transportation and transformation routes of
individual elements in BES are systematically illustrated. In partic-
ular, electron transfer involved in element conversion is specified.
The challenges are discussed and research needs are proposed to
engineer an improved BES with product specificity for waste treat-
ment, energy production, resource recovery and chemical synthe-
sis.

2. Microbial extracellular electron transfer: the fundament of
element conversion reactions in BES

The linking of microbial respiration to an electrode through ex-
tracellular electron transfer is the fundament of various element
conversion reactions in BES. At the anode, the ability of microor-
ganisms  to  respire  with  the  electrode  as  the  electron  acceptor
is responsible for the transduction of chemical energy into elec-
tric  energy.  At  the  cathode,  electron  transfer  from  the  electrode
to  microorganisms  is  basically  involved  in  the  production  of  or-
ganic/inorganic  chemicals  and  fuels.  To  date,  significant  progress
has been made in understanding the microbial extracellular elec-
tron transfer, whereas the involved mechanisms are still vague and
actively debated. Herein, general knowledge of the state-of-art mi-
crobial  extracellular  electron  transfer  mechanisms  is  given  from
an  energetic  point  of  view.  As  illustrated  in  Fig.  1 ,  microorgan-
isms perform the electron exchange with the electrode via a link-
ing species, which can be out-membrane cytochromes, conductive
nanowires or soluble redox mediators. In addition, there is cooper-
ative interspecies electron transfer in mixed cultures.

2.1. Microbial electron donation to the anode electrode

Microorganisms that extracellularly transfer electrons to the an-
ode  electrode  are  called  exoelectrogens  [3] .  The  ability  of  exo-
electrogens to  perform exoelectrogenesis depends on  the linking
species that facilitates the electron transfer from the microbial cell
to the anode electrode. For a basic classification, it is distinguished
between a direct electron transfer (DET), which is driven by outer
membrane-bounded cytochromes or conductive nanowires, and a
mediated electron transfer (MET), which is driven by soluble elec-
tron shuttling species.

The  DET  is  the  most  evident  electron  transfer  pathway  in  a
few exoelectrogens represented by the Geobacter sulfurreducens and
Shewanella oneidensis [17–21] . Such an electron transfer pathway
requires  the  microorganisms  to  physically  contact  the  electrode
to  form  an  electrochemically  active  biofilm.  The  effective  range

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

3

Fig. 1.  Proposed microbe-electrode electron transfer pathways at the bioanode and biocathode of BES.

of  DET  through  outer  membrane-bounded  cytochromes  is  gen-
erally  limited  to  nanometer  scale,  but  both  S.  oneidensis  and  G.
sulfurreducens possess nanowire structures for long-range DET in
coductive  biofilm  that  can  exceed  100  μm  [22] .  Microbial  con-
ductive  nanowires  are  in  fact  filamentous  appendages  that  can
grow up to tens of micrometers. For S. oneidensis , the nanowires
with a conductivity of 1 S cm −1  are regarded as an extension of
the  outer  cell  membrane  [ 23 , 24 ].  The  nanowires  of  G.  sulfurre-
ducens have so far been known as electrically conductive pili (e-
pili,  conductivity  of  50  mS  cm −1  [25] )  assembled  from  the  PilA
pilin monomer until recently, when Wang and coworkers observed
extracellular appendages of wild-type G. sulfurreducens assembled
by micrometer-long polymerization of the hexaheme cytochrome
OmcS [26] . While their roles in long-range DET remain to be clar-
ified,  e-pili  and  out-surface  cytochrome  filaments  are  both  con-
ducive and can transfer electrons independently [27] . DET ability
has been found in bacteria that lack outer-surface cytochromes but
express e-pili [ 28 , 29 ]. The MET represents an indirect pathway that
allows for long-range electron transfer while not requiring physical
contact between microbes and electrode. The soluble mediators in-
volved in the MET pathway have redox potentials positive enough
to  gain  electrons  from  electron  carriers  in  vivo  or  on  the  outer
cell membrane and then donate them to the electrode. Phenazines,
phenothiazines and quinones are the most frequently used artifi-
cial  species  mediating  the  microbe-to-electrode  electron  transfer
at the anode [30–32] . While exogenous mediators are effective for
exploring microbes that lack extracellular electron transfer ability,
their application has inherent limitations, e.g., the need to be reg-
ularly added to the system, the unstable nature and the toxicity at
higher concentrations [33] . In comparison, endogenous mediators
are self-secreted by the microbes and are more applicable and ami-
able. Exoelectrogens capable of producing flavins, phenazines and
quinones to assist their respiration at the anode have been the fo-

cus of extensive reports [34–36] . Notably, the mediators produced
by one species can also be utilized by other species to facilitate
their electron exchange with the electrode [37–39] . This is a fact of
significance for promoting the exoelectrogenic activity of microbial
communities. In addition, different species in an anodic consortium
can  cooperate  with  each  other  via  interspecies  electron  transfer.
Direct interspecies electron transfer through a network of conduc-
tive pili and cytochromes has been reported between syntrophic
Geobacter co-cultures [40–42] , which is believed to play a role in
the long-range electron transfer across the multilayered biofilm on
the anode electrode.

The  microbe-to-electrode  electron  transfer  routes  are  flexible,
depending upon the metabolic status of the cell and environmen-
tal cues. Shewanella spp . secrete flavins as mediators or multi-heme
cytochrome  bound  cofactors  [ 43 , 44 ],  and  grow  primarily  as  sus-
pended cells or thin biofilms. If mediators are not present at high
levels, Shewanella spp . can transfer electrons through direct con-
tact  between  outer  membrane  cytochromes  and  surface  [45] .  In
analogue, G. sulfurreducens is found to produce an electron shut-
tle  after  long-term  adaption  to  the  genetic  deletion  of  the  PilA
gene [46] . Such examples reveal the great ability of exoelectrogens
to adapt to the disruption of one potential extracellular electron
transfer route with the adjustment of the metabolism for another.
Microorganisms gain energy from coupling reducing and oxidiz-

(cid:3)
E ( donor ) − E ( acceptor )

ing reactions, as depicted by Eq. (1):
(cid:2)
(cid:2)G = nF
(1)
where (cid:2)G is the change of Gibbs free energy under biological stan-
dard conditions, E represents the biological standard potential of
the  electron donor  and/or electron acceptor,  n is  the number of
electrons transferred, and F is the Faraday constant. It is obvious
that the potential gradient between the electron donor and elec-
tron acceptor is a major source of free energy. For certain exoelec-

4

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

trogens, the amount of energy acquired from extracellular electron
transfer ( (cid:2)G
elec ) can be described as follows:
(cid:3)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)G
E ( link ) − E ( acceptor )
elec = nF

(2)

where E
(link)  is the redox potential of the linking species in exo-
electrogens, from which electrons are transferred to the electrode.
As such, the (cid:2)G
elec from the DET can be calculated from the redox
potentials of the outer membrane cytochromes, which are usually
the linking species responsible for the DET. In similar, the (cid:2)G
elec
from the MET can also be obtained from the redox potentials of
electron shuttling species. Notably, since the potentials of the mi-
crobially secreted electron shuttling species are usually more nega-
tive than the formal potential of cytochromes, more electric energy
is expectable from endogenous mediator-involved MET than from
DET.  Taking Shewanella spp. as an example, the redox potentials
of cytochromes in such species are reported to be almost identi-
cal to a mean value of 0 V (vs. Standard Hydrogen Electrode, SHE)
[33] . Thus, the (cid:2)G
elec from their transfer of one mole of electrons
is calculated to be −49.2 kJ, assuming the formal potential of outer
membrane cytochromes of 0 V (vs. SHE) and effective potential of
2 ) cathode of + 0.51 V vs. SHE. In comparison, the
the oxygen (O
transfer of one mole of electrons through riboflavin (redox poten-
tial of −0.21 V vs. SHE) donates a (cid:2)G
elec value as high as −69.5 kJ.
From this point of view, although biosynthesis of the electron shut-
tling species might be energetically costly, a much greater energy
bonus  is  obtained  from  the  accelerated  electron  transfer.  Marsili
and  coworkers  indicated  that  the  riboflavin  secreted  by  S.  onei-
densis  increased  the  rate  of  electron  transfer  by  370%,  resulting
in an ATP production 10 0 0-fold faster than the ATP consumption
on  flavin  synthesis  [34] .  Hence,  exoelectrogens  benefit  from  the
biosynthesis of electron shuttling species in that they help them
gain more energy. What should be noted is that the MET pathway
maintains high energy efficiency only in batch systems. In continu-
ous systems, significant electron loss would inevitably occur due to
the waste of unused mediators that diffuse out of the media before
coming in contact with the electrode [47] .

When energy production is the goal of the BES, we seek to ex-
tract as many of the electrons stored in the electron donor as pos-
sible as electric charges. The electron recovery efficiency in an an-
odic reaction can be expressed as the anodic Columbic efficiency
( ACE ), which is defined as the fraction of electrons in the form of
a current passing through the electric circuit versus the electrons
liberated from the electron donor at the anode. The ACE is calcu-
lated according to Eq. (3) , as follows:

ACE =

∫ t
0 Idt
Fb(cid:2)M

× 100%

(3)

where I is the current ( A ), t is the time (s), b denotes the moles
of electrons extracted from one mole of the electron donor, and
(cid:2)M denotes the moles of the electron donor reacted. The partial
degradation of complex compounds at the bioanode usually results
in a variety of products that make it difficult to accurately calculate
the number of electrons extracted from the electron donor. In this
case, it is more convenient to use the COD to calculate the ACE, as
follows:

ACE =

8 ∫ t

0 Idt
F V An (cid:2)COD

× 100%

(4)

where V An is the volume of liquid in the anode compartment and
O2 = 32 for the molar
8 is a constant calculated on the basis of M
2 and b = 4 for the number of electrons exchanged per
weight of O
mole of O

2 [3] .

When all electrons extracted from the electron donor go to the
electrode, the ACE achieves the utmost of 100%. However, the ac-
tual ACEs of the bioanodes are always lower than 100% due to the
consumption of electrons on biomass synthesis and maintenance.

2.2. Microbial electron collection from the cathodic electrode

Analogous  to  the  anodic  electron  transfer  pathways,  microor-
ganisms take up electrons either directly from the cathode elec-
trode surface or indirectly via soluble mediators, but the compo-
nents involved in the cathodic electron transfer function primarily
at higher potentials. In the MET pathway, microorganisms use ex-
ogenously added or self-secreted electron shuttling species to facil-
itate their electron collection from the electrode. Methyl viologen
and flavins have been shown to mediate the electrode-to-microbe
electron transfer in the reduction of acetate and O
2  [ 4 8 , 4 9 ]. Me-
diators may lack stability, so the DET is the preferred pathway in
long-term. Microbial species capable of accepting electrons directly
from the electrode are referred to as electrotrophs [4] . The c-type
cytochromes are recognized as the main components involved in
the cathodic DET pathway due to their ability to perform reversible
electron transfers over a broad range of potential [50] . Therefore,
DET would require electrotrophs to be equipped with cell compo-
nents such as outer membrane c-type cytochromes that are capa-
ble of acquiring electrons directly from electrode at a given redox
potential [51] . When a series of successive reduction reactions oc-
cur at the biocathode, the reactions might be dominated by differ-
ent extracellular electron transfer modes. A DET mode existed for
− reduc-
− reduction whereas MET mode was valid for NO
the NO
2
3
tion in the denitrification process at the biocathode [52] .

Indirect  interspecies  electron  transfer  through  hydrogen  gas
2 ) is an important metabolism pattern of mixed culture at the
(H
biocathode [4] . In such a pattern, hydrogenase-containing species
take up electrons from the electrode to produce H
2 [53–56] , which
is then utilized by other species to reduce a final electron accep-
tor [57] . Microbially induced electrochemical H
2  formation could
be responsible for an  important fraction of  the  electron transfer
to acetogens or methanogens at high cathode potentials in micro-
bial electrosynthesis [51] . However, it should be noted that several
hydrogenase-containing species are capable of reducing an electron
acceptor by directly gaining electrons from the electrode without
2  [ 58 , 59 ]. To achieve a direct electron trans-
the production of H
fer, these hydrogenase-containing species should first deliver elec-
trons  to  an  electronegative  component  so  that  they  can  harvest
energy from metabolism [ 53 , 54 , 57 ]. For example, methanogens en-
4 production
gaging in electron collection from the electrode for CH
contain ferredoxin or methanophenazine as in vivo redox partners
of membrane-associated hydrogenases [58–60] . Direct interspecies
electron  transfer  could  be  more  energy  conserving  as  compared
with indirect interspecies electron transfer [51] . Such a syntrophic
metabolic pathway is of great implications in stimulating the syn-
trophic anaerobic conversion of various organic substances to CH
4 .
So far, direct evidence for the involvement of direct interspecies
electron transfer in the cathodic process is still lacking. However,
Rotaru  and  coworkers  demonstrated  cell-to-cell  electron  transfer
from Geobacter metallireducesn, a bacterium that is capable of ac-
quiring electrons from the electrode, to Methanosaeta harundinacea,
a bacterium that is capable of reducing CO
4  [61] . Such a
finding suggests that microbes capable of direct interspecies elec-
tron transfer may emerge as important players in microbial elec-
trosysthesis.

2  to CH

While most of the electrotrophs also have exoelectrogenic ac-
tivity, the components responsible for electron collection from the
electrode differ from the ones manipulating electron donation in
the opposite direction. Microarray analysis of the G. sulfurreducens
gene  expression  suggested  the  deletion  of  cytochrome  genes  es-
sential  for  electricity  production  did  not  impact  electricity  con-
sumption and vice versa [62] . At the bioanode, electron transfer
from the outer membrane cytochromes to the electrode is merely
a pathway for electrons to flow down a potential gradient. In con-
trast, electron transfer from the electrode through outer membrane

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

5

cytochromes into microbial cell demands an energy-conservation
course to generate a proton-motive force [ 62 , 63 ]. These are signif-
icantly different metabolic demands, and accordingly, different cy-
tochromes are selected into the electron transfer pathways to meet
them.

Similar to the ACE , the cathodic Columbic efficiency ( CCE ) is a
measure of the electron transfer efficiency in a cathodic reaction,
which is defined as the ratio of the electrons required for the re-
duction of the target chemical to the electrons transferred from the
cathode electrode. The CCE is calculated by Eq. (5) , as follows:

The BES, as a novel wastes-to-electricity converter, has been ex-
tensively reviewed, including the information on various substrates
used at the anode and corresponding current and power outputs
[65] ,  different  types  of  wastewater  substrates  in  terms  of  treat-
ment efficiency and power generation efficiency [66] , energy gen-
eration capacities of various actual wastes [67] . Herein, the focus is
confined to the transformation routes of different types of organic
compounds and the electron recovery efficiencies at the bioanode.
Also, the relationship between the nature of organic compounds
and their energy potentials in the BES is discussed.

C C E =

Fn(cid:2)N
∫ t
0 Idt

× 100%

(5)

where n denotes the moles of electrons used for the reduction of
1 mole of electron acceptor and (cid:2)N denotes the moles of electron
acceptor reacted. CCE values less than 100% indicate that an addi-
tional electron sink is present at the cathode and values greater
than 100% indicate that an electron donor other than the electrode
is present to supply electrons to the target chemical.

In microbial electrosynthesis, the electrons for the production
of reduced organics originate from both the electric circuit and or-
ganic reactants. In such a case, the cathodic electron transfer ef-
ficiency can be reflected by the ηCE , which shows to what extent
the electrons from the electric circuit and reactants are recovered
in the products [64] . The ηCE is calculated as follows:
ηCE =

(6)

n r
n s + ∫ t

0 Idt

where  n r  and  n s  represent  the  moles  of  electrons  contained  in
1 mol of product and reactant, respectively. The number of elec-
trons contained in some typically reduced compounds are as fol-
2 , 8 mol mol −1
lows: 2 mol mol −1 for formate, 2 mol mol −1 for H
for  acetate,  8  mol  mol −1  for  CH
4 ,  12  mol  mol −1  for  ethanol,
20  mol  mol −1  for  butyrate,  32  mol  mol −1  for  caproate  and
44 mol mol −1 for caprylate.

3. Element conversion reactions at the anode—from chemical
energy to electric energy

3.1. Degradation of organic carbon coupled with energy production

The energy value of organic compounds comes from their car-
bon atoms rich in electrons. The flexibility of exoelectrogens to use
a variety of organic compounds at the anode makes the BES an
ideal technology for sustainable energy harvesting. To date, a large
number  of  organic  compounds  in  wastes,  from  small  molecular
compounds to macromolecular polymers, have been used as feeds.

3.1.1. Biodegradable small-molecular compounds as substrate

Small-molecular  compounds  with  good  biodegradability,  such
as the acetate and glucose, can be fully degraded by exoelectro-
gens.  However,  the  electrons  from  the  degradation  are  partially
extracted as electric energy, but others are lost to non-electricity
sinks, including methanogenesis, denitrification, sulfate reduction,
and biomass synthesis, particularly for mixed cultures [68] . When
the BES is fed with fermentable substrates, fermentation is also in-
volved in microbial metabolism [ 8 , 69 ]. Therefore, fermentable sub-
stances suffer from more severe electron losses to undesirable pro-
cesses compared to nonfermentable ones. The MFC fed with glu-
cose was reported to obtain an ACE of 49%, with 26% of electrons
lost to biomass building, 18% to residual organic compounds and
3.7% to CH
4 production. In comparison, a much higher ACE of 71%
was obtained by the acetate-fed MFC, because cell synthesis and
residual organic compounds accounted for only 15% and 11% of the
total electrons extracted from acetate [70] .

Table  1  summarizes  a  series  of  bioreactions  likely  to  occur
at  the  bioanode  fed  with  the  fermentable  substrate  glucose.  Al-
though thermodynamic analysis favors exoelectrogenesis over fer-
mentation, high energy consumption due to activation overpoten-
tial severely reduces the energy gain from exoelectrogenesis [69] .
As a matter of fact, direct exoelectrogenesis is not the predomi-
nant metabolic pathway of the bioanode consortia when fed with
fermentable substances. Instead, the synergy between fermentation
and exoelectrogenesis is believed to dominate the electricity gener-
ation for a mixed culture because of its thermodynamic advantage
[6] . Schroder estimated that the oxidation of 1 mole of glucose at
the anode of a BES liberated −2176.7 kJ of chemical energy, based
2 (pH 7, 25 °C)
on the biochemical standard potential of glucose/CO
as −0.43 V vs. SHE and effective potential of O
2 cathode as + 0.51 V
vs. SHE (Reaction 1a) [33] . Although exoelectrogenesis enables the
direct conversion from chemical energy into electricity, a distinct
portion of the energy embodied in glucose inevitably remains for
its  survival  and  reproduction.  Assuming  all  the  24  electrons  lib-

Table 1
Bioreactions occurring at the bioanode fed with glucose.

Reaction

Stoichiometry

Gibbs free energy a

(kJ)

Fermentations
Homolactic
Alcoholic
Acetogenesis
Mixed acid
Butyric
Methanogenesis (acetoclastic)
H 2 consuming reactions b
Methanogenesis (H 2 otrophic)
Homoacetogenesis
Electricity generating reactions
Glucose oxidation
Acetate oxidation
H 2 oxidation
a
b

tion: ref. [69] .

C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2CH 3 COO − + 2H +
−197
−235
C 6 H 12 O 6 → 2CH 3 CH 2 OH + 2CO 2
C 6 H 12 O 6 + 2H 2 O → 2CH 3 COO −+ 2CO 2 + 4H 2 + 2H +
−216
C 6 H 12 O 6 → CH 3 COO − + C 2 H 5 COO − + CO 2 + H 2 + 2H +  −287
C 6 H 12 O 6 → C 3 H 7 COO − + 2CO 2 + 2H 2 + H +
−264
CH 3 COO − + H + → CH 4 + CO 2
−36

4H 2 + CO 2 → CH 4 + 2H 2 O
4H 2 + 2CO 2 → CH 3 COO − + H + + 2H 2 O

C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6H 2 O → 6CO 2 + 24H + + 24e −
CH 3 COO − + 2H 2 O → 2CO 2 + 7H + + 8e −
H 2 → 2H + + 2e −

−131
−95

−1438
−375
−118

Data refer to pH 7 and 298 K.
The Gibbs free energy is reported for an anode potential of + 0.2 V vs. SHE. Sources of Gibbs free energy of forma-

6

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

erated from the oxidation of glucose are harvested at the anode,
direct exoelectrogenesis on the glucose recovers 54% of the chemi-
cal energy as electricity through the DET pathway [33] . Such a low
energy efficiency indicates a high degree of biological energy dis-
sipation. In comparison, when the fermentation products of glu-
2 and acetate, are used for electricity generation, 4 mol
cose, i.e., H
of H
2  and 2 mol of acetate are available from 1 mol of glucose
2 represents one of the most electroactive electron
(Reaction 2a). H
carriers  that  can  be  directly  oxidized  at  the  anode  electrode  for
energy generation without microbial involvement [ 71 , 72 ]. Assum-
ing that the oxidation of H
2 follows an abiotic pathway, for 1 mol
2  with biological standard potential of −0.42 V vs. SHE, the
of H
maximum electric energy from its oxidation is −179.5 kJ (Reaction
3a) [33] . Acetate is a simple substrate that can be utilized by most
exoelectrogens. Following a DET pathway, the exoelectrogen gains
electric energy of −393.7 kJ from the oxidation of acetate, accord-
ing to the formal potentials of the outer membrane cytochromes
2  cathode as 0 V and + 0.51 V vs. SHE, respectively (Reac-
and O
tion 4a) [33] . In total, the oxidation of 1 mol of glucose through
fermentation and exoelectrogenesis yields 1505.4 kJ of electric en-
ergy, corresponding to an energy efficiency of 69%, which is much
higher than that for direct exoelectrogenesis.
C 6 H 12 O 6 + 6 O 2 → 6C O 2 + 6 H 2 O

(1a)

C 6 H 12 O 6 + 2 H 2 O → 2C H 3 COOH + 2C O 2 + 4 H 2

H 2 + 1 / 2 O 2 → H 2 O

C H 3 COOH + 2 O 2 → 2C O 2 + 2 H 2 O

(2a)

(3a)

(4a)

In reality, very few exoelectrogens are able to directly utilize a
fermentable substrate such as the glucose [73] , but most of them
can  only  feed  on  low-molecular  organic  acids  and  alcohols  pro-
vided by fermenters. From this point of view, a syntrophic, rather
than competitive, interaction exists between the two populations.
Exoelectrogens  facilitate  fermentation  through  continuously  con-
suming its end products for energy production.

3.1.2. Biorefractory compounds as substrate

The anode of the BES provides a unique environment that en-
ables the integration of biological degradation, electrolytic disso-
ciation and electrochemical oxidation; hence, more effective pol-
lutant removal is expected  in the BES than that in conventional
biological reactors [74] . This is especially favorable for improving
the treatment efficiencies of recalcitrant wastes [75–78] . As shown
in  Table  2 ,  a  majority  of  biorefractory  compounds  can  be  com-
pletely mineralized in the BES, but partial degradation is also ob-
served in a few cases. For instance, the phenolic compound toluene
was  reported  to  be  initially  decomposed  into  benzoic  acid,  and
2  in the MFC inoculated with sludge from an
subsequently to CO
oil cracking wastewater treatment plant [80] . This result is in ac-
cordance with the finding that several anodic consortia are able
to break down the benzene ring [ 80 , 82 ]. Paradoxically, the degra-
dation of pentachlorophenol was found to eventually form tetra-
chlorohydroquinone (TeCHQ) and 2,3,4,5-tetrachlorophenol (TeCP)
[77] , and phenyl derivatives were identified as the products from
the degradation of Congo red [91] . An investigation of the degrada-
tion of phenolic and furanic compounds indicated a fermentation-
exoelectrogenesis-coupled  pathway  with  catechol  and  phenol  as
the final products [92] . Acknowledging that a  number of factors
should  be  taken  into  consideration  when  explaining  why  some
compounds are able to be totally mineralized in the BES whereas
others not, the development of synergetic communities with cer-
tain species to perform stepwise degradation should be a prerequi-
site for the effective removal of recalcitrant wastes. However, such

a complicated stepwise degradation pathway tends to cause severe
electron losses, thus leading to very low ACE of the BES. As shown
in Table 2 , the ACE s for the degradation of most biorefractory com-
pounds are less than 10%. In this case, the BES would be mainly
used for enhanced pollutants degradation rather than energy pro-
duction when recalcitrant wastes are used as the substrates.

2  [81] .  Since  the  O

While  the  anaerobic  condition  is  generally  recommended  for
2 , the
the operation of bioanode to avoid electron loss through O
degradation of biorefractory compounds might be promoted under
microaerophilic conditions. The removal efficiency of aniline was
observed  to  be  increased  remarkably  from  15.8%  to  91.2%  when
the anaerobic condition of the bioanode was switched to an aer-
obic one; meanwhile, the ACE decreased from 11.3% to 5.1% due
to  electron  consumption  by  O
2  at  the  bioan-
ode would impair the energy potential of the BES, its positive role
in the degradation of biorefractory compounds should be properly
addressed  when  waste  removal  is  the  main  goal.  If  a  biorefrac-
tory compound itself does not support microbial survival well, a
co-substrate can be utilized as an alternate energy source for mi-
crobial metabolism. Co-substrates are able to improve microbial ac-
tivity, induce functionalized enzymes and create a more robust mi-
crobial community. As a result, microbial degradation of the biore-
fractory compound is enhanced. For example, the amendment of
easily degradable substrates, such as glucose and acetate, was re-
ported to substantially accelerate the decolorization of Congo red
[91] . Similarly, the removal of 4-chlorophenol was promoted by ca.
42% after dosing the co-substrate acetate because of the stimulated
enzymatic activity and enriched microbial community [93] . How-
ever, such a strategy might be not applicable to all systems. For
example,  the  biodegradation  rate  of  indole  was  found  to  be  re-
tarded by the co-substrate glucose, due to the preference of the
anode consortium for glucose as its fuel [76] .

3.1.3. Macromolecular polymers as substrate

Complex organic materials should be exposed to disintegration
and enzymatic hydrolysis before they are taken up by the anode
consortia.  As  shown  in  Fig.  2 ,  the  disintegration  of  complex  or-
ganic materials results in particulate carbohydrates, proteins and
lipids, which are then enzymatically hydrolyzed into monosaccha-
rides, amino acids, long chain fatty acids and glycerol by extracel-
lular  hydrolases.  The  anode  consortia  make  use  of  these  soluble
hydrolysis products either via direct anaerobic respiration with the
electrode as electron acceptor or by fermenting them into volatile
fatty  acids,  alcohols  and  H
2  as  the  precursors  of  exoelectrogen-
esis  [ 8 , 94–96 ].  The  rate-limiting  step  of  the  process  is  normally
the  sequential  hydrolysis  of  organic  particulates  into  monomers.
According to the Michaelis–Menten equation [97] , the hydrolysis
rate is dependent positively upon the enzyme concentration. Mi-
crobial hydrolysis of the macromolecules often takes several hours
due to the insufficient secretion of extracellular hydrolases [ 98 , 99 ].
The power output of the BES fed with cellulose was enhanced by
supplying proper hydrolase to accelerate the hydrolysis, but the hy-
drolase failed to be recycled due to its consumption by the anode
consortium as fuel [95] .

Cellulose and starch are typical polysaccharides comprising the
majority of agricultural wastes. A few bacteria strains are able to
metabolize the cellulose and/or starch and transfer electrons to the
electrode, but the electron recovery efficiencies are very low due
to incomplete degradation of polysaccharides by individual strains
[ 100 , 101 ]. For instance, the exoelectrogen Enterobacter cloacae par-
tially degraded cellulose to acetic acid, ethanol and propanol, and
the  ACE  was  only  14%  [101] .  Therefore,  complete  utilization  of
polysaccharides for energy production requires the cooperation of
various microbial strains with different functions. Notably, the co-
culture of a cellulolytic fermenter and exoelectrogen is highly rec-
ommended to improve the degradation degree of the cellulose. The

99

400

260
150

500
120

5~40

Table 2
Degradation efficiencies of biorefractory compounds at the bioanodes of BESs and corresponding ACE s.

Contaminant

Structure

1,2-dichloroethane

CH 2 Cl-CH 2 Cl

Phenol

Toluene

Aniline

Pyridine

4-chlorophenol
(glucose as
co-substrate)

Veratryl alcohol

Pentachlorophenol

Aniline

Indole

Quinoline

Concentration (mg L −1
)

Degradation efficiency

Totally mineralized

ACE (%)

25~43

11.09~103.8

Totally mineralized

83.9–96.4% COD removal

1.5

—

5.1
—

75% TOC removal
100% TOC removal

85.4–90.3% COD removal
86% COD removal

~1%
< 8%

—

6.3~30.3

Reference

[75]

[79]

[80]

[81]
[82]

[83]
[84]

[85]

100~500

75–86% COD removal

0.92~0.98

[86]

5~20

150

250

120

120
200

TeCHQ and TeCP as the
products

100% TOC removal

—

—

95% COD removal (continuous
fed mode)
70% COD removal (batch-fed)
95% COD removal

0.7 (continuous-fed mode)
81.5 (batch-fed mode)

< 8%

93% COD removal
More than 80% COD removal

< 8%
1.6

[77]

[82]

[76]

[84]

[84]
[87]

( continued on next page )

M

.

S
u
n

,

L
.
-
F

.

Z
h
a
i

a
n
d

Y

.

M
u

e
t

a
l
.
 /
 P
r
o
g
r
e
s
s
 i
n

E
n
e
r
g
y

a
n
d

C
o
m
b
u
s
t
i
o
n

S
c
i
e
n
c
e

7
7

(
2
0
2
0
)

1
0
0
8
1
4

7



















Table 2 ( continued )

Contaminant

Structure

Dibenzothiophene

Concentration (mg L −1
)

Degradation efficiency

0.5 mg kg −1

soil

—

ACE (%)

—

Reference

[88]

Phenanthrene
(glucose or
pyruvate as
co-substrate)

Sulphamethoxazole

Ceftriaxone sodium
(glucose as
co-substrate)

Congo red
(glucose, acetate,
or ethanol as
co-substrate)

Mixture of furfural,
5-hydroxymethyl
furfural, syringic
acid, vanillic acid
and
4-hydroxybenzoic
acid

20

17.47~70.43% COD removal

< 1.4%

[89]

20

Benzenethiol and CH 4 as the
products

50

96% COD removal

300

Phenyl derivatives as the
products

—

—

—

[78]

[90]

[91]

200~800

49~61% COD removal

44~69

[92]

8

M

.

S
u
n

,

L
.
-
F

.

Z
h
a
i

a
n
d

Y

.

M
u

e
t

a
l
.
 /
 P
r
o
g
r
e
s
s
 i
n

E
n
e
r
g
y

a
n
d

C
o
m
b
u
s
t
i
o
n

S
c
i
e
n
c
e

7
7

(
2
0
2
0
)

1
0
0
8
1
4



















M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

9

Fig. 2.  Degradation pathway of macro-molecular polymers at the bioanode of BES.

MFC  with  the  binary  culture  of  Clostridium  cellulolyticum  and  G.
sulfurreducens obtained a high ACE of 47% from cellulose when uti-
lizing the C. cellulolyticum to ferment the cellulose and the G. sul-
furreducens to produce electricity from the fermentative products
[102] . Mixed cultures have also been employed by the cellulose-
fed BESs [ 96 , 103 ], which, however, obtained lower ACEs than the
binary culture due to the more complicated cellulose degradation
routes responsible for more severe electron losses.

Proteins  and  lipids  are  present  in  a  large  amount  of  domes-
tic  and  industrial  wastewaters.  So  far,  bovine  serum  albumin  is
the  only  protein  ever  used  as  the  sole  fuel  to  power  the  BES
[104] .  However,  the  success  of  the  BES  in  generating  electricity
from amino acids-, peptones-, and proteins-rich wastewaters im-
plies the capability of the anode consortia to degrade various pro-
teins [ 104 , 105 ]. The BES usually recovers more electrons from sin-
gle proteins than from mixed proteins. With the same reactor con-
figuration and inoculums, the MFC obtained ACEs in the range of
10.7 to 20.6% on bovine serum albumin, but only from 2.3 to 6.0%
on  peptone  [104] .  Lipids  are  regarded  as  undesirable  substrates
for the BES because of their poor accessibility to microorganisms
[106] .  Exoelectrogens  only  make  use  of  the  hydrolysis  products
of  lipids,  i.e.,  long-chain  fatty  acids  and  glycerol,  as  their  power
source [ 101 , 107–109 ]. Fortunately, the ubiquity of lipase activity in
environmental microorganisms enables the lipids to be readily uti-
lized by the anode consortia [106] . As a result, the BES obtained
high treatment efficiencies when used on wastewaters rich in pro-
teins and lipids, but the ACE s were less than 30%, suggesting the
severe electron losses to the undesired metabolic routes [ 110 , 111 ].

3.2. Oxidation of sulfide coupled with the recovery of element sulfur
(S 0 ) and energy production

The interest in BES-based sulfide removal was motivated by the
0 at the bioan-
0  conversion  process  recovers

discovery that sulfide can be directly oxidized into S
ode  [ 112 , 113 ].  Such  a  sulfide-to-S

both the electric energy and S
0 otherwise lost in sulfide-containing
wastewaters. As shown in Fig. 3 , the removal of sulfide at the an-
ode of the BES is a process that includes both the electrochemi-
cal oxidation and microbial metabolism of aqueous sulfide. Sulfur
has many possible oxidation states which are involved in several

Fig. 3.  Main sulfur conversion routes at the anode of BES.

10

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

parallel or consecutive electrochemical equilibriums that can occur
simultaneously [ 114 , 115 ]. Reactions 5a-9a summarize the standard
equilibrium potentials of the related reactions based on thermo-
dynamic calculations [116] , which are all lower than the effective
2 cathode ( + 0.51 V vs. SHE) of the BES. As a re-
potential of the O
sult, the electrochemical oxidation of sulfide at the anode of the
BES involves an array of products involving S
0 , polysulfide and sul-
fur oxyanions.

H S

− → S + H

+ + 2 e

− E = −0 . 065 V vs . SHE

2H S

− → S 2 −

2  + 2 H

+ + 2 e

− E = +0 . 298 V vs . SHE

S 2 −
2  → 2S + 2 e

− E = −0 . 310 V vs . SHE

2S + 3 H 2 O → S 2 O 2 −

3  + 6 H

+ + 4 e

− E = +0 . 165 V vs . SHE

H S

− + 4 H 2 O → SO 2 −

4  + 9 H

+ + 8 e

− E = +0 . 252 V vs . SHE

(5a)

(6a)

(7a)

(8a)

(9a)

The complete scheme for the electrochemical oxidation of sul-
fide is suggested at the boron-doped diamond electrode, as shown
by Reactions 10a-15a, where the sulfide is initially present as HS −
− [117] :
and the polysulfide as HS
2

−
H S

−
( aq ) → H S

( ads )

(10a)

−
H S

( ads ) → S 0 + 2 e

+
− + H

S 0 + 8O H

− → SO 2 −

4  ( aq )

+6 e

− + 4 H 2 O

−
S 0 +H S

−
( aq ) → HS
2 ( aq )

−
4 HS
2 ( aq )

+4O H

− → S 2 O 2 −

3  ( aq )

−
+6H S

( aq ) + 4 H 2 O

(11a)

(12a)

(13a)

(14a)

2 S 2 O 2 −

3  ( aq )

−
+ HS
2 ( aq )

+ H 2 O → S 4 O 2 −

6  ( aq )

−
+2H S

( aq ) + O H

− (15a)

2 O

0 .  Further  oxidation  to  SO

3 2 − (Reaction 14a) and, hence, S

Reaction 10a represents the initial adsorption of sulfide on the
electrode, and Reaction 11a is the electrochemical oxidation of sul-
4 2 − and  the  extraction  of  S
fide  to  S
0
by residual sulfide as polysulfide are illustrated by Reactions 12a
and 13a, respectively. Polysulfide is partly disproportionate, yield-
6 2 − (Reaction 15a). Poly-
ing S
sulfide is observed only at the early stage of the process when a
significant concentration of sulfide is available. However, the oxi-
dation pathway of sulfide at the carbon electrode, which is usually
used as the anode electrode of the BES, is quite different. As shown
in Fig. 4 , the electrochemical oxidation of sulfide does not lead to
3 2 −)
the  formation  of  SO
and tetrathionate (S

4 2 −,  but  S
6 2 −) are the main products [118] .
4 O

0 ,  polysulfide,  thiosulfate  (S

4 O

2 O

Fig. 4.  A) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy S2p spectra and B) cyclic voltammetry of sulfur species on Au/Hg electrode showing the electrochemical oxidation of sulfide at
the carbon paper anode of BES; C) scanning electronic microscopy image of S 0 on the carbon paper surface.

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

11

2 O

The involvement of a microbial catalysis apparently changes the
distribution of oxidation products. The sulfide was reported to be
3 2 − and  then  to  S
0  in  the  presence  of  the
first  oxidized  to  S
4 2 −
autotrophic  denitrifer  Pseudomonas  sp .  C27  [119] ,  and  the  SO
was produced when a mixed microbial community was developed
at  the  anode  [ 118 , 120 ].  Notably,  the  coexistence  of  other  pollu-
tants  can  influence  the  oxidation  pathway  of  sulfide  by  leading
0  was  identified
to  quite  different  microbial  communities.  The  S
as  the  predominant  product  at  the  anode  fed  with  sulfide  only
[ 113 , 121 , 122 ],  whereas  a  majority  of  sulfide  was  converted  into
4 2 − when benzene coexisted in the solution [120] . Noticing that
SO
S
0 is the most common products of sulfide-fed anode, the BES is
well suited for the treatment of wastes containing both sulfide and
organic carbon. Dutta and coworkers reported that the S
0 formed
on the bioanode could be a preferred electron acceptor for micro-
bial acetate oxidation over the electrode [123] . Then, the biologi-
cally formed sulfide as an electron donor would be readily oxidized
0  pair acts as an electron
at the anode. In this way, the sulfide/S
transfer mediator in the energy harvesting from acetate. A similar
electron transfer pathway mediated by sulfur cycling in the degra-
dation of toluene has been also reported [124] .

0 and SO

As aforementioned, S

4 2 − are the two dominant prod-
ucts from the oxidation of sulfide at the BES anode. A major ques-
tion to address is whether the objective is to recover S
0 or to har-
vest energy. The chemical energy of sulfide can be fully harvested
4 2 −,  but  such  an  oxidation
when  it  is  completely  oxidized  to  SO
pathway does not sustain permanent sulfur removal because the
4 2 − is still a pollutant to the environment. Moreover,
product SO
practices on the oxidation of sulfide at the bioanode acquired very
low ACE values, i.e., 25.6% with a pure culture [119] and 6.7% with
a mixed culture [125] . In comparison, the recovery efficiency of S
0
was reported to be above 70% at the abiotic anode, and the gener-
ated electric energy was an additional bonus [ 126 , 127 ]. Currently,
0 recovery option seems economically more reasonable than
the S
0  is primarily in-
the energy harvest one for the BES. Since the S
4 2 − is the prod-
duced by the electrochemical process while the SO
uct under microbial catalysis [118] , an abiotic anode is preferable
to the biotic one when the S
0 recovery is the main consideration.
Another issue to be addressed is that the oxidation of sulfide at the
0 deposits on the surface of the electrode.
anode of BES produces S
0 deposits not only account for considerable sul-
These unwanted S
fur loss but also deactivate the electrode [ 113 , 118 ]. An in situ elec-
trochemical  reduction  method  has  been  proposed  to  reduce  the
0  to  sulfide  or  S x 2 − by  imposing  a  cathode  potential
deposited  S
[128] . Such a strategy seems feasible to maintain the continuous
operation of the BES, but the sulfide/S x 2 − products cause additional
burden to the whole sulfur pollutants removal process. The trans-
0 involves a series of steps initiating with
formation of sulfide to S
0  molecule followed by the formation of
the building up of the S
the S
0 is able to rapidly grow and pre-
cipitate from solution, but a suboptimal condition may produce a
0 cluster that is easily absorbed by the electrode before
liquidlike S
0  on the electrode
crystallization [129] . Therefore, deposition of S
0 .
might be alleviated by promoting the crystallization of S

0 crystal. Well crystallized S

4. Element conversion at the cathode—utilization of electric
energy for value-added chemical production

4.1. Microbial electrosynthesis for the production of organic chemicals

Microbial electrosynthesis is a promising process that powers
the  microbial  activity  with  electricity  for  the  reduction  of  CO
2
or basic organics into fuels and commodity chemicals. By adopt-
ing  suitable  heterogeneous  electrocatalysts,  the  reduction  of  CO
2
to  formic  acid  has  been  reported  at  the  abiotic  cathodes  of  a
BES operated in MEC mode [ 130 , 131 ]. While electrocatalysts can

help to reduce CO
2  to a variety of organic chemicals, they suffer
from  a  low  energy  efficiency  and  poor  product  selectivity  [132] .
The biocathode is preferred for lowering the power demand and
enhance  reaction  specificity,  by  taking  advantage  of  the  micro-
bial metabolism to activate the cathodic reactions. Microbial elec-
trosynthesis was initially applied to synthesize the CH
4 from CO
2
at a potential more negative than −0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl with the aid
of methanogens on the electrode [57] . Then, the conversion of CO
2
to acetate was realized on an acetogens-colonized graphite elec-
trode set at −0.4 V vs. SHE [133] . Afterwards, a series of C2-C6
carboxylic  acids  and  alcohols  have  been  produced  via  microbial
electrosynthesis  from  CO
2  or  acetate  [ 64 , 134–137 ].  Recently,  Wu
and coworkers reported an engineered electroactive Escherichia coli
with enhanced succinate production from fumarate [138] . Micro-
bial electrosynthesis of chiral alcohols with enantiomeric excess of
> 99% was also realized by using the resting E. coli alcohol dehydro-
genase expression strain [139] . These results open an opportunity
to increase microbial electrosynthesis yield and broaden product
spectrum by using synthetic biology tools to engineer trait-specific
genetic modules.

As summarized in Fig. 5 , a biocathode is capable of yielding dif-
2 as the initial reactant, en-
ferent value-added chemicals with CO
dowing the microbial electrosynthesis process with a great poten-
2 . In Table 3 , the reported CCE values in a va-
tial for reuse of CO
riety of microbial electrosynthesis processes started from CO
2 are
compared. Since biomass formation and microbial metabolism con-
sume nearly 10% of the electrons transferred from the electrode
[ 133 , 141 , 148 ], the CCE values in microbial electrosynthesis are gen-
erally lower than 90%. To date, the highest CCE of 100 ±4% was re-
ported in a microbial electrosynthesis process [150] . In that work,
after the biofilm reached a certain state of development, bacterial
growth slowed down and only a very small proportion of the elec-
trons were used to this end. In addition, the recycling of electrons
from decaying biomass might also occur. However, long-term per-
formance of the system remains to be evaluated. Indeed, utiliza-
tion of electrons from decaying biomass for microbial electrosyn-
thesis  could  lead  to  an  instantaneous  high  CCE  that  can  exceed
100%, but such a microbial behavior seemed not able to sustain
long-term operation [154] . In comparison, modifying the microbes
causes permanent enhancement of microbial electrosynthesis effi-
ciency. Chen and coworkers adopted penicillin to disrupt the cell
wall synthesis of Moorella thermoautotrophica with an aim to en-
hance  cell  permeability  and  bacterial  electron  uptake  rate  [152] .
They found that the microbial electrosynthesis rates per biomass
were doubled and the CCE in formate and acetate was increased
from  73%  to  88%,  attributed  to  the  shift  of  electrons  from  the
cell well formation reactions to the chemical production reactions.
This result enlightens us to adopt genetic modification strategies to
abolish unwanted metabolic pathways in microbes in future stud-
ies.

2 was exclusively converted to CH

As shown in Fig. 5 , Microbial electrosynthesis is controlled by
several  metabolic  pathways  that  are  highly  dependent  upon  the
cathode potential. The CO
4 at the
potential of −0.85 V vs. Ag/AgCl, but was recovered predominantly
as acetate when the cathode potential became more negative than
−0.95  V  vs.  Ag/AgCl  [142] .  The  change  of  the  cathode  potential
from  −0.4  to  −0.53  V  vs.  SHE  caused  a  significant  electron  loss
2  evolution, thus resulting in a large decrease of CCE from
into H
36.2% to 7.0% for the CH
4 and acetate production [141] . In addition,
the biocathodes with pure cultures usually have higher CCE val-
ues than the ones with mixed cultures, because the application of
mixed cultures is likely to complicate the distribution of products
and reduce the amount of electrons into target products. Notably,
the production of acetate at the biocathodes with mixed cultures
4 because of the
always has to compete with the production of CH
coexistence of methanogens and homoacetogens in the original in-

12

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

Fig. 5.  Proposed metabolic pathways and key intermediates for microbial electrosynthesis of organic compounds from CO 2 [ 137 , 140 ].

Table 3
CCE s of the BESs for the production of different reduced organic carbons from CO 2 .

Target product

Cathode

Operation condition of cathode

CCE (%)

Reference

CH 4

Porous graphite felt with mixed cultures

Carbon paper with mixed cultures
Carbon felt with mixed cultures
Graphite felt with mixed cultures
Graphite rod with Methanococcus sp.

MEC, 0.2 V voltage application
MEC, 0.5 V voltage application
Cathode potential at −0.65~ −0.9 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −0.85~ −1.15 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
Cathode potential at −0.7 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −0.7 V (vs. SHE)

Formate

MWCNT-CoTAPc

MEC-MFC coupled system

Acetate

Ni-coated graphite with Sporomusa ovata
Graphite stick with Sporomusa sphaeroides
Graphite stick with Clostridium ljungdahlii
Graphite stick with Moorella thermoacetica
Graphite stick with Sporomusa sp .

Porous graphite felt with mixed cultures

Carbon felt with mixed cultures
Graphite rod/granules with mixed cultures
Carbon felt with mixed cultures
Carbon cloth with mixed cultures
NanoWeb- RVC with mixed cultures
CNTs/RVC with mixed cultures
Ni-PHFs/CNT with Sporomusa ovata

Cathode potential at −0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)

Cathode potential at −0.4 V (vs. SHE)

Cathode potential at −0.69 V (vs. SHE)
MEC, 0.2 V voltage application
MEC, 0.5 V voltage application
Cathode potential at −1.05 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
Cathode potential at −0.59 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −1.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
Cathode potential at −0.8 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −0.85 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −0.85 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)

Acetate and 2-oxobutyrate

Graphite stick with Sporomusa ovata
Graphite stick with Clostridium aceticum

Cathode potential at −0.4 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −0.4 V (vs. SHE)

Butyrate

Carbon cloth with mixed cultures

Cathode potential at −0.8 V (vs. SHE)

Formate and acetate

Graphite plate with Moorella
thermoautotrophica

Cathode potential at −0.6 V (vs. Saturated
Calomel Electrode)

18.2~21.7
2.4~4.8
50~80
56.7~95.8
73
45.3~58.9

73.5

82~84
84
72
85
61.1~91.8
17.6
4.2~12.3
28.4
69
52~64
52.9 a
70
100
83

86
53
49.6 a

73–88

Alcohols

Gas diffusion electrode with mixed
cultures

a

The values are calculated from the data in the reference.

Cathode potential at −0.795 V (vs. SHE)

49

[141]

[58]
[142]
[143]
[144]

[131]

[145]

[134]

[146]

[141]

[142]
[147]
[148]
[135]
[149]
[150]
[151]

[133]
[134]

[135]

[152]

[153]

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

13

oculums.  This  issue  has  been  addressed  by  taking  initial  culture
enrichment or long-term culture adaptation strategies towards the
production of the target products [ 147 , 148 , 155 ]. While the amend-
ment of methanogenic inhibitors, such as 2-bromoethanesulfonate,
is able to suppress methanogens in the short-term [ 147 , 155 ], pre-
enrichment of the acetogenic community prior to the reactor oper-
ation avoids the interference of methanogenesis in the long-term
[148] .  Bajracharya  and  coworkers  reported  a  specific  enrichment
procedure involving inoculum pretreatment, culture transfer, sup-
plementation of electro-active CO
2 reducer, and cathode polariza-
2 -reducing biocathode, which exclusively
tion. This developed a CO
reduced CO
4 was not detected over more than
300 days of operation [156] .

2 to acetate, and CH

2 .  If  so,  the  CO

One may notice that the cathode potentials applied for micro-
bial  electrosynthesis  are  usually  negative  enough  to  initiate  the
2  might  be  fixated  into  products
evolution  of  H
via  a  Wood–Ljungdahl  pathway  in  which  the  H
2  is  used  as  an
2  as  an  electron  acceptor  as  well  as
electron  donor  and  the  CO
a  building  block  for  biosynthesis  [135] .  Indirect  electron  trans-
2  has  been identified in microbial electrosynthesis pro-
fer  via H
cesses [ 64 , 142 , 143 ]. However, the reduction of CO
2 can also be sus-
tained by electrons transferred directly from the cathode electrode
[ 58 , 59 , 133 ]. Whether involved in the carbon reduction or not, H
2
evolution  certainly  consumes  electrons.  For  example,  the  ηCE  of
capturing electrons from electric current and acetate in the target
products, i.e., caproate and butyrate, was reported to be 11.7% and
4.5%, respectively, at the mixed cultured biocathode, and a large
2 evolution [64] . For
portion of the electrons (27.9%) was lost to H
the biocathode aiming at producing acetate from CO
2 evo-
2 , the H
lution  was  identified  as  consuming  the  second  highest  share  of
electrons [ 147 , 148 ]. As H
2 evolution is unavoidable in most micro-
2  as an electron donor
bial electrosynthesis processes, utilizing H
for  biosynthesis  is  encouraged  to  improve  the  CCE  of  microbial
electrosynthesis. One possible solution is to introduce H
2 -utilizing
species into the biocathode community to consume the produced
2 .  In  this  regard,  Kracke  and  coworkers  recently  developed  a
H
2 -driven microbial electrosynthesis system by integrating electro-
H
chemical H
2 reduction. The selected
bacteria, whether electro-active or not, demonstrated a high and
2  and the integrated system obtaind
stable efficiency to utilize H
2 to methane and
nearly 100% of CCE s in selective reduction of CO
acetate, respectively [157] .

2 evolution with microbial CO

The cathode material as an electron donor plays a critical role
in the electricity-driven chemical production by microbes. A recent
review has systematically summarized the recent developments of
cathode materials and explored the key cathode–microbe interac-
tions that lead to improved microbial electrosynthesis productiv-
ity [158] . As suggested, a good cathode material reduces electron
losses  by  smoothing  mass  and  electron  transfer,  providing  suffi-
cient active surface for biofilm development, or contributing to the
improved (bio)electrocatalysis. Here, some examples are provided.
A gas transfer electrode (GDE) was reported to be capable of re-
inforcing the CO
2  mass transfer and increasing its availability to
the biocathode, thus improving the overall CCE in acetate produc-
tion  [154] .  The  highly  conductive  carbon  nanotubes  had  a  good
biocompatibility and high specific surface area, and their coating
on the cathode facilitated cell attachment and biofilm architecture,
leading to increased CCE s [ 150 , 151 ]. For the H
2 -mediated microbial
electrosynthesis, energy efficiency was increased significantly after
modifying the cathode material towards more efficient H
2  evolu-
tion reaction [157] .

The power supplied by the bioanode is usually not sufficient to
initiate microbial electrosynthesis at the biocathode, and external
power  supplement  is  needed.  Microbial  electrolythesis  has  been
proposed to be driven by renewable electricity, especially that from
solar and wind, for the combined purposes of energy storage and

CO
2  capture  [159–161] .  Solar  or  wind  energy  often  suffers  from
power fluctuation or even interruption at long-time scale, resulting
in the variability of power sources. The electricity from the bioan-
ode of BES is instable as well [67] . To overcome such a challenge,
Rojas and coworkers examined the effect of electric supply inter-
ruption on microbial acetate electrosynthesis process. They found
that the biocathode was resilient to temporary power interruption
up to 64 h and the acetate production restored after the power gap
[ 162 , 163 ]. Later, it was found the microbial electrosynthesis func-
tion could be recovered even after 6-week power off, but the prod-
uct shifted from acetate to methane [164] . These findings reinforce
the  great  opportunity  of  microbial  electrosynthesis  in  renewable
energy exploitation, and put forward a possible strategy for tuning
the microbial community towards different end products.

4.2. Reduction of metal ions for heavy metal recovery

The removal of industrial heavy metals from wastewater is the
subject of considerable ecological and economic interest. The BES
technology is effective in reducing different metal ions at low en-
ergy  input  and  provides  a  clean  and  economic  method  for  the
recovery  of  solid  metals  and/or  metal  oxides  from  metallurgical
wastewaters.  Fig. 6  illustrates the  potentials required for  the re-
ductions of various metal ions. Several metal ions with high posi-
tive redox potentials, including the Au(III), V(V), Cr(VI), Ag(I), Cu(II),
Fe(III) and Hg(II), can be spontaneously reduced at the abiotic cath-
ode of BES, concomitant with the electricity generation [165–175] .
Others with redox potentials lower than the anode potential of BES
need an external power supplement to instigate their reductions at
the abiotic cathode. When a mixture of metal ions is subjected to
reduction, metal separation can be accomplished by controlling the
input voltage or the retention time of the mixture in the cathode
chamber. For example, lead, cadmium and zinc ions are sequen-
tially recovered at input voltages of 0.34, 0.51 and 1.7 V, respec-
tively [176] . Electrolysis of the mixture of copper, nickel and fer-
rous ions at 1.0 V first induced the reduction of the copper ion,
followed by the reductions of nickel and ferrous ions, correspond-
ing well to the order of their reduction potentials from high to low
values [177] . When MFC and MEC are integrated, self-sustained re-
ductions of multiple metal ions are realized. Using the energy har-
vested in Cr(VI)- and Cu(II)-reducing MFCs to power the Cd(III)-
reducing MEC, chromic hydroxide, copper and cadmium were si-
multaneously recovered without external energy supplement [178] .
Such a stacked BES configuration is also effective for the separa-
tion of different metal ions. The W(VI) and Mo(VI) were separated
from each another in various units of a stacked BES system with
a separation factor as high as 467 ±22 [179] . Another potential ap-
plication of metallurgical BES is the soil-MFC for the self-powered
electrokinetic removal of heavy metals from a soil matrix. Soil has
abundant organic matter that can be converted into electricity to
drive the migration of metal ions to the cathode surface [180] , and
then  the  metal  ions  are  converted  into  their  immobilized  forms
via the reduction reaction [181] . Such a metal recovery process is
practically promising because it directly utilizes the electric field in
situ generated in the soil to simultaneously enrich and immobilize
heavy metals.

2 reduction and H

As shown in Fig. 6 , the O

2 evolution reactions
may be simultaneously triggered when metal ions are reduced at
the biocathode of BES. In general, an acidic pH is essential to pro-
vide soluble metal ions for reduction, and a high positive cathode
potential favors metal reduction owing to thermodynamic conve-
nience [182] . However, the solution pH and cathode potential also
influence the distribution of electrons into the various cathodic re-
actions, especially in the presence of O
2 . Fig. 7 shows theoretical
potentials for the half-reactions possibly involved in the reductions
of Cr(III), Cu(II) and Cd(II) at the abiotic cathodes of BES over pH

14

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

Fig. 6.  Standard potentials for reduction of metal ions as well as side reactions at the cathode of BES.

2  reduction  and  H

2  reduction  and  H

0–12 [178] . A series of reactions, including the reductions of metal
2  evolution,  can
ions  into  multiple  products,  O
occur at the cathode dependent upon solution pH and cathode po-
tential. Therefore, as shown in Table 4 , the CCE s for metallurgical
BESs with abiotic cathodes are generally lower than 100% due to
2  evolution  reactions  for
the  competition  of  O
electrons. However, CCE values above 100% have also been reported
in some cases, even though another electron donor is not available
at the abiotic cathode. Such abnormal CCE values are caused by
the inclusion of the part of metals removed by adsorption into the
calculation of CCE . Although metal adsorption to the membrane,
electrode, biomass and metal precipitates contributes to a certain
fraction of metal removal at the cathode of the BES, such an event
does not change the valence state of the metals and, thus, does not
consume any electrons. Obviously, the calculated CCE value would
be higher than the real value if the amount of metal due to ad-
sorption is taken into calculation. For example, the CCE of the MFC
used  for  Cr(VI)  reduction  was  80%  in  the  first  cycle  but  rose  to
approximately 380% in the third cycle. The authors explained that
the Cr(VI) removal in the third cycle was largely attributed to the
adsorption by the Cr(III) precipitate that was formed in the initial
two cycles [185] .

Application of a biocathode not only saves the energy used for
metal  reduction  but  also  accelerates  the  reduction  kinetics.  The
cathode potential required for the reduction of U(VI) was positively
shifted from −0.9 to −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl by G. sulfurreducens on the
electrode [187] , and S. oneidensis MR-1 as a biocatalyst promoted
the reduction rate of Cr(VI) by three times [184] . While promot-
ing the external voltage supply has been generally used as a strat-
egy to enhance the reductions of metal ions at abiotic cathodes,

an excessive power supply should be avoided when operating the
metallurgical BES with a biocathode, because an electrode poten-
tial beyond the self-regulation capability of electrotrophs will dete-
riorate microbial activities and increase the energy loss [189] . Since
mixed cultures possess higher self-regulation capabilities and sta-
bilities than pure cultures, trials have been made to cultivate elec-
trotrophic  communities  for  the  reductions  of  various  metal  ions
[ 183 , 190–192 ]. Wu et al. proposed that the electroactive biofilms
established  at  the  anode  might  also  function  as  biocatalysts  at
the  cathode  because  there  is  no  strict  boundary  between  exo-
electrogens  and  electrotrophs  [190] .  Nevertheless,  we  should  be
aware that the availability of microbial species able to utilize cer-
tain metal ion as the electron acceptor and electrode as the elec-
tron  donor  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  application  of  a  biocathode
in reducing such a metal ion. In this respect, dissimilatory metal-
reducing bacteria are the potential candidates for biocathode con-
struction. On the one hand, dissimilatory metal-reducing bacteria
possess special respiration chains enabling them to transfer elec-
trons to a variety of metals and metal ions. On the other hand, c-
type cytochromes within dissimilatory metal-reducing bacteria are
a group of important enzymes that mediate the electron uptake
from  solid  electron  donors.  In  particular,  c-type  cytochromes  lo-
cated on cell surface are capable of independently serving as elec-
tron transfer shuttles between exogenous electron donor-acceptor
pairs without the active involvement of the microbe [193] .

When  the  biocathode  is  used  for  metal  reduction,  a  fraction
of  the  electrons  transferred  from  the  cathode  electrode  need  to
be  used  for  biomass  growth  and  maintenance.  Thus,  the  CCE s
of  metallurgical  BESs  with  biocathodes  are  generally  lower  than
those  with  abiotic  cathodes  ( Table  4 ).  However,  microorganisms

Table 4
CCEs of metallurgical BESs for the reduction of different metal ions.

Metal conversion

Concentration (mg L −1
)

Type of cathode

Au(III) → Au
Ag(I) → A(0)
Pb(II) → Pb(0)
Zn(II) → Zn(0)

Fe(III) → Fe(II)

50~200
108
400
300

500

1000

Abiotic cathode
Abiotic cathode
Abiotic cathode
Abiotic cathode

Abiotic cathode

Abiotic cathode

50

800
5
20
5
20
5
20
5
20

50

10

20

2.5

22
31
40
63
~13
~50
~10
~40
~40
~10
~40
50
800
184
96

Cu(II) → Cu(0)

Cr(VI) → Cr(III)

U(VI) → U(IV)

Co(II) → Co(0)

Cd(II) → Cd(0)

W(VI) → W(0)
Mo(VI) → Mo(0)

a

The values are calculated from the data in the reference.

Operation condition of cathode

CCE (%)

Reference

ca. 67 ~137
3.56~38.12
5.3
1.2
6~27 a
7~196 a
84 (anaerobic cathode)
43 (aerobic cathode)
54~65
19~39
77.2
1.9
7.2
4.3
8.3
3.2
8.7
4.5
11.2
66~69
34~67
64

MFC
MFC
Cathode potential at −0.51 V (vs. SHE)
Cathode potential at −0.66 V (vs. SHE)
Salt bridge MFC
Membrane MFC

MFC

MFC
MFC-MEC system
MFC(short-circuit)

Abiotic cathode
Abiotic cathode
Abiotic cathode
Biocathode with Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia

Biocathode with Citrobacter sp .

Biocathode with Pseudomonas aeruginosa

MFC

Biocathode with Stenotrophomonas sp .

Abiotic cathode
Abiotic cathode
Biocathode with Shewanella oneidensis
MR–1
Biocathode with Shewanella oneidensis
MR–1
Abiotic cathode
Biocathode with Shewanella oneidensis
MR–1

MFC
MFC-MEC system
MFC

Cathode potential at −0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl),
lactate as another electron donor
MFC
MFC

80

80
87~164

Biocathode with mixed culture

MFC

Biocathode with Geobacter sulfurreducens
Abiotic cathode
Biocathode with mixed culture
Biocathode with mixed culture
Abiotic cathode
Biocathode with mixed culture
Biocathode with mixed culture
Abiotic cathode
Abiotic cathode

Cathode potential at −0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
MEC, applied voltage of 0.2~0.7 V
MEC, applied voltage of 0.2 V
MEC, applied voltage of 0.2 V
MEC, applied voltage of 0.2 V
MEC, applied voltage of 0.5 V
MEC, applied voltage of 0.5 V
MFC-MEC system
Cathode potential at −0.66 V (vs. SHE)

Abiotic cathode

Stacked BES

114.45
71.91
85.04
118.14
103
18.3~35.1
5.34
19.0
23
5.3
21.8
7~27
5.3

64~83

[166]
[171]
[176]
[176]

[168]

[167]

178

176

[183]

[178]

[184]

[185]

[186]

[187]
[188]

[141]

[178]
[176]

[179]

M

.

S
u
n

,

L
.
-
F

.

Z
h
a
i

a
n
d

Y

.

M
u

e
t

a
l
.
 /
 P
r
o
g
r
e
s
s
 i
n

E
n
e
r
g
y

a
n
d

C
o
m
b
u
s
t
i
o
n

S
c
i
e
n
c
e

7
7

(
2
0
2
0
)

1
0
0
8
1
4

1
5



















16

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

metabolic byproducts of fumarate and other organics from bacte-
rial cells as electron donors [185] .

4.3. Spontaneous bio-electrochemical autotrophic denitrification for
N 2 and N 2 O production

2 /H

−/nitrogen gas (N
2 ) ( + 0.74 V vs. SHE
The redox potential of NO
3
2 O ( + 0.82 V vs. SHE at pH 7.0),
at pH 7.0) is similar to that of O
− is a potential competitor of O
2 as an electron acceptor
so the NO
3
− has
at the cathode of BES. While spontaneous reduction of NO
3
been reported at a platinum (Pt) cathode, the product was domi-
+ due to the low cathode po-
− and NH
nated by undesirable NO
4
2
tential, which was only + 0.341 V vs. SHE [194] . As depicted by Re-
− on the Pt electrode
actions 16a-18a, the initial reduction of NO
3
−, which is subsequently reduced to nitric oxide (NO)
produces NO
2
with strong affinity to the Pt surface [195] . The further reduction
of NO depends crucially on the electrode potential. At low poten-
tials of 0 ~ + 0.3 V vs. SHE, the reduction of adsorbed NO produces
+ . Gaseous products such as N
NH
2 are only formed from
4
NO in solution at potentials at least above + 0.3 V vs. SHE [ 196 , 197 ].

2 O and N

−
NO

3 + 2 H

+ + 2 e

−
− → NO

2 + H 2 O

−
NO

2 + 2 H

+ → N O

+ + H 2 O

N O

+ + e

− → NO

(16a)

(17a)

(18a)

2 O or N

The  participation  of  denitrifying  bacteria  is  required  if  one
− to the N
hopes to control the reduction of NO
2  stage
3
at  the  cathode  of  BES.  Autotrophic  denitrifying  bacteria  capa-
ble  of  accepting  electrons  from  the  electrode  have  been  discov-
− can  be  reduced  to  N
− and  NO
ered  [ 198 , 199 ].  Both  the  NO
2
3
2
at  the  biocathode  accompanied  by  the  anodic  oxidation  of  or-
ganic  carbon  to  produce  electricity  [199–202] .  However,  the  BES
− cathodes exhibits poorer power generating abil-
−/NO
with NO
2
3
2  cathode,  because  much
ity  compared  to  the  ones  with  an  O
−,
− or NO
lower cathode potentials are obtained when the NO
2
3
instead  of  O
2 ,  serve  as  the  electron  acceptor.  The  energy  con-
sumed  by  denitrifying  microbes  at  the  biocathode  was  reported
to account for 83–90% of the total energy loss, which was signifi-
cantly higher than the 1% of energy loss attributed to exoelectro-
gens at the bioanode [203] . In view of the significant constraint
of the denitrification process to energy output, the BES with the
− biocathode  is  more  valued  for  its  advantage  of  au-
−/NO
NO
2
3
totrophic denitrification than energy production. Recently, the po-
tential  of  BES  technology  to  replace  conventional  energy  insen-
− treating processes was suggested [204] . In the
−/NO
sitive NO
2
3
case of heterotrophic denitrification, heterotrophs require organic
substrates as their energy and carbon sources. Heterotrophic den-
itrification  efficiency  is  usually  restricted  by  an  insufficient  or-
ganic carbon supply when low organic-loaded wastewaters, such
as groundwater, are treated [ 205 , 206 ]. In comparison, autotrophs
in  the  biocathode  of  the  BES  adopt  the  electrode  as  the  elec-
tron  donor  and  CO
2  as  the  carbon  source;  hence,  the  limitation
caused by the shortage of organic carbon is avoided. In addition,
performing  denitrification  at  the  cathode  of  the  BES  brings  eco-
nomic  benefit  compared  to  the  conversional  bio-electrochemical
autotrophic  denitrification  process  that  uses  H
2  as  the  electron
donor.  In  the  conversional  bio-electrochemical  autotrophic  deni-
2  is electrochemically produced on the cath-
trification process, H
ode surface through the electrolysis of water at a high cost, and
then  is  utilized  by  autotrophs  for  denitrification  [207] .  Although
the power supplied by the bioanode of the BES is not sufficient
2 production at the biocathode, it is adequate to initi-
to sustain H
ate the autotrophic denitrification. It was found that the reducing

Fig. 7.  Cathode theoretical potential for half-reactions of A) Cr(VI) to Cr(III), B)
Cu(II) to Cu, and C) Cd(II) to Cd at different pH values (Reprinted with permission
from Ref. [178] , Copyright 2014 Elsevier Co.)

are able to reduce metal ions using electrons not only from the
cathode electrode but also from other electron donors available at
the  biocathode.  As  such,  the  total  coulombs  actually  transferred
from the electrode can be lower than the coulombs supplied for
metal reduction, resulting in a CCE value higher than 100%. Xafe-
nias and coworkers calculated that only 46% of the Cr(VI) was bio-
electrochemically  reduced  at  the  biocathode  amended  with  lac-
tate, whereas the remaining was microbially reduced with the lac-
tate as the electron donor [184] . A Shewanella -inoculated biocath-
ode pretreated by fumarate achieved CCE s that varied from 87 to
164% for the reduction of Cr(VI) because of the involvement of the

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

17

power  required  for  denitrification  was  drastically  reduced  when
autotrophs used the cathode electrode, rather than H
2 , as the elec-
tron  donor  [208] .  As  such,  autotrophic  denitrification  is  able  to
spontaneously occur at the biocathode of the BES without an ex-
ternal  energy  input.  This  leads  to  substantial  energy  saving  for
the  treatment  of  nitrogen-rich  wastewaters.  The  specific  energy
consumption  of  a  BES  for  groundwater  denitrification  was  only
−1 ,  which was  one magnitude lower
2.22  kW  h  kgNO
than  the  value  reported  for  the  biofilm  electrode  reactor  with
2 as electron donor [209] .
electro-generated H

removed

3 —N

The denitrification occurring at the biocathode of the BES fol-
lows a biological pathway encompassing a sequence of reduction
−,  NO  and  N
2 O.  As  de-
steps  with  the  intermediate  species  NO
2
−
− is  first  reduced  to  NO
picted  by  Reactions  19a-22a,  the  NO
2
3
and then further to NO. Next, two NO molecules are conjugated to
form NO
−
NO

2 , which is finally reduced to N
−
− → NO

2 + H 2 O E = +0 . 433 V vs . SHE

3 + 2 H

+ + 2 e

2 [210] .

(19a)

−
NO

2 + 2 H

+ + e

− → NO + H 2 O E = +0 . 350 V vs . SHE

(20a)

NO + H

+ + e

− → 1 / 2 N 2 O + 1 / 2 H 2 O E = +1 . 175 V vs . SHE  (21a)

1 / 2 N 2 O + H

+ + e

− → 1 / 2 N 2 + 1 / 2 O 2 E = +1 . 355 V vs . SHE

(22a)

2 O to N

2 O [211] . The N

− and N
2 O, but NO
2

Among  the  several  intermediate  species,  NO  is  unstable  and
can be readily transformed into N
2 O are suf-
ficiently stable to exist as by-products. Notably, due to the slow
reduction kinetics from N
2 , complete denitrification is usu-
2 O
ally interrupted by the accumulation of the N
yield is reported to vary from 4% to 70% at the cathode of the con-
tinuously operated BES [ 201 , 203 , 211 , 212 ]. Since N
2 O is known as a
type of greenhouse gas with a powerful global warming potential,
it is often considered an unwanted byproduct. In comparison, the
2  is favored as a better product of denitrification pro-
harmless N
2 O release, sufficiently long time should be
cess. In order to avoid N
allowed for adequate N
2 O reduction at the biocathode of BES [201] .
Increasing solution conductivity favors the complete denitrification
2  as a result of facilitated electron and proton transporta-
into N
tions [203] . At a high positive cathode potential, the competition
between  the  different  denitrifying  enzymes  can  be  relieved  and
the  N
2 O,
as  an  important  oxidant  in  chemical  synthesis,  racing  car  engi-
2 . A
neer and rocket motor, is commercially more valued than N
2 O as a potential renewable energy
recent report has recognized N
source [ 214 , 215 ]. In this regard, N
2 O should be a potential product
of denitrification on the BES platform. With such a purpose, a high
level of current density is recommended to suppress the micro-
2 O becomes the dom-
2 O reduction so that N
bial gene encoding N
inated product [211] . Moreover, the produced N
2 O should be re-
moved from the cathode chamber in time, because the denitrifying
2 O using the electrode as an
community is able to further reduce N
electron donor [201] . Autotrophic denitrification for N
2 O produc-
tion represents a profitable direction for BES development, but it
has yet to be demonstrated with a high N
2 O yield over long-term
operation.

2 O  accumulation  can  be  reduced  [213] .  Paradoxically,  N

5. Challenges and opportunities for BES towards improved
product specificity

The  BES  has  been  developed  to  sustain  value-added  conver-
sion of a suite of elements towards environmental and energy sus-
tainability.  This  technology  provides  a  versatile  platform  to  cou-
ple wastes treatment with renewable energy and resource recovery

and green chemical synthesis. Notably, the various anodic and/or
cathodic element conversion processes can be operated indepen-
dently or integrated with each other, to adapt to different applica-
tion needs. A knowledge-driven innovation is proposed to advance
the development of BES by tuning the conversion routes of ele-
ments for the improved product specificity.

Electro-microbiological  study .  The  electron  flow  between  mi-
crobes  and  electrode  governs  the  oxidation  or  reduction  of  key
elements in BES. Towards an enhanced microbial electron trans-
fer rate and selectivity, it requires in-depth understanding of the
electro-microbiology  in  designing,  modeling  and  operation  the
BES-based  processes.  So  far,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  mi-
crobes  exchange  electrons  with  the  electrode  via  out-membrane
cytochromes, conductive nanowires or redox mediators. However,
such knowledge is based on the electro-microbiology studies dom-
inated by the two model microbes, i.e., Shewanella and Geobacter ,
and detailed mechanisms are still in dispute. Endogenous flavins
secreted by Shewanella spp. are well known soluble electron car-
riers involved in the MET pathway. However, they cannot act as
electron shuttles at any time, and some studies highlighted their
alternative  roles  as  cytochrome-bound  cofactors  to  promote  the
rate-limiting proton transport [ 216 , 217 ]. The exact nature of DET
pathway in Geobacter spp. is ambiguous with many unknown el-
ements. The structures of e-pili and out-surface cytochrome fila-
ments as conductive nanowires, and their roles in long-range DET
are currently of intense detate [ 24 , 26 ]. Fine-scale electron trans-
port  along  the  filaments  is  another  issue  of  complexity,  which
may  involve  incoherent  transport  with  electron  hopping,  or  co-
herent  transport  with  charge  delocalization  [218] .  Investigations
should be extended to other electroactive species to elucidate the
breadth and diversity of microbial extracellular electron transfer.
How different in-vivo electron transfer components interact with
each other, and the requirements for each electron transfer route
desires further investigations. Relative to our understanding of the
electron donation mechanism at the bioanode, the electron collec-
tion mechanism at the biocathode is less understood. While pos-
sible electron uptake pathways have been proposed to explain the
microbial H
2  reduction at the biocathode, fu-
ture  studies  are  encouraged  to  clarify  the  electron  uptake  path-
ways involved in the microbial carbon reduction and denitrifica-
tion. For mixed cultured biocathodes, functions of diverse species
and their syntrophic partnerships should be elucidated with a con-
sideration of interspecies electron transfer. Additionally, it is im-
portant  to  learn  the  metabolic  mechanisms  responsible  for  the
electron transfer in vivo. In particular, the manner by which elec-
trotrophs might conserve energy when directly accepting electrons
from the electrode should be understood. A combination of micro-
biological and electrochemical techniques can provide new insights
into the complex interactions at microbe-electrode interfaces. Var-
ious molecular techniques and electrochemical methodologies are
becoming available for elucidating the complex physiology in BES
[219] . Novel metabolomics and fluxomics  approaches have a  po-
tential to better understand the metabolic patterns of elecoactive
microorganisms. Adequate understanding of these available tools is
highly desirable to allow for more efficient utilization of the tools
as well as proper interpretation of the data.

2  production and O

Renewable energy production . As the most abundant fraction in
wastewater, organic carbon is also the direct and commonly ex-
ploited energy source. While the BES has been regarded as a po-
tent  tool  in  the  context  of  waste  treatment,  its  potential  as  an
energy factory is being recognized as well. No matter if the goal
is waste removal or energy production, total mineralization of or-
ganic carbon is the best choice. Acknowledging most complex or-
ganic compounds are not able to be directly utilized by exoelec-
trogen  alone,  fermentative  partners  are  required  to  provide  pre-
cursors for electricity generation. When the substrate is a macro-

18

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

molecular  polymer,  adequate  hydrolase  activity  is  a  prerequisite
for  its  efficient  decomposition.  In  this  respect,  complete  degra-
dation  of  organic  carbon  needs  the  orchestrated  actions  of  hy-
drolyzing, fermenting, and an exoelectrogenic species. Since the in-
tricate combination of sequential and parallel substrate degrada-
tion routes within mixed cultures usually accounts for more se-
vere electron losses than that in pure cultures, the manipulation of
microbial metabolism to give priority to the anode electrode dur-
ing electron transfer is the key to fully extracting energy from or-
ganic  carbon.  To  develop  a  synergistic  community,  an  important
task  is  to  identify  key  microbial  groups  and  their  contributions
to  the  anodic  reaction.  Post-genomic  techniques  such  as  meta-
transcriptomics  allow  for  functional  characterization  of  the  con-
sortium, and isotope-assisted phylogenetic analysis can further link
the taxonomic classification to microbial metabolism [220] . More-
over,  13 C-isotope  labeling  helps  to  elucidate  substrate  metabolic
pathways by monitoring the carbon flow in vivo [221] . On the ba-
sis of such information, the optimal microbial community is an-
ticipated  to  be  predicted  and,  subsequently,  established  for  the
in-depth  degradation  of  certain  organic  compounds  for  energy
production.

Renewable resource recovery . For the sulfide-fed BES, recovering
0 is currently more reasonable than harvesting energy. In contrast
S
to  chemical oxidation,  which  exclusively  converts  sulfide  into  S
0
by using certain oxidants, the electrochemical oxidation of sulfide
at the abiotic anode involves a series of reactions that can occur si-
0 is either precipitated after
multaneously. In such a process, the S
the solution is saturated with polysulfide or further oxidized into
0  recovery,  the  electrolytic
oxyanion  species.  To  maximum  the  S
0  solid  is  stable
conditions  must  be  carefully  manipulated.  The  S
with respect to further oxidation, but soluble S
0  and polysulfide
exhibit much faster oxidation kinetics [222] . Hence, timely precip-
0  from the solution is required to prevent its further
itation of S
oxidation. Lowering the pH of the solution facilitates S
0 precipita-
tion due to the decreased solubility of S
0 , but the pH should not
be too low to avoid volatilization of hydrogen sulfide.

Making  use  of  the  power  generated  from  renewable  organic
wastes at the bioanode, the BES offers the possibility of performing
valuable metal recovery from metallurgical wastewaters with lower
energy input compared to conventional electrolysis. Since the reuse
of metals can only become economically and technically feasible
when a relatively pure metal compound is produced, selectivity is
a challenge faced by metallurgical BES. Opportunities may exist by
controlling the cathode potential to realize sequential metals re-
covery. To obtain target metals, timely adjustment of the external
power supply is required to adapt to the fluctuated power output
from bioanode. In addition, to improve the reduction of metal ions,
metal removal due to adsorption needs to be reduced. In particular,
the adsorption of metal ions to the membrane not only decreases
the recovery efficiencies of metals but also leads to severe mem-
brane fouling. In comparison, metal ions adsorbed on the electrode
are able to be further electrochemically reduced. Thus, electrode
materials with adsorption specificity towards metal ions, such as
the carbonaceous materials, can be tried to prevent the adsorption
of metal ions to other solid components. Regardless of the poten-
tial of BES in heavy metal recovery, the separation of solid met-
als from the electrode surface is a challenge. Physical and chemical
approaches at high operational costs, such as heating, solvent ex-
traction and electrolysis, are necessary to obtain pure metals from
the BES [223] . To avoid such a metal separation step, the metals
on  the  electrode  is  proposed  to  be  recovered  together  with  the
electrode. As soon as an appropriate electrode material is utilized,
metallurgical BES can be used as a tool for the in situ fabrication
of metal composites. For example, the carbon electrode with cap-
tured iron from metallurgical wastewaters has applications in the
electron-Fenton process [224] .

2 O  to  N

2 O, instead of N

Through spontaneous bio-electrochemical autotrophic denitrifi-
− is converted to N
2  with a variable fraction es-
cation, the NO
3
2 O at the biocathode of the BES. While complete den-
caping as N
itrification to N
2 represents a permanent and innocent removal of
nitrogen pollutants, incomplete denitrification produces commer-
2 O, which is a bonus. In addition, converting
cially more valuable N
− to N
NO
2 , shortens the treatment steps for deni-
3
trification, resulting in fewer consumption of reducing equivalents.
It is possible to adjust the denitrification pathway to give priority
to the N
2 O product in the BES. Denitrification is characterized by
a modular pathway in that a microbial species does not possess
the full set of enzymes and performs only a subset of the steps
within the pathway [225] . For example, the bacteria that reduce
2  lack  the  other  denitrification  enzymes,  and  likewise,
N
denitrifiers lack the N
2 O as a ter-
2 O reductase, thus producing N
minal product [226] . Hence, the yield of N
2 O is determined by the
proportion  of  N
2 O-reducing  bacteria  in  the  whole  denitrification
community. Since the genes that code for the enzymes involved
in denitrification have been elucidated, regulation of the pathway
has a genetic basis. The manipulation of gene expressions requires
a full understanding of the modularity of the denitrification path-
way at the biocathode of the BES. The key enzymes responsible for
sequential denitrification as well as extracellular electron transfer
should be identified, and their distribution in the cathode consor-
tium needs clarification. With such information, a genetic strategy
is encouraged towards the N
2 O is
a harmful greenhouse gas if released to the atmosphere, but can
become a useful chemical if successfully collected. Since N
2 O is a
dissolved gas with high solubility in water [227] , direct capture of
N
2 O from the headspace of the cathode chamber has to be chal-
lenged. A separation step is required to increase the portion of gas
2 O. Several techniques are available to this end, such as
phase N
stripping and vacuum separation. Continuous stripping the cath-
2 in denitrification process is recommended to
ode chamber with N
provide efficient mass transfer of the produced N
2 O from aqueous
phase to gas phase. Such a strategy not only facilitates the collec-
2 O, but also helps to avoid further biological reduction of
tion of N
N

2 O production. The produced N

2 O into N

2 .

Green chemical synthesis . Life cycle assessment shows the BES
will  provide  a  positive  energy  gain  when  it  is  operated  for  the
microbial electrosynthesis of valuable organic chemicals [ 228 , 229 ].
Substantial efforts are still required to improve the product speci-
ficity to forward this technology, which highlights the control of
the  electron  and  carbon  flows  into  the  target  products.  Several
strategies can be envisaged to deliver the electron and carbon fol-
lowing  the  desired  synthetic  route.  For  pure  culture,  gene  tech-
nology is a potent tool to modify microbial metabolism towards
specificity.  Engineered  S.  oneidensis  and  E.  coli  have  been  used
for enhanced succinate and alcohols production [ 138 , 139 , 230 ], and
the synthetic biology approaches for engineering electroactive mi-
crobes towards improved microbial electrosynthesis have been en-
visaged [231] . For mixed cultures, the experiences in avoiding elec-
tromethanogenesis for electroacetogenesis suggest an opportunity
to alleviate the side reactions by adopting proper enrichment and
operation methods.

Some autotrophs at the biocathode can use H

2 as the reducing
power effectively. Recently, indirect inward electron transfer with
H
2 , rather than direct electron uptake, has been proposed as a fo-
cus of engineering applications [232] . Extracellular electron trans-
fer  via  H
2  should  also  be  given  attention  to,  because  a  few  au-
2  for highly
totrophs can utilize nearly 100% of electrons from H
selective chemicals synthesis from CO
2 can be elec-
trochemically produced at the cathode of BES at a low energy cost
2  reduction is suggested to couple with elec-
[233] , microbial CO
2 evolution reaction, which is kinetically more facile
trochemical H
2  reduction  reaction.  While  carbon-
than  the  electrochemical  CO

2 [157] . Since H

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

19

based cathodes are usually selected for microbial electron uptake,
2 -mediated microbial electrosynthesis calls for the development
H
of  robust  and  biocompatible  cathodes  to  effectively  catalyze  H
2
evolution reaction.

The conversion of CO

2 to fuels and commodity chemicals rep-
resents  an elegant  solution  to  close  the  carbon  cycle  when it  is
powered  by  renewable  energy  [132] .  To  this  end,  renewable en-
ergy is encouraged to be integrated into microbial electrosynthesis.
The long-term performance of hybrid systems should be evaluated,
and the response of biocathode community to variable durations of
power fluctuation is to be understood. In some cases, energy stor-
age systems might be useful to smooth the power fluctuations of
renewable energy supply, so that a stable microbial electrosynthe-
sis process can be envisaged.

6. Concluding remarks

The  BES  technology  provides  a  flexible  platform  for  perform-
ing extensive value-added conversion reactions of elements for en-
ergy generation and chemicals production. On such a platform, the
extraction of energy from organic carbon has gained predominant
research attention, and efforts are extending to the exploitation of
various element conversion processes for chemical synthesis and
resource recovery. The benefit of the BES comes from the obtain-
ment  of  value-added  electric  energy  and  chemicals.  Better  sub-
strate utilization and higher product yields are pursued to max-
imize the advantages of this technology. It calls for gaining con-
trol over the conversion routes of the elements towards the target
products. In the treatment of organic wastes, complete mineraliza-
tion is preferable to fully harvest the chemical energy embodied
in organic carbon and to assure the treatment efficiency of organic
wastes. S
2 O is
desired from the denitrification process. Dissolved metal ions are
better recovered as solid metals or metal oxides. Selectivity would
be the first consideration in microbial electrosynthesis reactions.
Depending on the choice of biocatalysts, several strategies could
be envisaged to manipulating extracellular electron transfer path-
ways and deliver electrons into the desired reaction routes. Novel
microbes with product specificity are anticipated by using genetic
engineering technology to modify the metabolism of pure cultures.
Pre-genomic,  genomic  and  post-genomic  techniques  are  valuable
for identifying microbial communities involved in the element con-
version processes; thus, efforts can be made to give certain micro-
bial species priority. Electrode modification is in development to
present carbonaceous materials with better affinity to exoelectro-
gens/electrotrophs, so that the microbe-electrode electron transfer
might be more facile.

0 is the desired product from sulfide oxidation and N

Declaration of Competing Interest

We declare that this manuscript entitled “Bioelectrochemical el-
ement conversion reactions towards generation of energy and value-
added chemicals ” is original, has not been published before and is
not currently being considered for publication elsewhere. There is
no conflict of interest.

We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by
all named authors and that there are no other persons who satis-
fied the criteria for authorship but are not listed.  We further con-
firm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been
approved by all of us.

We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole con-
tact for the Editorial process. He is responsible for communicat-
ing with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions
and final approval of proofs.  Signed by all authors as follows:  Min
Sun, Lin-Feng Zhai, Yang Mu, Han-Qing Yu.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank the National Natural Science Foun-
dation  of  China  ( 51478157 ,  21590812 ,  51538012  and 51821006 )
and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University
( NCET-13-0767 ) for supporting this work.

References

[1] Fukuzumi S . New perspective of electron transfer chemistry. Org Biomol Chem

2003; 1 :609–20 .

[2] Barbara PF , Meyer TJ , Ratner MA . Contemporary issues in electron transfer

research. J Phys Chem 1996; 100 :13148–68 .

[3] Logan BE . Microbial fuel cells . Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.;

2008 .

[4] Lovley DR . Powering microbes with electricity: direct electron transfer from

electrodes to microbes. Environ Microbiol Rep 2011; 3 :27–35 .

[5] Lovley  DR .  Dissimilatory  metal  reduction.  Annu  Rev  Microbiol

1993; 47 :263–90 .

[6] Lovley DR . Bug juice: harvesting electricity with microorganisms. Nat Rev Mi-

crobiol 2006; 4 :497–508 .

[7] . B ioelectrochemical systems: from extracellular electron transfer to biotechno-
logical application . B ioelectrochemical systems: from extracellular electron
transfer to biotechnological application. Rabaey K, Angenent L, Schroder U,
Keller J, editors. London: IWA; 2010 .

[8] Kiely PD , Regan JM , Logan BE . The electric picnic: synergistic requirements for
exoelectrogenic microbial communities. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2011; 22 :378–85 .
[9] Yuan Z , Pratt S , Batstone DJ . Phosphorus recovery from wastewater through

microbial processes. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2012; 23 :878–83 .

[10] Batstone DJ , Hulsen T , Mehta CM , Keller J . Platforms for energy and nutrient

recovery from domestic wastewater: a review. Chemosphere 2015; 140 :2–11 .

[11] McCarty PL , Bae J , Kim J . Domestic wastewater treatment as a net energy

producer-can this be achieved. Environ Sci Technol 2011; 45 :7100–6 .

[12] Lefebvre O , Uzabiaga A , Chang IS , Kim BH , Ng HY . Microbial fuel cells for
energy self-sufficient domesticwastewater treatment-a review and discussion
from energetic consideration. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2011; 89 :259–70 .
[13] Malvankar NS , Tuominen MT , Lovley DR . Biofilm conductivity is a decisive
variable for high-current-density Geobacter sulfurreducens microbial fuel cells.
Energy Environ Sci 2012; 5 :5790–7 .

[14] Oliveira VB , Simoes M , Melo LF , Pinto AMFR . Overview on the developments

of microbial fuel cells. Biochem Eng J 2013; 73 :53–64 .

[15] Lovley DR , Nevin KP . Electrobiocommodities: powering microbial production
of fuelsand commodity chemicals from carbon dioxide with electricity. Curr
Opin Biotechnol 2013; 24 :385–90 .

[16] Choi O , Sang BI . Extracellular electron transfer from cathode to microbes: ap-

plication for biofuel production. Biotechnol Biofuels 2016; 9 :11–24 .

[17] Bond DR , Lovley DR . Electricity production by Geobacter sulfurreducens at-

tached to electrodes. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003; 69 :1548–55 .

[18] Reguera  G ,  McCarthy  KD ,  Mehta  T ,  Nicoll  JS ,  Tuominen  MT ,  Lov-
ley  DR .  Extracellular  electron  transfer  via  microbial  nanowires.  Nature
2005; 435 :1098–101 .

[19] Gorby YA , Yanina S , McLean JS , Rosso KM , Moyles D , Dohnalkova A , Bev-
eridge TJ , Chang IS , Kim BH , Kim KS , Culley DE , Reed SB , Romine MF , Saf-
farini DA , Hill EA , Shi L , Elias DA , Kennedy DW , Pinchuk G , Watanabe K ,
Ishii S , Logan B , Nealson KH , Fredrickson JK . Electrically conductive bacterial
nanowires produced by Shewanella oneidensis strain MR-1 and other microor-
ganisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103 :11358–63 .

[20] El-Naggar  MY ,  Wanger  G ,  Leung  KM ,  Yuzvinsky  TD ,  Southam  G ,  Yang  J ,
Lau  WM ,  Nealson  KH ,  Gorby  YA .  Electrical  transport  along  bacterial
nanowires  from  Shewanella  oneidensis  MR-1.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA
2010; 107 :18127–31 .

[21] Okamoto A , Hashimoto K , Nakamura R . Long-range electron conduction of
Shewanella biofilms mediated by outer membrane C-type cytochromes. Bio-
electrochemistry 2012; 85 :61–5 .

[22] Kumar A , Hsu LHH , Kavanagh P , Barriere F , Lens PNL , Lapinsonniere L , Lien-
hard JH , Schroeder U , Jiang X , Leech D . The ins and outs of microorganism–
electrode electron transfer reactions. Nat Rev Chem 2017; 1 :0024 .

[23] Pirbadian  S ,  Barchinger  SE ,  Leung  KM ,  Byun  HS ,  Jangir  Y ,  Bouhenni  RA ,
Reed SB , Romine MF , Saffarini DA , Shi L , Gorby YA , Golbeck JH , El-Naggar MY .
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 nanowires are outer membrane and periplasmic
extensions of the extracellular electron transport components. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2014; 111 :12883–8 .

[24] Subramanian P , Pirbadian S , El-Naggar MY , Jensen GJ . Ultrastructure of She-
wanella  oneidensis  MR-1  nanowires  revealed  by  electron  cryotomography.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2018; 115 :E3246–55 .

[25] Adhikari RY , Malvankar NS , Tuominen MT , Lovley DR . Conductivity of indi-

vidual Geobacter pili. RSC Adv 2016; 6 :8354–7 .

[26] Wang  F ,  Gu  Y ,  O’Brien  JP ,  Yi  SM ,  Yalcin  SE ,  Srikanth  V ,  Shen  C ,  Vu  D ,
Ing NL , Hochbaum AI , Egelman EH , Malvankar NS . Structure of microbial
naowires reveals stacked hemes that transport electrons over micrometers.
Cell 2019; 177 :361–9 .

[27] Lovley  DR ,  Walker  DJF .  Geobacter  protein  nanowires.  PeerJ  Preprints

2019; 7 :e27773v1 .

20

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

[28] Walker DJF , Adhikari RY , Holmes DE , Ward JE , Woodard TL , Nevin KP , Lov-
ley DR . Electrically conductive pili from genes of phylogenetically diverse mi-
croorganisms. ISME J 2018; 12 :48–58 .

[29] Walker DJF, Nevin KP, Nonnenmann SS, Holmes DE, Woodard T, Ward JE, Ro-
taru AE, Mcinerney MJ, Lovley DR. Syntrophus conductive pili demonstrate that
common hydrogen-donating syntrophs can have a direct electron transfer option .
Biorxiv; 2018 https:// www.biorxiv.org/ content/ early/ 2018/ 2011/ 2028/ 479683 .
[30] Park DH , Zeikus JG . Electricity generation in microbial fuel cells using neutral

red as an electronophore. Appl Environ Microbiol 20 0 0; 66 :1292–7 .

[31] Tang  X ,  Du  Z ,  Li  H .  Anodic  electron  shuttle  mechanism  based  on  1-hy-
droxy-4-aminoanthraquinone  in  microbial  fuel  cells.  Electrochem  Commun
2010; 12 :1140–3 .

[32] Thurston CF , Bennetto HP , Delaney GM , Mason JR , Roller SD , Stirling JL . Glu-
cose metabolism in a microbial fuel cell: stoichiometry of product formation
in a thionine-mediated Proteus vulgaris fuel cell and its relation to coulombic
yields. J Gen Microbiol 1985; 131 :1393–401 .

[33] Schroder U . Anodic electron transfer mechanisms in microbial fuel cells and

their energy efficiency. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2007; 9 :2619–29 .

[34] Marsili E , Baron DB , Shikhare ID , Coursolle D , Gralnick JA , Bond DR . She-
wanella secretes flavins that mediate extracellular electron transfer. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008; 105 :3968–73 .

[35] Rabaey  K ,  Boon  N ,  Höfte  M ,  Verstraete  W .  Microbial  phenazine  pro-
duction  enhances  electron  transfer  in  biofuel  cells.  Environ  Sci  Technol
2005; 39 :3401–8 .

[36] Freguia S , Masuda M , Tsujimura S , Kano K . Lactococcus lactis catalyses elec-
tricity generation at microbial fuel cell anodes via excretion of a soluble
quinone. Bioelectrochemistry 2009; 76 :14–18 .

[37] Pham  TH ,  Boon  N ,  Aelterman  P ,  Clauwaert  P ,  De  Schamphelaire  L ,  De
Maeyer K , Hofte M , Verstraete W , Rabaey K . Metabolites produced by Pseu-
domonas sp. enable a gram-positive bacterium to achieve extracellular elec-
tron transfer. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2008; 77 :1119–29 .

[38] Pham TH , Boon N , De Maeyer K , Hofte M , Rabaey K , Verstraete W . Use
of Pseudomonas species producing phenazine-based metabolites in the an-
odes of microbial fuel cells to improve electricity generation. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 2008; 80 :985–93 .

[39] Masuda M , Freguia S , Wang Y-F , Tsujimura S , Kano K . Flavins contained in
yeast extract are exploited for anodic electron transfer by Lactococcus lactis .
Bioelectrochemistry 2010; 78 :173–5 .

[40] Summers ZM , Fogarty HE , Leang C , Franks AE , Malvankar NS , Lovley DR . Di-
rect exchange of electrons within aggregates of an evolved syntrophic cocul-
ture of anaerobic bacteria. Science 2010; 330 :1413–15 .

[41] Ueki T , Nevin KP , Rotaru AE , Wang LY , Ward JE , Woodad TL , Lovley DR .
Geobacter strains expressing poorly conductive pili reveal constraints on di-
rect interspecies electron transfer mechanisms. MBio 2018; 9 e01273-e01218 .
[42] Liu X , Zhou S , Rensing C , Zhou S . Synthrphic growth with direct interspecies
electron transfer between pili-free Geobacter species. ISME J 2018; 12 :2142–51 .
[43] Kotloski NJ , Gralnick JA . Flavin electron shuttles dominate extracellular elec-

tron transfer by Shewanella oneidensis . MBio 2013; 4 e0 0553-e0 0512 .

[44] Okamoto A , Tokunou Y , Kalathil S , Hashimoto K . Proton transport in the out-
er-membrane flavocytochrome complex limits the rate of extracellular elec-
tron transport. Angew Chem Int Ed 2017; 56 :9082–6 .

[45] Logan BE , Rossi R , Ragab A , Saikaly PE . Electroactive microorganisms in bio-

electrochemical systems. Nat Rev 2019; 17 :307–19 .

[46] Smith  JA ,  Tremblay  PL ,  Shrestha  PM ,  Snoeyenbos-West  OL ,  Franks  AE ,
Nevin KP , Lovley DR . Going wireless: Fe(III) oxide reduction without pili by
Geobacter sulfurreducens strain JS-1. Appl Environ Microbiol 2014; 80 :4331–40 .
[47] Thrash JC , Coates JD . Review: direct and indirect electrical stimulation of mi-

crobial metabolism. Environ Sci Technol 2008; 42 :3921–31 .

[48] Steinbusch KJJ , Hamelers HVM , Schaap JD , Kampman C , Buisman CJN . Bio-
electrochemical ethanol production through mediated acetate reduction by
mixed cultures. Environ Sci Technol 2010; 44 :513–17 .

[49] Liu  H ,  Matsuda  S ,  Hashimoto  K ,  Nakanishi  S .  Flavins  secreted  by  bacte-
rial cells of Shewanella catalyze cathodic oxygen reduction. Chem Sus Chem
2012; 5 :1054–8 .

[50] Cheng Q , Call DF . Hardwiring microbes via direct interspecies electron trans-

fer: mechanisms and applications. Environ Sci Proc Impacts 2016; 18 :968–80 .

[51] Tremblay PL , Angenent LT , Zhang T . Extracellular electron uptake: among au-
totrophs and mediated by surfaces. Trends Biotechnol 2017; 35 :360–71 .
[52] Wang K , Zhang S . Extracellular electron transfer modes and rate-limiting
steps in denitrifying biocathodes. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2019; 26 :16378–87 .
[53] Niviere  V ,  Hatchikian  EC ,  Bianco  P ,  Haladjian  J .  Kinetic  studies  of  elec-
trontransfer  between  hydrogenase  and  cytochrome  c3  from  Desulfovibrio
gigas –electrochemical properties of cytochrome c3. Biochim Biophys Acta
1988; 935 :34–40 .

[54] Moreno C , Franco R , Moura I , Le Gall J , Moura JJ . Voltammetric studies of
the catalytic electron-transfer process between the Desulfovibrio gigas hy-
drogenase and small proteins isolated from the same genus. Eur J Biochem
1993; 217 :981–9 .

[55] Tatsumi H , Takagi K , Fujita M , Kano K , Ikeda T . Electrochemical study of re-
versible hydrogenase reaction of Desulfovibrio vulgaris cells with methyl vio-
logen as an electron carrier. Anal Chem 1999; 71 :1753–9 .

[56] Lojou  E ,  Durand  MC ,  Dolla  A ,  Bianco  P .  Hydrogenase  activity  control
at  desulfovibrio  vulgaris  cell-coated  carbon  electrodes:  biochemical  and
chemical factors influencing the mediated bioelectrocatalysis. Electroanalysis
2002; 14 :913–22 .

[57] Marshall C , Ross D , Handley K , Weisenhorn P , Edirisinghe J , Henry C , Gilbert J ,
May H , Norman RS . Metabolic reconstruction and modeling microbial elec-
trosynthesis. Sci Rep 2017; 7 :8391 .

[58] Cheng S , Xing D , Call DF , Logan BE . Direct biological conversion of elec-
trical current into methane by electromethanogenesis. Environ Sci Technol
2009; 43 :3953–8 .

[59] Villano M , Aulenta F , Ciucci C , Ferri T , Giuliano A , Majone M . Bioelectro-
chemical reduction of CO 2 to CH 4 via direct and indirect extracellular elec-
tron transfer by a hydrogenophilic methanogenic culture. Bioresource Technol
2010; 101 :3085–90 .

[60] Thauer RK , Kaster AK , Goenrich M , Schick M , Hiromoto T , Shima S . Hydro-
genases from methanogenic archaea, nickel, a novel cofactor, and H 2 storage.
Annu Rev Biochem 2010; 79 :507–36 .

[61] Rotaru AE , Shrestha PM , Liu F , Shrestha M , Shrestha D , Embree M , Zen-
gler  K ,  Wardman  C ,  Nevin  KP ,  Lovley  DR .  A  new  model  for  electron
flow  during  anaerobic  digestion:  direct  interspecies  electron  transfer  to
Methanosaeta for the reduction of carbon dioxide to methane. Energy Envi-
ron Sci 2014; 7 :408–15 .

[62] Strycharz  SM ,  Glaven  RH ,  Coppi  MV ,  Gannon  SM ,  Perpetua  LA ,  Liu  A ,
Nevin KP , Lovley DR . Gene expression and deletion analysis of mechanisms
for electron transfer from electrodes to Geobacter sulfurreducens . Bioelectro-
chemistry 2011; 80 :142–50 .

[63] Rosenbaum  M ,  Aulenta  F ,  Villano  M ,  Angenent  LT .  Cathodes  as  electron
donors for microbial metabolism: which extracellular electron transfer mech-
anisms are involved. Bioresource Technol 2011; 102 :324–33 .

[64] van Eerten-Jansen MCAA , Heijne AT , Grootscholten TIM , Steinbusch KJJ , Sleu-
tels THJA , Hamelers HVM , Buisman CJN . Bioelectrochemical production of
caproate and caprylate from acetate by mixed cultures. ACS Sustain Chem Eng
2013; 1 :513–18 .

[65] Pant D , Van Bogaert G , Diels L , Vanbroekhoven K . A review of the substrates
used in microbial fuel cells (MFCs) for sustainable energy production. Biore-
source Technol 2010; 101 :1533–43 .

[66] Pandey  P ,  Shinde  VN ,  Deopurkar  RL ,  Kale  SP ,  Patil  SA ,  Pant  D .  Recent
advances  in  the  use  of  different  substrates  in  microbial  fuel  cells  to-
ward wastewater treatment and simultaneous energy recovery. Appl Energ
2016; 168 :706–23 .

[67] Sun M , Zhai LF , Li WW , Yu HQ . Harvest and utilization of chemical energy in

wastes by microbial fuel cells. Chem Sci Rev 2016; 45 :2847–70 .

[68] Borole AP , Reguera G , Ringeisen B , Wang ZW , Feng Y , Kim BH . Electroac-
tive biofilms: current status and future research needs. Energy Environ Sci
2011; 4 :4813–34 .

[69] Freguia  S ,  Rabaey  K ,  Yuan  Z ,  Keller  J .  Syntrophic  processes  drive  the
conversion  of  glucose  in  microbial  fuel  cell  anodes.  Environ  Sci  Technol
2008; 42 :7937–43 .

[70] Lee HS , Parameswaran P , Kato-Marcus A , Torres CI , Rittmann BE . Evaluation
of energy-conversion efficiencies in microbial fuel cells (MFCs) utilizing fer-
mentable and non-fermentable substrates. Water Res 2008; 42 :1501–10 .
[71] Suzuki  S ,  Karube  I ,  Matsunaga  T ,  Kuriyama  S .  Biochemical  energy  con-
version using immobilized whole cells of Clostridium butyricum . Biochimie
1980; 62 :353–8 .

[72] Tanisho S , Kamiya N , Wakao N . Microbial fuel cell using Enterobacter aero-

genes . Bioelectrochem Bioenerg 1989; 21 :25–32 .

[73] Chaudhuri SK , Lovley DR . Electricity generation by direct oxidation of glucose

in mediatorless microbial fuel cells. Nat Biotechnol 2003; 21 :1229–32 .

[74] Huang L , Cheng S , Chen G . Bioelectrochemical systems for efficient recalci-

trant wastes treatment. J Chem Technol Biotechnol 2011; 86 :481–91 .

[75] Pham  H ,  Boon  N ,  Marzorati  M ,  Verstraete  W .  Enhanced  removal
of  1,2-dichloroethane  by  anodophilic  microbial  consortia.  Water  Res
2009; 43 :2936–46 .

[76] Luo Y , Zhang R , Liu G , Li J , Li M , Zhang C . Electricity generation from indole
and microbial community analysis in the microbial fuel cell. J Hazard Mater
2010; 176 :759–64 .

[77] Huang  L ,  Gan  L ,  Zhao  Q ,  Logan  BE ,  Lu  H ,  Chen  G .  Degradation
of  pentachlorophenol  with  the  presence  of  fermentable  and  non-
fermentable  co-substrates  in  a  microbial  fuel  cell.  Bioresource  Technol
2011; 102 :8762–8 .

[78] Wang L , Liu Y , Ma J , Zhao F . Rapid degradation of sulphamethoxazole and the
further transformation of 3-amino-5-methylisoxazole in a microbial fuel cell.
Water Res 2016; 88 :322–8 .

[79] Luo H , Liu G , Zhang R , Jin S . Phenol degradation in microbial fuel cells. Chem

Eng J 2009; 147 :259–64 .

[80] Lin CW , Wu CH , Chiu YH , Tsai SL . Effects of different mediators on electricity
generation and microbial structure of a toluene powered microbial fuel cell.
Fuel 2014; 125 :30–5 .

[81] Cheng HY , Liang B , Mu Y , Cui MH , Li K , Wu WM , Wang AJ . Stimulation of
oxygen to bioanode for energy recovery from recalcitrant organic matter ani-
line in microbial fuel cells (MFCs). Water Res 2015; 81 :72–83 .

[82] Liu RH , Li WW , Sheng GP , Tong ZH , Lam MHW , Yu HQ . Self-driven bioelectro-
chemical mineralization of azobenzene by coupling cathodic reduction with
anodic intermediate oxidation. Electrochim Acta 2015; 154 :294–9 .

[83] Zhang C , Li M , Liu G , Luo H , Zhang R . Pyridine degradation in the microbial

fuel cells. J Hazard Mater 2009; 172 :465–71 b .

[84] Hu  WJ ,  Niu  CG ,  Wang  Y ,  Zeng  GM ,  Wu  Z .  Nitrogenous  heterocyclic
compounds  degradation  in  the  microbial  fuel  cells.  Process  Saf  Environ
2011; 89 :133–40 .

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

21

[85] Huang L , Sun Y , Liu Y , Wang N . Mineralization of 4-chlorophenol and anal-
ysis  of  bacterial  community  in  microbial  fuel  cells.  Procedia  Environ  Sci
2013; 18 :534–9 .

[86] Li MC , Zhang CP , Liu GL , Zhang RD , Luo Y , Li J . Power generation from veratryl
alcohol and microbial community analysis in the microbial fuel cell. J Environ
Sci Health A 2010; 45 :1195–206 .

[87] Zhang G , Liu G , Zhang R , Luo H . Electricity production from and biodegra-
dation  of  quinolinein  the  microbial  fuel  cell.  J  Environ  Sci  Health  A
2010; 45 :250–6 .

[88] Rodrigo  J ,  Boltes  K ,  Esteve-Nunez  A .  Microbial-electrochemical  bioreme-
diation  and  detoxification  of  dibenzothiophene-polluted  soil.  Chemosphere
2014; 101 :61–5 .

[89] Adelaja  O ,  Keshavarz  T ,  Kyazze  G .  Enhanced  biodegradation  of  phenan-
threne using different inoculum types in a microbial fuel cell. Eng Life Sci
2014; 14 :218–28 .

[90] Wen Q , Kong F , Zheng H , Yin J , Cao D , Ren Y , Wang G . Simultaneous pro-
cesses of electricity generation and ceftriaxone sodium degradation in an
air-cathode  single  chamber  microbial  fuel  cell.  J  Power  Sources
2011; 196 :2567–72 .

[91] Cao Y , Hu Y , Sun J , Hou B . Explore various co-substrates for simultaneous
electricity generation and Congo red degradation in air-cathode single-cham-
ber microbial fuel cell. Bioelectrochemistry 2010; 79 :71–6 .

[92] Zeng X , Borole AP , Pavlostathis SG . Biotransformation of furanic and pheno-
lic compounds with hydrogen gas production in a microbial electrolysis cell.
Environ Sci Technol 2015; 49 :13667–75 .

[93] Yu Y , Ndayisenga F , Yu Z , Zhao M , Lay CH , Zhou D . Co-substrate strategy for
improved power production and chlorophenol degradation in a microbial fuel
cell. Int J Hydrog Energy 2019; 44 :20312–22 .

[94] Rismani-Yazdi H , Christy AD , Dehority BA , Morrison M , Yu Z , Tuovinen OH .
Electricity generation from cellulose by rumen microorganisms in microbial
fuel cells. Biotechnol Bioeng 2007; 97 :1398–407 .

[95] Rezaei  F ,  Richard  TL ,  Logan  BE .  Enzymatic  hydrolysis  of  cellulose  cou-
pled with electricity generation in a microbial fuel cell. Biotechnol Bioeng
2008; 101 :1163–9 .

[96] Rismani-Yazdi H , Christy AD , Caver SM , Yu Z , Dehority BA , Tuovinen OH .
Effect of external resistance on bacterial diversity and metabolism in cellu-
lose-fed microbial fuel cells. Bioresource Technol 2011; 102 :278–83 .

[97] Vavilin VA , Fernandez B , Palatsi J , Flotats X . Hydrolysis kinetics in anaero-
bic degradation of particulate organic material: an overview. Waste Manag
2008; 28 :939–51 .

[98] Lubken M , Gehring T , Wichern M . Microbiological fermentation of lignocel-
lulosic biomass: current state and prospects of mathematical modeling. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 2010; 85 :1643–52 .

[99] Christy PM , Gopinath LR , Divya D . A review on anaerobic decomposition and
enhancement of biogas production through enzymes and microorganisms.
Renew Sust Energy Rev 2014; 34 :167–73 .

[100] Niessen J , Schroder U , Scholz F . Exploiting complex carbohydrates for mi-
crobial electricity generation-a bacterial fuel cell operating on starch. Elec-
trochem Commun 2004; 6 :955–8 .

[101] Rezaei F , Xing D , Wagner R , Regan JM , Richard TL , Logan BE . Simultaneous
cellulose degradation and electricity production by Enterobacter cloacae in a
microbial fuel cell. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009; 75 :3673–8 .

[102] Ren  ZYM ,  Ward  TE ,  Regan  JM .  Electricity  production  from  cellulose  in
a  microbial  fuel  cell  using  a  defined  binary  culture.  Environ  Sci  Technol
2007; 41 :4781–6 .

[103] Hassan SHA , Kim YS , Oh SE . Power generation from cellulose using mixed and
pure cultures of cellulose-degrading bacteria in a microbial fuel cell. Enzyme
Microb Technol 2012; 51 :269–73 .

[104] Heilmann J , Logan BE . Production of electricity from proteins using a micro-

bial fuel cell. Water Environ Res 2006; 78 :531–7 .

[105] Clauwaert P , van der Ha D , Verstraete W . Energy recovery from energy rich
vegetable products with microbial fuel cells. Biotechnol Lett 2008; 30 :1947–
1951 .

[106] Cammarota MC , Freire DMG . A review on hydrolytic enzymes in the treat-
ment of wastewater with high oil and grease content. Bioresource Technol
2006; 97 :2195–210 .

[107] Pham CA , Jung SJ , Phung NT , Lee J , Chang IS , Kim BH , Yi H , Chun J . A novel
electrochemically active and Fe(III)-reducing bacterium phylogenetically re-
lated to Aeromonas hydrophila , isolated from a microbial fuel cell. FEMS Mi-
crobiol Lett 2003; 223 :129–34 .

[108] Holmes DE , Nicoll JS , Bond DR , Lovley DR . Potential role of a novel psy-
chrotolerant  member  of  the  family  Geobacteraceae,  Geopsychrobacter  elec-
trodiphilus gen. nov., sp. nov., in electricity production by a marine sediment
fuel cell. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004; 70 :6023–30 .

[109] Zuo Y , Xing D , Regan JM , Logan BE . Isolation of the exoelectrogenic bacterium
Ochrobactrum anthropi YZ-1 by using a U-tube microbial fuel cell. Appl Envi-
ron Microbiol 2008; 74 :3130–7 .

[110] Mardanpour MM , Esfahany MN , Behzad T , Sedaqatvand R . Single chamber
microbial fuel cell with spiral anode for dairy wastewater treatment. Biosens
Bioelectron 2012; 38 :264–9 .

[111] Elakkiya E , Matheswaran M . Comparison of anodic metabolisms in bioelec-
tricity production during treatment of dairy wastewater in Microbial Fuel
Cell. Bioresource Techno 2013; 136 :407–12 .

[112] Ryckelynck N , Stecher HA , Reimers CE . Understanding the anodic mechanism
of a seafloor fuel cell: interactions between geochemistry and microbial ac-
tivity. Biogeochemistry 2005; 76 :113–39 .

[113] Rabaey K , van de Sompel K , Maignien L , Boon N , Aelterman P , Clauwaert P , de
Schamphelaire L , Pham HT , Vermeulen J , Verhaege M , Lens P , Verstraete W .
Microbial fuel cells for sulfide removal. Environ Sci Technol 2006; 40 :5218–
5224 .

[114] Ateya BG , Al-Kharafi FM , Al-Azab AS . Electrodeposition of sulfur from sulfide

contaminated brines. Electrochem Solid St 2003; 6 :137–40 .

[115] Nielsen AH , Vollertsen J , Hvitved-Jacobsen T . Kinetics and stoichiometry of
aerobic sulfide oxidation in wastewater from sewers: effects of pH and tem-
perature. Water Environ Res 2006; 78 :275–83 .

[116] Ateya  BG ,  Al-Kharafi FM .  Anodic  oxidation  of  sulfide  ions  from  chloride

brines. Electrochem Commun 2002; 4 :231–8 .

[117] Waterston K , Bejan D , Bunce NJ . Electrochemical oxidation of sulfide ion at a

boron-doped diamond anode. J Appl Electrochem 2007; 37 :367–73 .

[118] Sun M , Mu ZX , Chen YP , Sheng GP , Liu XW , Chen YZ , Zhao Y , Wang HL ,
Yu HQ , Wei L , Ma F . Microbial-assisted sulfide oxidation in the anode of a
microbial fuel cell. Environ Sci Technol 2009; 43 :3372–7 .

[119] Lee  CY ,  Ho  KL ,  Lee  DJ ,  Su  A ,  Chang  JS .  Electricity  harvest  from  ni-
trate/sulfide-containing  wastewaters  using  microbial  fuel  cell  with
autotrophic  denitrifier,  Pseudomonas  sp .  C27.  Int  J  Hydrog  Energy
2012; 37 :15827–32 .

[120] Rakoczy J , Feisthauer S , Wasmund K , Bombach P , Neu TR , Vogt C , Rich-
now HH . Benzene and sulfide removal from groundwater treated in a mi-
crobial fuel cell. Biotechnol Bioeng 2013; 110 :3104–13 .

[121] Dutta PK , Rabaey K , Yuan Z , Keller J . Spontaneous electrochemical removal of

aqueous sulfide. Water Res 2008; 42 :4965–75 .

[122] Lee DJ , Liu X , Weng HL . Sulfate and organic carbon removal by microbial
fuel cell with sulfate-reducing bacteria and sulfide-oxidising bacteria anodic
biofilm. Bioresource Technol 2014; 156 :14–19 .

[123] Dutta PK , Keller J , Yuan Z , Rozendal RA , Rabaey K . Role of sulfur during ac-

etate oxidation in biological anodes. Environ Sci Technol 2009; 43 :3839–45 .

[124] Daghio M , Vaiopoulou E , Patil SA , Suarez-Suarez A , Head IM , Franzetti A ,
Rabaey K . Anodes stimulated anaerobic toluene degradation via sulfur cycling
in marine sediments. Appl Environ Microbiol 2016; 82 :297–307 .

[125] Lee DJ , Lee CY , Chang JS . Treatment and electricity harvesting from sul-
fate/sulfide-containing wastewaters using microbial fuel cell with enriched
sulfate-reducing mixed culture. J Hazard Mater 2012; 243 :67–72 .

[126] Zhai LF , Wang B , Sun M . Solution pH manipulates sulfur and electricity re-
covery from aqueous sulfide in an air-cathode fuel cell. Clean Soil Air Water
2016; 44 :1140–5 .

[127] Zhai LF , Wang R , Duan MF , Sun M . Electrochemical oxide sulfide in an air–
cathode fuel cell with manganese oxide/graphite felt composite as anode. Sep
Purif Technol 2018; 197 :47–53 .

[128] Dutta PK , Rozendal RA , Yuan Z , Rabaey K , Keller J . Electrochemical regenera-
tion of sulfur loaded electrodes. Electrochem Commun 2009; 11 :1437–40 .
[129] Steudel R . Mechanism for the formation of elemental sulfur from aqueous
sulfide in chemical and microbiological desulfurization processes. Ind Eng
Chem Res 1996; 35 :1417–23 .

[130] Zhao HZ , Zhang Y , Chang YY , Li ZS . Conversion of a substrate carbon source
to formic acid for carbon dioxide emission reduction utilizing series-stacked
microbial fuel cells. J Power Sources 2012; 217 :59–64 .

[131] Zhao H , Zhang Y , Zhao B , Chang Y , Li Z . Electrochemical reduction of car-
bon dioxide in an MFC-MEC system with a layer-by-layer self-assembly car-
bon nanotube/cobalt phthalocyanine modified electrode. Environ Sci Technol
2012; 46 :5198–204 .

[132] Bushuyev OS , Luna PD , Dinh CT , Tao L , Saur G , van de Lagemaat J , Kelley SO ,
Sargent EH . What should we make with CO 2 and how can we make it? Joule
2018; 2 :825–32 .

[133] Nevin KP , Woodard TL , Franks AE , Summers ZM , Lovley DR . Microbial elec-
trosynthesis: feeding microbes electricity to convert carbon dioxide and wa-
ter to multicarbon extracellular organic compounds. MBio 2010; 1 :e00103–
e00110 .

[134] Nevin KP , Hensley SA , Franks AE , Summers ZM , Ou J , Woodard TL , Snoeyen-
bos-West OL , Lovley DR . Electrosynthesis of organic compounds from carbon
dioxide is catalyzed by a diversity of acetogenic microorganisms. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2011; 77 :2882–6 .

[135] Ganigue R , Puig S , Batlle-Vilanova P , Balaguer MD , Colprim J . Microbial elec-
trosynthesis of butyrate from carbon dioxide. Chem Commun 2015; 51 :3235–8 .
[136] Arends JB , Patil SA , Roume H , Rabaey K . Continuous long-term electricity–
driven bioproduction of carboxylates and isopropanol from CO 2 with a mixed
microbial community. J CO 2 Util 2017; 20 :141–9 .

[137] Vassilev I , Hernandez PA , Batile-Vilanova P , Freguia S , Kromer JO , Keller J ,
Ledezma P , Virdis B . Microbial electrosynthesis of isobutyric, butyric, caproic
acids and corresponding alcohols from carbon dioxide. ACS Sustain Chem Eng
2018; 6 :8485–93 .

[138] Wu Z , Wang J , Zhang X , Bi C . Engineering an electroactive Escherichia coli for
the microbial electrosynthesis of succinate by increasing the intracellular FAD
pool. Biochem Eng J 2019; 146 :132–42 .

[139] Mayr JC, Grosch JH, Hartmann L, Rosa LFM, Spiess AC, Harnisch F. Resting
Escherichia coli as chassis for microbial electrosynthesis: production of chiral
alcohols. Chem Sus Chem 2019. doi: 10.10 02/cssc.20190 0413 .

[140] Mohan SV , Modestra JA , Amulya K , Butti SK , Velvizhi G . A circular bioe-
conomy with biobased products from CO 2  sequestration. Trends Biotechnol
2016; 34 :506–19 .

[141] Huang LP , Jiang L , Wang Q , Quan X , Yang J , Chen L . Cobalt recovery with
simultaneous methane and acetate production in biocathode microbial elec-
trolysis cells. Chem Eng J 2014; 253 :281–90 .

22

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

[142] Jiang Y , Su M , Zhang Y , Zhan G , Tao Y , Li D . Bioelectrochemical systems for
simultaneously production of methane and acetate from carbon dioxide at
relatively high rate. Int J Hydrog Energy 2013; 38 :3497–502 .

[143] van Eerten-Jansen MCAA , Jansen NC , Plugge CM , de Wilder V , Buisman CJN ,
ter Heijne A . Analysis of the mechanisms of bioelectrochemical methane pro-
duction by mixed cultures. J Chem Technol Biotechnol 2015; 90 :963–70 .
[144] Mayer  F ,  Enzmann  F ,  Lopez  AM ,  Holtmann  D .  Performance  of  different
methanogenic species for the microbial electrosynthesis of methane from car-
bon dioxide. Bioresource Technol 2019; 289 :121706 .

[145] Nie  H ,  Zhang  T ,  Cui  M ,  Lu  H ,  Lovley  DR ,  Russell  TP .  Improved  cathode
for high efficient microbial-catalyzed reduction in microbial electrosynthesis
cells. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2013; 15 :14290–4 .

[146] Aryal N , Tremblay PLM , Lizak DM , Zhang T . Performance of different Sporo-
musa species for the microbial electrosynthesis of acetate from carbon diox-
ide. Bioresource Technol 2017; 233 :184–90 .

[147] Marshall CW , Ross DE , Fichot EB , Norman RS , May HD . Long-term opera-
tion of microbial electrosynthesis systems improves acetate production by
autotrophic microbiomes. Environ Sci Technol 2013; 47 :6023–9 .

[148] Patil SA , Arends JBA , Vanwonterghem I , van Meerbergen J , Guo K , Tyson GW ,
Rabaey  K .  Selective  enrichment  establishes  a  stable  performing  commu-
nity for microbial electrosynthesis of acetate from CO 2 . Environ Sci Technol
2015; 49 :8833–43 .

[149] Jourdin L , Freguia S , Donose BC , Chen J , Wallace GG , Keller J , Flexer V . A novel
carbon nanotube modified scaffold as an efficient biocathode material for im-
proved microbial electrosynthesis. J Mater Chem A 2014; 2 :13093–102 .
[150] Jourdin L , Grieger T , Monetti J , Flexer V , Freguia S , Lu Y , Chen J , Romano M ,
Wallace GG , Keller J . High acetic acid production rate obtained by microbial
electrosynthesis from carbon dioxide. Environ Sci Technol 2015; 49 :13566–74 .
[151] Bian  B ,  Alqahtani  MF ,  Katuri  KP ,  Liu  D ,  Bajracharya  S ,  Lai  Z ,  Rabaey  K ,
Saikaly PE . Porous nickel hollow fiber cathodes coated with CNTs for efficient
microbial electrosynthesis of acetate from CO 2 using Sporomusa ovate . J Mater
Chem A 2018; 6 :17201–11 .

[152] Chen S , Fang Y , Jing X , Luo H , Chen J , Zhou S . Enhanced electrosynthesis per-
formance of Moorella thermoautotrophica by improving cell permeability. Bio-
electrochemistry 2018; 12 :151–9 .

[153] Srikanth S , Singh D , Vanbroekhoven K , Pant D , Kumar M , Puri SK , Ramaku-
mar SSV . Electro-biocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide to alcohols using
gas diffusion electrode. Bioresource Technol 2018; 265 :45–51 .

[154] Bajracharya S , Vanbroekhoven K , Buisman CJN , Pant D , Strik DPBTB . Appli-
cation of gas diffusion biocathode in microbial electrosynthesis from carbon
dioxide. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2016; 23 :22292–308 .

[155] Marshall CW , Ross DE , Fichot EB , Norman RS , May HD . Electrosynthesis of
commodity chemicals by an autotrophicmicrobial community. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2012; 78 :8412–20 .

[156] Bajracharya  S ,  Yuliasni  R ,  Vanbroekhoven  K ,  Buisman CJN ,  Strik DPBTB ,
Pant D . Long-term operation of microbial electrosynthesis cell reducing CO 2
to multi-carbon chemicals with a mixed culture avoiding methanogenesis.
Bioelectrochemistry 2017; 113 :26–34 .

[157] Kracke  F ,  Wong  AB ,  Maegaard  K ,  Deutzmann  JS ,  Hubert  MA ,  Hahn  C ,
Jaramillo TF , Spormann AM . Robust and biocompatible catalysts for efficient
hydrogen-driven microbial electrosynthesis. Commun Chem 2019; 2 :45 .
[158] Aryal N , Ammam F , Patil SA , Pant D . An overview of cathode materials for
microbial electrosynthesis of chemicals from carbon dioxide. Green  Chem
2017; 19 :5748–60 .

[159] Nevin KP , Woodard TL , Franks AE , Summers ZM , Lovley DR . Microbial elec-
trosynthesis: feeding microbes electricity to convert carbon dioxide and wa-
ter to multicarbon extracellular organic compounds. MBio 2010; 1 :e00103–10 .
[160] Perathoner S , Centi G . CO recycling: a key strategy to introduce green energy

in the chemical production chain. ChemSusChem 2014; 7 :1274–82 .

[161] Abate S , Lanzafame P , Perathoner S , Centi G . New sustainable model of biore-
fineries: biofactories and challenges of integrating bio-and solar refineries.
ChemSusChem 2015; 8 :2854–66 .

[162] Rojas MPA , Zaiat M , Gonzalez ER , de Wever H , Pant D . Effect of the electric
supply interruption on a microbial electrosynthesis system converting inor-
ganic carbon into acetate. Bioresource Technol 2018; 266 :203–10 .

[163] Rojas MPA , Mateos R , Sotres A , Zaiat M , Gonzalez ER , Escapa A , de Wever H ,
Pant D . Microbial electrosynthesis (MES) from CO 2 is resilient to fluctuations
in renewable energy supply. Energ Convers Manag 2018; 177 :272–9 .

[164] Mateos R , Escapa A , San-Martin MI , De Wever H , Sotres A , Pant D . Long-term
open circuit microbial electrosynthesis system promotes methanogenesis. J
Energy Chem 2020; 41 :3–6 .

[165] Choi C , Cui Y . Recovery of silver from wastewater coupled with power gener-
ation using a microbial fuel cell. Bioresource Technol 2012; 107 :522–5 .
[166] Choi C , Hu N . The modeling of gold recovery from tetrachloroaurate wastew-
ater using a microbial fuel cell. Bioresource Technol 2013; 133 :589–98 .
[167] Heijne AT , Liu F , Weijden RVD , Weijma J , Buisman CJN , Hamelers HVM . Cop-
per recovery combined with electricity production in a microbial fuel cell.
Environ Sci Technol 2010; 44 :4376–81 .

[168] Lefebvre O , Neculita CM , Yue X , Ng HY . Bioelectrochemical treatment of acid

mine drainage dominated with iron. J Hazard Mater 2012; 241-242 :411–17 .

[169] Li Z , Zhang X , Lei L . Electricity production during the treatment of real
using microbial fuel cell. Process

electroplating wastewater containing Cr 6 +
Biochem 2008; 43 :1352–8 .

[170] Tao H , Li W , Liang M , Xu N , Ni J , Wu W . A membrane-free baffled microbial
fuel cell for cathodic reduction of Cu(II) with electricity generation. Biore-
source Technol 2011; 102 :4774–8 .

[171] Tao  H ,  Gao  Z ,  Ding  H ,  Xu  N ,  Wu  W .  Recovery  of  silver  from  sil-
ver(I)-containing solutions in bioelectrochemical reactors. Bioresource Technol
2012; 111 :92–7 .

[172] Wang G , Huang L , Zhang Y . Cathodic reduction of hexavalent chromium
[Cr(VI)] coupled with electricity generation in microbial fuel cells. Biotechnol
Lett 2008; 30 :1959–66 .

[173] Wang Z , Lim B , Lu H , Fan J , Choi C . Cathodic reduction of Cu 2 +

and elec-
tric  power  generation  using  a  microbial  fuel  cell.  Bull  Korean  Chem  Soc
2010; 31 :2025–30 .

[174] Wang  Z ,  Lim  B ,  Choi  C .  Removal  of  Hg 2 +

as  an  electron  acceptor  cou-
pled with power generation using a microbial fuel cell. Bioresource Technol
2011; 102 :6304–7 .

[175] Zhang B , Feng C , Ni J , Zhang J , Huang W . Simultaneous reduction of vana-
dium(V) and chromium(VI) with enhanced energy recovery based on micro-
bial fuel cell technology. J Power Sources 2012; 204 :34–9 .

[176] Modin O , Wang X , Wu X , Rauch S , Fedje KK . Bioelectrochemical recovery of
Cu, Pb, Cd, and Zn from dilute solutions. J Hazard Mater 2012; 235 :291–7 .
[177] Luo H , Liu G , Zhang R , Bai Y , Fu S , Hou Y . Heavy metal recovery combined
with H 2 production from artificial acid mine drainage using the microbial
electrolysis cell. J Hazard Mater 2014; 270 :153–9 .

[178] Zhang  Y ,  Yu  L ,  Wu  D ,  Huang  L ,  Zhou  P ,  Quan  X ,  Chen  G .  Dependency
of simultaneous Cr(VI), Cu(II) and Cd(II) reduction on the cathodes of mi-
crobial electrolysis cells self-driven by microbial fuel cells. J Power Sources
2015; 273 :1103–13 .

[179] Huang L , Li M , Pan Y , Shi Y , Quan X , Puma GL . Efficient W and Mo deposition
and separation with simultaneous hydrogen production in stacked bioelectro-
chemical systems. Chem Eng J 2017; 327 :584–96 .

[180] Chen Z , Zhu BK , Jia WF , Liang JH , Sun GX . Can electrokinetic removal of met-
als from contaminated paddy soils be powered by microbial fuel cells? Envi-
ron Technol Innov 2015; 3 :63–7 .

[181] Wang H , Song H , Yu R , Cao X , Fang Z , Li X . New process for copper migration
by bioelectricity generationin soil microbial fuel cells. Environ Sci Pollut Res
2016; 23 :13147–54 .

[182] Qin B , Luo H , Liu G , Zhang R , Chen S , Hou Y , Luo Y . Nickel ion removal
from  wastewater  using  the  microbial  electrolysis  cell.  Bioresource  Technol
2012; 121 :458–61 .

[183] Shen  J ,  Huang  L ,  Zhou  P ,  Quan  X ,  Puma  GL .  Correlation  between  cir-
cuital current, Cu(II) reduction and cellular electron transfer in EAB isolated
from Cu(II)-reduced biocathodes of microbial fuel cells. Bioelectrochemistry
2017; 114 :1–7 .

[184] Xafenias  N ,  Zhang  Y ,  Banks  CJ .  Enhanced  performance  of  hexavalent
chromium reducing cathodes in the presence of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
and lactate. Environ Sci Technol 2013; 47 :4512–20 .

[185] Hsu L , Masuda SA , Nealson KH , Pirbazari M . Evaluation of microbial fuel cell
Shewanella biocathodes for treatment of chromate contamination. RSC Adv
2012; 2 :5844–55 .

[186] Tandukar  M ,  Huber  SJ ,  Onodera  T ,  Pavlostathis  SG .  Biological  chromium
(VI) reduction in the cathode of a microbial fuel cell. Environ Sci Technol
2009; 43 :8159–65 .

[187] Gregory KB , Lovley DR . Remediation and recovery of uranium from con-
taminated  subsurface  environments  with  electrodes.  Environ  Sci  Technol
2005; 39 :8943–7 .

[188] Jiang L , Huang L , Sun Y . Recovery of flakey cobalt from aqueous Co(II) with
simultaneous hydrogen production in microbial electrolysis cells. Int J Hydrog
Energy 2014; 39 :654–63 .

[189] Huang L , Chai X , Chen G , Logan BE . Effect of set potential on hexavalent
chromium reduction and electricity generation from biocathode microbial
fuel cells. Environ Sci Technol 2011; 45 :5025–31 .

[190] Wu X , Zhu X , Song T , Zhang L , Jia H , Wei P . Effect of acclimatization on hex-
avalent chromium reduction in a biocathode microbial fuel cell. Bioresource
Technol 2015; 180 :185–91 .

[191] Chen Y , Shen J , Huang L , Pan Y , Quan X . Enhanced Cd(II) removal with simul-
taneous hydrogen production in biocathode microbial electrolysis cells in the
presence of acetate or NaHCo 3 . Int J Hydrog Energy 2016; 41 :13368–79 .
[192] Qiu R , Zhang B , Li J , lv Q , Wang S , Gu Q . Enhanced vanadium (V) reduction
and bioelectricity generation in microbial fuel cells with biocathode. J Power
Sources 2017; 359 :379–83 .

[193] Freguia S , Tsujimura S , Kano K . Electron transfer pathways in microbial oxy-

gen biocathodes. Electrochim Acta 2010; 55 :813–18 .

[194] Fang C , Min B , Angelidaki I . Nitrate as an oxidant in the cathode chamber of a
microbial fuel cell for both power generation and nutrient removal purposes.
Appl Biochem Biotechnol 2011; 164 :464–74 .

[195] Molodkina EB , Ehrenburg MR , Polukarov YM , Danilov AI , Souza-Garcia J , Fe-
liu JM . Electroreduction of nitrate ions on Pt(111) electrodes modified by cop-
per adatoms. Electrochim Acta 2010; 56 :154–65 .

[196] de Vooys ACA , Koper MTM , van Santen R , van Veen JAR . Mechanistic study of
the nitric oxide reduction on a polycrystalline platinum electrode. Electrochim
Acta 2001; 46 :923–30 .

[197] de Vooys ACA , Koper MTM , van Santen RA , van Veen JAR . Mechanistic study
on the electrocatalytic reduction of nitric oxide on transition-metal elec-
trodes. J Catal 2001; 202 :387–94 .

[198] Gregory KB , Bond DR , Lovley DR . Graphite electrodes as electron donors for

anaerobic respiration. Environ Microbiol 2004; 6 :596–604 .

[199] Puig S , Serra M , Wilar-Sanz A , Cabre M , Baneras L , Colprim J , Balaguer MD .
Autotrophic nitrite removal in the cathode of microbial fuel cells. Bioresource
Technol 2011; 102 :4462–7 .

M. Sun, L.-F. Zhai and Y. Mu et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 77 (2020) 100814

23

[200] Clauwaert P , Rabaey K , Aelterman P , DeSchamphelaire L , Pham TH , Boeckx P ,
Boon N , Verstraete W . Biological denitrification in microbial fuel cells. Environ
Sci Technol 2007; 41 :3354–60 .

[201] Virdis B , Rabaey K , Yuan Z , Keller J . Microbial fuel cells for simultaneous car-

bon and nitrogen removal. Water Res 2008; 42 :3013–24 .

[202] Virdis B , Rabaey K , Yuan ZG , Rozendal RA , Keller J . Electron fluxes in a mi-
crobial fuel cell performing carbon and nitrogen removal. Environ Sci Technol
2009; 43 :5144–9 .

[203] Puig S , Coma M , Desloover J , Boon N , Colprim J , Balaguer MD . Autotrophic
denitrification in microbial fuel cells treating low ionic strength waters. Env-
iron Sci Technol 2012; 46 :2309–15 .

[204] Sevda S , Sreekishnan TR , Pous N , Puig S , Pant D . Bioelectroremediation of
perchlorate and nitrate contaminated water: a review. Bioresource Technol
2018; 255 :331–9 .

[205] Carrey R , Otero N , Vidal-Gavilan G , Ayora C , Soler A , Gomez-Alday JJ . In-
duced nitrate attenuation by glucose in groundwater: flow-through experi-
ment. Chem Geol 2014; 370 :19–28 .

[206] Tartakovsky B , Millette D , Delisle S , Guiot SR . Ethanol-stimulated bioreme-
diation of nitrate-contaminated ground water. Ground Water Monit Remediat
2002; 22 :78–87 .

[207] Ghafari S , Hasan M , Aroua MK . Bio-electrochemical removal of nitrate from
water and wastewater-A review. Bioresource Technol 2008; 99 :3965–74 .
[208] Virdis B , Rabaey K , Rozendal RA , Yuan Z , Keller J . Simultaneous nitrifica-
tion, denitrification and carbon removal in microbial fuel cells. Water Res
2010; 44 :2970–80 .

[209] Molognoni D , Devecseri D , Cecconet D , Capodaglio AG . Cathodic ground-
water denitrification with a bioelectrochemical system. J Water Process Eng
2017; 19 :67–73 .

[210] Tavares P , Pereira AS , Moura JJG , Moura I . Metalloenzymes of the denitrifica-

tion pathway. J Inorg Biochem 20 06; 10 0 :2087–100 .

[211] Doan TV , Lee TK , Shukla SK , Tiedje JM , Park J . Increased nitrous oxide ac-
cumulation by bioelectrochemical denitrification under autotrophic condi-
tions: kinetics and expression of denitrification pathway genes. Water Res
2013; 47 :7087–97 .

[212] Virdis B , Read ST , Rabaey TK , Rozendal RA , Yuan Z , Keller J . Biofilm stratifica-
tion during simultaneous nitrification and denitrification (SND) at a biocath-
ode. Bioresource Technol 2011; 102 :334–41 .

[213] Pous N , Puig S , Balaguer MD , Colprim J . Cathode potential and anode electron
donor evaluation for a suitable treatment of nitrate-contaminated groundwa-
terin bioelectrochemical systems. Chem Eng J 2015; 263 :151–9 .

[214] WERF. Energy production and efficiency research −the roadmap to net-zero

energy; Alexandria, VA, 2011; pp 1 −8.

[215] Scherson YD , Woo SG , Griddle CS . Production of nitrous oxide from anaerobic
digester centrate and its use as a co-oxidant of biogas to enhance energy
recovery. Environ Sci Technol 2014; 48 :5612–19 .

[216] Xu  S ,  Jangir  Y ,  El-Naggar  MY .  Disentangling  the  roles  of  free  and  cy-
tochrome-bound favins in extracellular electron transport from Shewanella
oneidensis MR-1. Electrochim Acta 2016; 198 :49–55 .

[217] Okamoto A , Tokunou Y , Kalathil S , Hashimoto K . Proton transport in the out-
er-membrane flavocytochrome complex limits the rate of extracellular elec-
tron transport. Angew Chem Int Ed 2017; 56 :9082–6 .

[218] Ru X , Zhang P , Beratan DN . Assessing possible mechanisms of micrometer-s-
cale electron transfer in hene-free Geobacter sulfurreducens pili. J Phys Chem
B 2019; 123 :5035–47 .

[219] Ali J , Sohail A , Wang L , Haider MR , Mulk S , Pan G . Electro-microbiology as
a promising approach towards renewable energy and environmental sustain-
ability. Energies 2018; 11 :1822 .

[220] Zhi W , Ge Z , He Z , Zhang H . Methods for understanding microbial community
structures and functions in microbial fuel cells: a review. Bioresource Technol
2014; 171 :461–8 .

[221] Luo S , Guo W , Nealson KH , Feng X , He Z . 13

C pathway analysis for the role
of formate in electricity generation by Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. Sci Rep
2016; 6 :20941 .

[222] Ateya BG , Al-Kharafi FM , Abdallah RM , Al-Azab AS . Electrochemical removal
of hydrogen sulfide from polluted brines using porous flow through elec-
trodes. J Appl Electrochem 2005; 35 :297–303 .

[223] Wang H , Ren ZJ . Bioelectrochemical metal recovery from wastewater: a re-

view. Water Res 2014; 66 :219–32 .

[224] Sun M , Ru XR , Zhai LF . In-situ fabrication of supported iron oxides from syn-
thetic acid minedrainage: high catalytic activities and good stabilities toward-
selectro-Fenton reaction. Appl Catal B Environ 2015; 165 :103–10 .

[225] Zumft WG . Cell biology and molecular basis of denitrification. Microbiol Mol

Biol Rev 1997; 61 :533–616 .

[226] Graf DRH , Jones CM , Hallin S . Intergenomic comparisons highlight modularity
of the denitrification pathway and underpin the importance of community
structure for N 2 O emissions. PloS One 2014; 9 :e114118 .

[227] Sharif HMA , Cheng HY , Haider MR , Khan K , Yang L , Wang AJ . NO removal
with efficient recovery of N 2 O by using recyclable Fe 3 O 4 @EDTA@Fe(II) com-
plex: a novel approach toward resource recovery from flue gas. Environ Sci
Technol 2019; 53 :1004–13 .

[228] Foley JM , Rozendal RA , Hertle CK , Lant PA , Rabaey K . Life cycle assessment of
high-rate anaerobic treatment, microbial fuel cells, and microbial electrolysis
cells. Environ Sci Technol 2010; 44 (9):3629–37 .

[229] Pant D , Singh A , Van Bogaert G , Gallego YA , Diels L , Vanbroekhoven K . An
introduction to the life cycle assessment (LCA) of bioelectrochemical systems
(BES) for sustainable energy and product generation: relevance and key as-
pects. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2011; 15 :1305–13 .

[230] La JA , Jeon JM , Sang BI , Yang YH , Cho EC . A hierarchically modified graphite
cathode with Au nanoislands, cysteamine, and Au nanocolloids for increased
electricity-assisted production of isobutanol by engineered Shewanella onei-
densis MR-1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017; 50 :43563–74 .

[231] Kracke F , Lai B , Yu S , Kromer JO . Balancing cellular redox metabolism in mi-
crobial electrosynthesis and electro fermentation-a chance for metabolic en-
gineering. Metab Eng 2018; 45 :109–20 .

[232] Jiang Y , May HD , Lu L , Liang P , Huang X . Carbon dioxide and organic waste
valorization by microbial electrosynthesis and electro-fermentation. Water
Res 2019; 149 :42–55 .

[233] Kadier A , Simayi Y , Abdeshahian P , Azman NF , Chandrasekhar K , Kalil MS .
A comprehensive review of microbial electrolysis cells (MEC) reactor de-
signs and configurations for sustainable hydrogen gas production. Alex Eng
J 2016; 55 :427–43 .

Min Sun received her PhD from the University of Science & Technology of China
(USTC) under the supervision of Prof. Han-Qing Yu in 2009. Her research has fo-
cused on mechanism elucidation and function exploration of microbial fuel cell. Dr.
Sun is now a Professor at Hefei University of Technology (HFUT), China. She has
published more than 30 SCI journal papers.

Lin-Feng Zhai received his PhD from Hefei University of Technology, China, in 2007.
He now works at this university as an Associate Professor. His research expertise is
renewable energy and environmental electrochemistry. He has published more than
20 SCI journal papers.

Yang Mu received his PhD from the University of Science & Technology of China
(USTC) under the supervision of Prof. Han-Qing Yu in 2006. Then, he spent 5 years
as a postdoctoral fellow at Advanced Water Management centre (AWMC) in the Uni-
versity of Queensland, Australia. He has worked as a full Professor at USTC since
2012. His research interests include wastewater treatment, resource and energy re-
covery from wastes. He has published more than 80 SCI journal papers.

Han-Qing Yu received his PhD from Tongji University, China in 1994, and had
worked in turn as a “Marie Curie” postdoctoral fellow at the University of New-
castle  upon  Tyne,  UK,  a  research  fellow  at  the  Nanyang  Technological  Univer-
sity, Singapore, and a research assistant professor at the Hong Kong University.
He  is  currently  a  professor  in  the  Dept.  of  Applied  Chemistry,  USTC.  Also,  he
is now an Associate Editor of Water Research and an editorial board member
of 10 international refereed journals. His research interests include electrochem-
ical/biological degradation of contaminants, bioelectrochemical system, and nano-
materials for environmental and energy applications. He has published more than
400 international peer-reviewed papers with an H index of 72, and 8 invited book
chapters.
