Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Review of thermoelectric generation for internal combustion engine waste 
heat recovery 

Nicolae Vlad Burnete a, *, Florin Mariasiu a, Christopher Depcik b, Istvan Barabas a, 
Dan Moldovanu a 
a Automotive Engineering and Transports Department, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Muncii Street, 103-105, Cluj-Napoca 400641, Romania 
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Kansas, 1530 W.15th Street, 3138 Learned Hall, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Thermoelectric module 
Thermoelectric generator 
Internal combustion engine 
Waste heat recovery 
Exhaust heat recovery 
Energy conversion 

With  the  current  emphasis  on  electrified  vehicles,  the  use  of  internal  combustion  engines  (ICEs)  as  the  main 
propulsion source is challenged, especially for passenger cars. Even though this is not yet the case for freight 
transportation and the internal combustion engine is still considered the short to mid-term solution, significant 
improvements in its efficiency and pollutant emissions are required. An energy distribution analysis shows that 
the  internal  combustion  engine  already  has  two  important  heat  rejection  sources  representing  approximately 
65–70% of the energy input: the exhaust gas system (~35–40%) and the radiator (~30%). Partially recovering 
some of this otherwise wasted heat can improve overall thermal efficiency. Compared to other thermal energy 
recovery  methods  (Organic  Rankine  Cycle,  mechanical  or  electrical  turbocompounding,  etc.),  thermoelectric 
generators have numerous advantages: environmentally friendly, no moving parts, little to no noise and vibra-
tion,  no  working  fluids,  high  reliability  (when  working  temperatures  are  not  exceeded),  low  maintenance, 
scalable,  modular,  ability  to  operate  over  a  wide  range  of  transient  temperature  conditions,  and  the  direct 
conversion of thermal energy into electrical energy. This effort seeks to bring together all aspects concerning the 
use of thermoelectric generators for internal combustion engine waste heat recovery in a comprehensive over-
view  on  the  issue  while  aiding  researchers  and  engineers  in  the  development  of  efficient  systems.  This  is 
accomplished by delivering two thorough summaries of both experimental and simulation results including, but 
not  limited  to  the  power  output  and  parasitic  losses,  as  well  as  the  gain  in  efficiency  and  reduction  in  fuel 
consumption. Furthermore, this effort includes a recap of hot side heat exchanger design (e.g., external shape, 
internal structure, material, test temperature and gas flow velocity, etc.). As a result, the use of thermoelectric 
generators installed on the exhaust system and in other regions that can provide heat for power generation (i.e., 
radiator and exhaust gas recirculation) are fully described.   

1. Introduction 

According  to  the  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  [1],  in 
2018  the  amount  of  rejected  energy  resulting  from  the  residential, 
commercial, industrial, and transportation sectors in the United States 
(U.S.) totaled 45.65 EJ, of which 23.63 EJ came from the transportation 
sector. This analysis shows the significant potential for energy recovery 
systems and that by recouping a part of this energy from internal com-
bustion  engines  (ICEs),  overall  transportation  efficiency  could  be 
meaningfully increased. 

Internal  combustion  engines  are  one  of  the  largest  fossil  fuel 

consumers  due  to  their  widespread  use  in  transportation  along  with 
stationary power units and industrial and agricultural machinery [2]. 
Despite significant technological advances and improvements, there is a 
limit to internal combustion engine efficiency, namely the efficiency of 
the  constant  volume  cycle.  Due  to  geometrical  constraints,  this  effi-
ciency is already below the reference efficiency for a heat engine oper-
ating between high temperature and low temperature reservoirs, namely 
the  Carnot  efficiency.  Consequently,  it  is  impossible  for  an  internal 
combustion engine to achieve the efficiency of an electric motor or fuel 
cell due to unavoidable irreversibilities. Partially recovering some of the 
otherwise  wasted  heat  is  important  in  improving  thermal  efficiency. 
Here,  the  waste  heat  recovery  (WHR)  process  seeks  to  capture  and 

Abbreviations: TEM, Thermoelectric module; TEG, Thermoelectric generator; ICE, Internal combustion engine; WHR, Waste heat recovery. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: nicolae.vlad.burnete@auto.utcluj.ro (N.V. Burnete).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101009 
Received 12 March 2021; Received in revised form 22 March 2022; Accepted 24 March 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)101009Availableonline1April20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Nomenclature 

Air coflow 
Air counterflow 
Exhaust gas aftertreatment system 
95% diesel + 5% biodiesel (V/V) 
90% diesel + 10% biodiesel (V/V) 
Brake specific fuel consumption 
Computation fluid dynamics 
Constant property model 
Direct current 

Abbreviations 
ACO 
ACOU 
ATS 
B5 
B10 
BSFC 
CFD 
CPM 
DC 
DCTEG  Direct contact thermoelectric generator 
DMPPT  Distributed maximum power point tracking 
DPP 
EES 
EGR 
EPA 
eTEG 
FC 
HEV 
HVAC 
HX 

Differential power processing 
Engineering equation solver 
Exhaust gas recirculation 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Electric turbo-generator 
Fuel consumption 
Hybrid electric vehicle 
Heating ventilation and air conditioning 
Heat exchanger 

New European Driving Cycle 
Non-road Transient Cycle 
Phase change material 
Proton exchange membrane 
Real driving emissions 

Internal combustion engine 
ICE 
Integrated starter generator 
ISG 
MPP 
Maximum power point 
MPPT  Maximum power point tracking 
NEDC 
NRTC 
PCM 
PEM 
RDE 
SASTEG  Segmented asymmetrical thermoelectric generator 
STEG 
TC 
TE 
TEG 
TEM 
U.S. 
UDDS 
WCO 
WCOU  Water counterflow 
WHR 
WLTC  Worldwide Harmonized Light Vehicles Test Cycle 
WLTP  Worldwide Harmonized Light Vehicle Test Procedure 
WTVC  World Transient Vehicle Cycle  

Segmented thermoelectric generator 
Thermocouple 
Thermoelectric 
Thermoelectric generator 
Thermoelectric module 
United States 
Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule 
Water coflow 

Waste heat recovery 

convert heat that would otherwise end up unused in the environment, in 
some other form of useful energy [3]. 

An  internal  combustion  engine  energy  distribution  analysis  shows 
that approximately 65–70% of the energy input is lost through exhaust 
gases (~35–40%)  and through dissipation in cooling circuits (~30%) 
[4].  In  other  words,  the  internal  combustion  engine  already  has  two 
important  heat  sources:  the  exhaust  gas  system  and  the  radiator.  To 
further underline the potential and importance of waste heat recovery 
for internal combustion engines, a study performed by the Fiat Research 
Center [5] estimated that recovering 400–500 W of waste thermal en-
ergy as electrical energy can lead to a reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emission values by 6–7 gm/km. Furthermore, simulations performed by 
Stobart et al. [6] in 2010 considering the technology available at that 
time  for  waste  heat  recovery  predicted  fuel  savings  of  3.9–4.7%  for 
various passenger cars and up to 7.4% for a transit bus. 

There are numerous methods available for recovering a part of the 
energy  otherwise  wasted  through  the  exhaust  gases  like  the  Organic 
Rankine  Cycle,  mechanical  or  electrical  turbocompounding,  thermo-
electric (TE) generators, etc. However, if they are not properly designed, 
all these methodologies can also result in parasitic power losses (either 
directly or indirectly through the added weight of the system) that can 
become  significant.  Of  these  options,  thermoelectric  generation  is  a 
promising method since it uses solid-state devices with relatively low 
maintenance.  Compared  to  other  thermal  energy  recovery  methods, 
thermoelectric generators (TEGs) have several advantages [7–9]: envi-
ronmentally friendly, no moving parts, little to no noise and vibration, 
no working fluids, high reliability (when working temperatures are not 
exceeded), low maintenance, scalable, modular, ability to operate over a 
wide range of transient temperature conditions, and the direct conver-
sion  of  thermal  energy  into  electrical  energy.  Furthermore,  the  same 
thermoelectric module can be used for both cooling and heating along 
with thermoelectric generation. However, recovering high temperature 
waste  heat  also  poses  challenges  concerning  the  reliability  and  dura-
bility of thermoelectric generators devices like oxidation, sublimation, 
degradation  of  the  thermal  and  electrical  interface,  as  well  as  mis-
matches  due  to  thermal  expansion  [10–17].  The  main  limitations  of 
thermoelectric  generators  for  automotive  applications  are  [7–9]:  low 
efficiency, high cost, insufficient extraction and non-uniform heat dis-
tribution on the hot side, insufficient (/inappropriate) heat dissipation 

(method) on the cold side, installation space, high added weight as a 
result  of  the  low  efficiency  of  each  individual  element,  the  unsteady 
nature of the heat source (in case of exhaust gas waste heat recovery), as 
well as a large number of required connections. 

As presented prior, the advantages of utilizing thermoelectric gen-
erators in automotive applications are numerous with studies predicting 
even a possible replacement of the alternator in passenger vehicles [18]. 
Therefore, if enough electrical energy is generated, the added mass of 
the  TEG  system  could  be  balanced  by  removing  this  device.  Another 
possibility  is  to  use  thermoelectric  generators  as  a  replacement  for 
currently  available  heating  ventilation  and  air  conditioning  (HVAC) 
systems.  Here,  switching  between  heating  and  cooling  is  done  by 
reversing  the  current  while  offering  high  control  flexibility  [19].  In 
addition,  partially  recovering  waste  heat  as  electrical  energy  could 
significantly  benefit  engine  performance,  efficiency,  reliability,  and 
design [20]. As a result, the stress on the battery could be lowered with 
the aim of increasing its lifetime. 

Currently, there are a few review papers that endeavor to summarize 
the  literature  for  utilizing  thermoelectric  generators  when  recovering 
the  waste  thermal  energy  of  internal  combustion  engines.  Rodriguez 
et  al.  [3]  cover  several  aspects  of  waste  heat  recovery  using  thermo-
electric  generators,  namely  the  possible  locations  for  thermoelectric 
generator installation, a description of the thermoelectric technology, 
the typical components used to build a thermoelectric generator, aspects 
of  exhaust  gas  thermoelectric  generator  modeling  required  to  predict 
power output, experimental results, and future trends. Zheng et al. [19] 
have a more general approach to the use of thermoelectric generators for 
recovering waste heat. In other words, these authors review the status of 
material development with respect to function, commercialization, and 
high  efficiency  thermoelectric  generator  development,  as  well  as 
possible  application  areas  in  different  industries.  With  respect  to  the 
automotive industry, the authors briefly present the use of the thermo-
electric  devices  for  climate  control  and  waste  heat  recovery  from 
exhaust gases. Shen et al. [4] perform a comprehensive review of ther-
moelectric  generators  installed  on  the  exhaust  pipe  of  vehicles  with 
respect to the country where the study was performed taking into ac-
count the proposed research objectives, test conditions, system features, 
as  well  as  study  outcomes.  In  addition,  these  authors  cover  the  chal-
lenges  of  thermoelectric  generator  design  like  heat  extraction  and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010092N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

dissipation, connection modes, available space, weight, and other items, 
but also present a summary of previous studies. The paper ends with 
proposed future directions. Alghoul et al. [21] focused on classifying and 
clarifying  the  differences  between  thermoelectric  systems  used  for 
power generation with respect to design and performance, but also the 
test rigs employed by researchers. Aspects of thermoelectric generator 
use for automotive exhaust gas heat recovery are covered only briefly. In 
their  review,  Champier  [8]  reviews  the  possible  application  areas  of 
thermoelectric  generators  in  general;  thus,  only  succinctly  covering 
their use for automotive waste heat recovery . Saidur et al. [20] review 
the technologies that can be used to recover the exhaust gas waste heat 
of  internal  combustion  engines,  like  thermoelectric  generation,  a 
six-stroke  internal  combustion  engine  cycle,  or  a  Rankine  bottoming 
cycle and turbocharging. With respect to thermoelectric generators, the 
authors cover some of their general aspects for the automotive industry, 
the main challenges, and a few advances in the technology. Yang [22] 
presents  specific  potential  applications  of  thermoelectric  waste  heat 
recovery in vehicles and its potential to reduce fuel consumption. Patil 
et al. [23] begin with a description of thermoelectric materials, but then 
concentrate their study on the design of thermoelectric generators heat 
exchangers  with  respect  to  the  heat  transfer  rate,  temperature  distri-
bution, and  pressure drop.  Orr  et  al. [24] review the  advantages and 
limitations of using heat pipes in conjunction with thermoelectric gen-
erators as a means to improve the system efficiency. This is achieved by 
decreasing the pressure losses in the gas stream, thermal resistance, as 
well as allowing for a more flexible design and temperature control. Like 
Saidur et al. [20], Hatami et al. [25] start by covering waste heat re-
covery technologies for internal combustion engines, but then they focus 
their review on the hot side heat exchanger design studies as a means to 
improve the thermoelectric generator system efficiency. 

In  contrast  to  the  presented  literature,  this  effort  seeks  to  bring 
together all aspects concerning the use of thermoelectric generators for 
internal combustion engine waste heat recovery to provide a compre-
hensive overview on the issue while aiding researchers and engineers in 
the development of efficient systems. This is accomplished by delivering 
a thorough summary of experimental results that highlights the goal of 
the study, the applied test method and obtained temperature gradient, 
the  design  of  the  TEG  system  (thermoelectric  materials,  number  of 
thermoelectric  modules,  system  mass,  hot  side  structure,  and  cooling 
method), the power output and parasitic losses, as well as the gain in 
efficiency and reduction in fuel consumption. A similar summary is also 
supplied for simulation studies. The authors have also included efforts 
covering  the  hot side  heat exchanger  design (external shape,  internal 
structure,  material,  test  temperature  and  gas  flow  velocity,  average 
interface  temperature,  uniformity  of  temperature  distribution,  and 
pressure drop). Furthermore, it has been found that the focus of litera-
ture  is  on  TEG  systems  installed  on  the  exhaust  system  due  to  high 
temperatures  of the  exhaust  gases, simplicity  and  a  relatively low  in-
fluence on engine operation (the last two reasons strongly depend on the 
design of the thermoelectric generator). In contrast, this review includes 
studies covering other regions that can provide heat for power genera-
tion (i.e., radiator and exhaust gas recirculation). 

2. Fundamentals of thermoelectric generators 

A thermoelectric generator module is a solid-state device that con-
verts thermal energy directly into electrical energy based on the Seebeck 
principle (the creation of an electric potential between two connected 
semiconductors when these components are subjected to a temperature 
difference). The reversed process of transforming electrical energy into 
thermal energy is also possible and is based on the Peltier effect. These 
effects happen by using charge carriers (electrons and holes) moving in 
the material, which are particles with the ability to transport heat and 
electric  charge.  Their  movement  requires  an  energy  input,  but  when 
they  recombine,  energy  is  released.  A  thermoelectric  module  (TEM) 
consists of many thermocouples (up to hundreds) positioned between 

two (usually) ceramic plates that serve as electric insulators and thermal 
conductors. Throughout this effort TEG is used to refer to the system 
made up of one or more thermoelectric modules (operating as thermo-
electric  generators)  and  (but  not  always)  hot  and  cold  side  heat  ex-
changers. Considering Thot the temperature of the hot side junction and 
Tcold the temperature of the cold side junction, under open circuit con-
ditions, the Seebeck voltage (VOC) is: 

VOC = α⋅ΔT = α⋅(Thot (cid:0) Tcold)

(1)  

where  α  = VOC  /  ΔT  is  the  Seebeck  coefficient  that  is  specific  to  the 
material  and  it  can be  either positive  or  negative.  For  the  rest  of  the 
paper, α  designates the junction Seebeck coefficient, unless otherwise 
mentioned. 

The Peltier effect is the reverse of the Seebeck effect, namely it is the 
conversion of current flow into a temperature difference between two 
dissimilar materials and is defined by the Peltier coefficient (πP): 

πP =

Qh/c
I

(2)  

where  Qh/c  is  the  rate  of  heating  or  cooling  and  I  is  the  current.  The 
Peltier effect is undesirable for thermoelectric generation since it causes 
an increased transport of heat from the hot side to the cold side; thus, 
decreasing the temperature gradient. An additional effect that must be 
considered for thermoelectric generators is the Thomson effect (defined 
as the heating or cooling of a current-carrying material when subjected 
to a temperature difference). In device modeling, this effect is regarded 
as  minor  compared  to  the  Joule  effect  (discussed  next)  and  is  often 
neglected. Here, some authors [26,27] have shown that it does not alter 
the  internal  resistance,  but  can  reduce  the  thermoelectric  generator 
power output by hindering the voltage output. 

The Joule effect correlates heat and electrical energy as follows: 

QJ = I2⋅Rcond

(3)  

where Rcond is the conductor resistance, while QJ is heat released along 
the length of a conductor when electric current flows through it. The 
Joule  effect  is  independent  of  the  current  flow  direction,  which  is 
thermodynamically irreversible and accounted for as a heat loss [26,27]. 
The  Seebeck,  Peltier,  and  Thomson  (τ)  coefficients  are  connected 
through the Kelvin relationships: 

πP = α⋅Tjunction

τ = T⋅

dα
dT

(4)  

(5)  

where Tjunction  is the temperature of the junction and T  is the average 
temperature of the material. Consequently, the amount of heat trans-
ferred due to the Peltier effect is: 

Qh/c = α⋅I⋅Tjunction

(6) 

In  general,  three  scenarios  exist  for  operation  of  a  TEG  system: 
constant heat, “dynamic” heat and constant temperature. The constant 
temperature  scenario  requires  maintaining  steady  temperature  values 
for the hot and cold side. This is accomplished by varying the amount of 
energy input by heat with respect to changes in electrical load. One way 
of achieving this situation is by employing phase-change materials (see 
Section  7.2)  that  can  release  the  stored  heat  at  variable  rates  corre-
sponding to the electrical and thermal operating conditions. The con-
stant heat scenario is usually found in waste heat applications, where 
there is a uniform amount of energy input by heat, while the tempera-
tures of the hot and cold side can vary depending on parasitic effects 
driven by the load current. Finally, the “dynamic” heat scenario varies 
the  amount  of  energy  input  by  heat  in  a  timeframe  shorter  than  the 
thermal time constant (i.e., response) of the TEG system. For automotive 
applications all these scenarios are possible. For example, exhaust gas 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010093N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

waste  heat  recovery  is  typically  of  the  type  “dynamic”  heat,  whereas 
radiator waste heat recovery is often the constant heat variety. 

3. Efficiency 

3.1. General considerations 

The  primary  parameter  used  to  describe  the  potential  of  thermo-

electric devices is the figure of merit (Z) [8]: 

Z =

(

(cid:0)

)2

αp (cid:0) αn
√

+

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
κp⋅ρp

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
κn⋅ρn

)2

(7)  

where  ρ  is  the  electrical  resistivity  and  κ  is  the  thermal  conductivity 
which consists of two parts: lattice thermal conductivity (κL) and elec-
tronic thermal conductivity (κe) [28]. The subscripts p and n indicate the 
corresponding  two materials  of  the  thermocouple  (p-type and  n-type, 
respectively). To characterize the material thermoelectric performance, 
the dimensionless figure of merit (zT) is used. For simplification, it is 
often  assumed  that  ZT  (device  figure  of  merit  -  see  Eq.  (7))  and  zT 
(material figure of merit) are equal [29]; thus, leading to: 

ZT =

α2σ
κ

T =

α2
ρκ

T

(8)  

where T = (Thot +Tcold)/2 and σ is the electrical conductivity (σ = 1/ρ). 
The efficiency of a thermoelectric module operating as a generator 
[8] is defined as the ratio of the electrical energy output (Welectric) to the 
thermal energy supplied to the hot side (Qhot): 

ηTEM,generator =

Welectric
Qhot

=

Thot (cid:0) Tcold
Thot

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 + ZT
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 + ZT

√
⋅

(cid:0) 1
+ Tcold
Thot

(9) 

As  an  example,  the  variation  of  thermal  efficiency  for  a  thermo-
electric generator installed on the exhaust pipe or exhaust gas recircu-
lation  cooler  when  the  cold  side  is  cooled  with  engine  coolant  (the 
coolant average temperature is considered to be 353.15 K [30]) is pre-
sented in Fig. 1, where C is the Carnot efficiency and 0.5, 1, 2, and 5 are 
example ZT values. Depending on engine load, the temperature differ-
ence can reach values as high as 650 K [31,32]. In such cases the effi-
ciency would range between 9.2% for a ZT of 0.5 and 33.5% for a ZT of 
5. It is important to note here that the current (market) state of the art ZT 
for thermoelectric materials is less than 2 [33]. However, limiting the 
discussion to a value of 2 will mitigate the importance and potential of 
research  in  this  field  [33].  Previous  research  [28,34–36],  as  well  as 
ongoing research projects, like the Horizon 2020 project UncorrelaTEd 
[37] showed that it is possible to decouple the Seebeck coefficient and 

the electrical conductivity, thus allowing for an increase in the power 
factor by a factor of 4 or more [38]. Consequently, the limit of 5 pre-
sented in Fig. 1 was chosen to highlight the importance of developing 
high performance thermoelectric generators, considering the high en-
ergy  efficiency  that  can  be  achieved  in  these  conditions.  Currently, 
commercially  available,  and  widely  used  thermoelectric  modules  use 
bismuth  telluride  (Bi2Te3)  that  have  a  ZT  of  approximately  1,  subse-
quently  leading  to  a  conversion  efficiency  of  ~2–10%  (based  on  the 
scenarios presented prior and the references presented in Tables 6 and 7 
in Section 10). Some researchers estimate that reaching a ZT value of 2 
can lead to an approximately 9–10% improvement in fuel consumption 
[39]. 

As indicated, to be useful in thermoelectric applications for internal 
combustion engine waste heat recovery, a material should have a large 
ZT value. Considering Eqn. (8), this means the material must have a high 
power factor α2σ and a low thermal conductivity. Here, the power factor 
characterizes the heat to electricity conversion of the charge carriers. 
Maximizing  these  characteristics  is  a  difficult  task  since  it  involves  a 
compromise  between  parameters  that  are  interdependent  (although 
there are studies [28,34–36,38] which have shown that it is possible to 
overcome  these  barriers):  i.e.,  Seebeck  coefficient,  electrical  conduc-
tivity (or electrical resistivity), and thermal conductivity (see Eqs. (4) 
and (5)). The low thermal conductivity requirement also conflicts with 
the heat flux requirements and ultimately with the power output of the 
system [40], which represents a percentage of the heat flux through the 
thermoelectric devices. As a result, decreasing the thermal conductivity 
of the thermoelectric material to increase the ZT negatively impacts the 
heat flux through the devices, thus limiting the amount of power it can 
produce. Subsequently, to recover this power, more thermoelectric de-
vices are required resulting in an increase in the overall size and weight 
of the system that can be detrimental to fuel economy of the vehicle. 

To  determine  overall  TEG  system  efficiency,  more  factors  beyond 
just the specific thermoelectric module efficiency have to be included 
(see Eqs. (1) and (2) from [4]). This includes the efficiency of the hot 
(ηHX,hot) and cold side (ηHX,cold) heat exchangers (HX), needed for auto-
motive waste heat recovery applications, along with the efficiency of the 
electrical converter and its ability to optimize the electrical load (not 
included here) [41]: 

ηTEG,system = ηhot HXηTEMηcold HX

(10) 

It must be noted that, generally, heat exchangers are evaluated ac-
cording to their effectiveness, but Fakheri has showed in his work [42] 
that, if the effectiveness is known, it is possible to determine a corre-
sponding  heat  exchanger  efficiency.  Furthermore,  contact  resistances 
between the heat exchangers and the thermoelectric module (accounted 
for by the coefficients ζhot HX-TEM,contact loss, ζTEM-cold HX,contact loss) must be 
added (to Eq. (10)) along with the additional heat losses from the side 

Fig. 1. Theoretical variation of ηTEG for different ZT values when Tcold = 353.15[K] (specific to exhaust gas thermoelectric generators with coolant cooling) – heat 
exchanger efficiency and other practical losses are neglected. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010094N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

surfaces of both the heat exchangers and the thermoelectric module legs 
(accounted for by the coefficients ζhot  HX,side and ζTEM,side): 

ηTEG,system = ζhot HX,side⋅ηhot HX⋅ζhot HX(cid:0) TEM,contact⋅ζTEM,side⋅ηTEM⋅

ζTEM(cid:0) cold HC,contact⋅ηcold HX

(11) 

If the heat exchanger on the cold side is operating at temperatures 
above the ambient, heat losses to the ambient could improve the tem-
perature gradient and heat flux through the thermoelectric device; thus, 
improving its efficiency. 

3.2. Analysis of efficiency 

As described in the previous section, the findings illustrate that there 
are significant differences in the presentation of the underlying equa-
tions  for  thermoelectric  generation.  Furthermore,  the  analysis  also 
highlighted numerous situations where it was not clear how the equa-
tions were obtained. In both cases, it is possible to cause confusion and/ 
or the arrival of the reader at erroneous conclusions (this is also valid for 
Sections 5 and 9). With respect to the efficiency of thermoelectric de-
vices, research and innovation should be focused on the identification of 
new solutions, technologies and materials that can further improve the 
figure of merit to reach a value of at least 5, although even a lower value 
might  suffice  for  internal  combustion  engine  waste  heat recovery  ap-
plications. By doing so, the efficiency of the devices will be significantly 
increased, thus making them more attractive for vehicle manufacturers, 
especially for heavy-duty vehicles used in road transport. Achieving this 
target  requires  solutions  to  break  the  correlation  between  the  three 
factors  influencing  ZT:  Seebeck  coefficient,  electrical  resistivity,  and 
thermal conductivity. 

4. Thermoelectric modules design 

4.1. Materials 

When it comes to thermoelectric materials, the main challenges for 
researchers and manufacturers alike are: growth of material operating 
range to work at higher temperature differences, improvement of ZT, 
and/or development of low-cost materials to counteract the effects of 
low efficiency [8]. Other technological challenges involving the use of 
thermoelectric  generators  for  high  temperature  operation  (not  only 
automotive),  like the diffusion of atoms at the boundary of the semi-
conductor  and  the  metal,  control  of  the  mechanical  stress,  etc.,  are 
presented  by  Yazawa  and  Shakouri  [43].  Note  that  there  are  several 
literature  reviews  regarding  thermoelectric  materials  that  deliver 
excellent classifications, thermoelectric properties, and material struc-
tures  [3,19,33,44];  hence,  their  comprehensive  presentations  are  not 
presented in this effort. 

According to Zheng et al. [19], there has been no significant break-
through in developing commercially available materials with high ZT 
values that are capable of replacing Bi2Te3  or other materials that are 
currently in use. The main causes identified are:  

• Tested materials have been manufactured in form factors specific to 
some type of specialized testing equipment, thus limiting testing;  
• Testing of thin film (1–10 μm) samples may require a difficult and 
time-consuming correction of end values to account for surface dis-
locations, substrate interactions or even stress-induced effects;  

• Test errors and/or the use of inadequate equipment;  
• Measuring individual properties at large time intervals. Since these 
can vary in time and/or due to exposure to the test conditions, the 
resulting ZT value may be incorrect; 

• Measuring just two of the properties, with the third being extrapo-
lated or chosen from literature, which can also lead to incorrect ZT 
values. 

Although peak ZT values of common thermoelectric materials vary in 
the range of 1–2.6 (Fig. 2 - top), one must be aware that these values are 
also a function of temperature. Typically, values provided in the liter-
ature are mainly the peak values but their change with temperature is 
equally important to consider (Fig. 2 - bottom) [3] since in many ap-
plications, like internal combustion engine exhaust waste heat recovery, 
the  temperature  of  the  heat  source  varies  over  a  wide  range.  With 
respect to automotive applications, primary material requirements are: 
large ZT values, high reliability, low producing cost, high availability, 
low environmental impact, and large-scale manufacturing capabilities 
[45]. 

4.1.1. Thermomechanical properties 

Mechanical  properties  of  thermoelectric  materials  are  essential  to 
consider  along  with  their  thermoelectric  properties.  Overall,  to  resist 
different  external  forces  (bending,  shaking,  compression,  etc.)  and 
ensure long-term reliability of thermoelectric materials, a high elastic 
modulus is required [46]. Generally, thermoelectric generator modules 
used in automotive applications for waste heat recovery have to resist 
over  10,000  thermal  cycles  (i.e.,  variable  thermal  gradients  from  the 
cold start and the hot stop of the engine, temperature variations caused 
by  the  variable  engine  load) along  with  withstanding the  mechanical 
vibration  and  shocks  generated  by  the  internal  combustion  engine, 
moving parts of the transmission, and unevenness of the road surface [4, 
47,48]. Since most thermoelectric materials are brittle, fracture strength 
(σf) is  crucial to  evaluate mechanical failure. Other mechanical  prop-
erties,  such  as  Young’s  modulus  (E),  hardness  (HV),  toughness  (KC), 
Poisson’s ratio (ν), thermal shock resistance (Rth,shock), and coefficient of 
thermal expansion (αth,exp) are required for optimal design of thermo-
electric modules [22,47]. 

4.1.2. Cost 

◦

◦

LeBlanc et al. [49] generated a comprehensive analysis of the ma-
terial, manufacturing, and system costs for 30 thermoelectric materials 
with respect to the conversion efficiency. The authors estimated the cost 
of  power  generation  in  $/W  by  considering  material,  manufacturing, 
and heat exchanger costs for five scenarios involving different temper-
atures (thermoelectric cooling –  T  = 10 
C, low temperature heat re-
◦
C, solar thermal generator – T = 135 
covery – T = 60 
C, automotive 
◦
◦
exhaust – T = 275 
C, and industrial furnace heat recovery – T = 425 
C). 
Furthermore,  an  appropriate  device  geometry  is  determined  with 
respect  to  cost  and  performance.  Note  that  the  dominant  design  pa-
rameters  consider  the  ratio  of  the  total  area  covered  by  the  active 
thermoelectric material to the plate area, designated as the fill factor (F) 
and the leg length (L), respectively. Since there is a trade-off between 
material volume and power output, it can be concluded that an optimum 
geometry can be determined for minimum costs and maximum power 
output. The results for each of the scenarios involving power generation 
are presented in Table 1. Specific discussion involving the advantages 
and disadvantages of the materials provided in Table 1 can be found in 
the works of Yang et al. [33], Liu et al. [50], and Wei et al. [51]. 
In  a  different  study,  Ouyang  and  Li  [52]  analyzed 
the 
cost-performance ratio and the corresponding power output density and 
efficiency  of  multiple  materials  (with  operating  temperatures  in  the 
range  300–1000  K)  from  the  following  categories:  skutterudites, 
half-Heusler,  SiGe  alloy,  and  chalcogenides.  The  authors  modeled 
various segmented thermoelectric generators by considering tempera-
ture  dependent  material  properties,  as  well  as  electrical  and  thermal 
contact resistances for every interface between thermoelectric elements 
and between the thermoelectric element and the electrode. They arrived 
at the conclusion that thermoelectric materials exhibiting high power 
factors (e.g., half-Heuslers and Yb filled skutterudites) are preferable for 
applications where the cost is not a major concern. However, if there are 
cost  limitations,  the  use  of  segmented  thermoelectric  generators  that 
include  thermoelectric  materials  with  a  high  ZT  can  lead  to  a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010095N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 2. Peak ZT values (top – adapted from [33]) and comparison of state of the art ZT (bottom) in 2008 (marked with dashed lines (p-type) and dotted lines (n-type) – 
adapted from [29]) and 2017 (marked with continuous lines – adapted from [33]). 

Table 1. 
Cost of different thermoelectric generators with respect to material, manufacturing type and mean temperature [49].  

Mean temperature [

◦

C] 

Materials with lowest cost 

Manufacturing type 

Scenario 

Low temperature 

Medium-Low temperature 

Medium-High temperature 

60 

135 

275 

High temperature 

425 

Bi2Te3 
Bi0.52Sb1.48Te3 
Bi0.52Sb1.48Te3 
Bi0.52Sb1.48Te3 
Bi0.52Sb1.48Te3 
AgPb18SbTe20 
(Na0.0283Pb0.945Te0.9733) 
(Ag1.11Te0.555) 
AgPb18SbTe20 
Yb0.2In0.2Co4Sb12 
Zr0.25Hf0.25Ti0.5NiSn0.994Sb0.006 
(Na0.0283Pb0.945Te0.9733) 
(Ag1.11Te0.555) 
AgPb18SbTe20 
Mg2Si0.6Sn0.4 
Zr0.25Hf0.25Ti0.5NiSn0.994Sb0.006 

Bulk 
Bulk 
Nanobulk 
Bulk 
Nanobulk 
Bulk 
Nanobulk 
Bulk 
Bulk 
Bulk 

Nanobulk 
Bulk 
Bulk 
Bulk 

Cost 

< 100$/W 

< 20$/W 

< 6$/W 

< 6$/W  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010096N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

cost-performance  ratio  of  approximately  0.86  $/W,  an  efficiency  of 
17.8%, and a power density of 3.0 W/cm2. This makes them a possible 
solution  for  internal  combustion  engine  exhaust  gas  thermoelectric 
generators. 

To estimate the power generation cost (G) on a $/W basis, the LeB-

lanc et al. [49] applied the same equation as Yee et al. [53]: 

G =

C
Pel

=

4
α2σ(Thot (cid:0) Tcold)2

(m + 1)2
m

[
(cid:0)

CM,B + CB

)

ρmatL2 +

(cid:0)

)
L +

CM,A

]

CHXhT L
F

(12)  

where C is the overall cost in $, Pel  the output power in W, and m =
RLoad/RTEG. Here, CB is the cost associated with the bulk material, CM,B 
the  manufacturing  cost  associated  with  processing  the  bulk  material 
while ρmat is the density of the active material. The sum of CM,B and CB is 
designated as volumetric cost. CM,A represents the cost that scales with 
the area of the module, or areal module costs. Finally, CHX is the cost of 
both heat exchangers and hT their overall heat transfer coefficient. 

Hendricks et al. [54] expanded on the works of Yee et al. [53] and 
LeBlanc  et  al.  [49]  by  removing  key  assumptions  and  constraints  to 
account for heat exchanger heat flux effects and differences in thermal 
characteristics  of  the  hot  and  cold  side  heat  exchangers.  This  was 
accomplished  while  invoking  the  cold  to  hot  side  heat  exchanger 
conductance ratio (≥10) developed in [55] to arrive at a more detailed 
cost equation:  

4.2. Design and manufacturing 

The material covered in Sections 2, 3, and 9 of this effort highlights 
that the typical metrics for thermoelectric generators are its figure of 
merit  (usually  reported  based  on  the  material  properties),  efficiency, 
and power output. However, a thermoelectric module is comprised of 
more than just the thermoelectric conversion material and, therefore, a 
device-level discussion is required. According to Liu and Bai [58], the 
final assembled module can be split with respect to the key materials 
involved: thermoelectric conversion materials (used for the conversion 
of thermal to electrical energy), thermoelectric interface materials (used 
for  ensuring  a  reliable  transport  of  heat  and  electricity  between  the 
electrode strip and the thermoelectric elements with a minimum loss of 
energy),  package  material  (used  to  prevent  the  evaporation  of  the 
thermoelectric  conversion  material  and/or  as  thermal  insulation), 
housing material (used to provide structural support as well as electrical 
insulation),  and  brazing  or  soldering  material.  This  leads  to  multiple 
challenges that must be overcome to ensure durability and the desired 
module  operating  performance  (e.g.,  the  stresses  that  an  automotive 
exhaust  gas  waste  heat  recovery  thermoelectric  generator  must  with-
stand as discussed in Section 4.1): the development of a corresponding 
contact  layer  with  respect  to  the  thermoelectric  material  (since  the 
thermomechanical stress at the semiconductor-metal interface is one of 
the main failure mechanism [59]), mitigating contact issues due to the 
mismatch of thermal expansion coefficients, appropriate packaging, etc. 
[60]. Considering these aspects, the manufacturing process that depends 
on the thermoelectric material employed becomes of particular impor-

G =

4
α2σ(Thot (cid:0) Tcold)2

(m + 1)2
m

[
1.1⋅κ⋅AHX,TE interface⋅F
KHX,hot

]2[

+ L

(cid:0)

CM,B + CB

)
ρmat +

CM,A
L

+

CHXUAHX
AHX,TE interfaceL⋅F

]

(13)   

where  AHX,TE_interface  is  the  interface  area  between  the  heat  exchanger 
and  the  thermoelectric  element,  UAHX  the  UA  value  of  the  heat 
exchanger,  and  KHX,hot  the  thermal  conductance  of  the  hot  side  heat 
exchanger.  Using  this  equation,  Hendrix  [56]  established  the  de-
pendency  of  the  optimum  cost  and  fill  factor  on  heat  exchanger  per-
formance and heat exchanger flux. They concluded that, for the overall 
TEG  system  cost  to  drop  below  3$/W,  heat  exchanger  costs  must  be 
lower  than  1$/(W/K)  in  comparison  to  thermoelectric  material  and 
manufacturing  costs.  Other  efforts  by  Anderson  and  Brandon  [57] 
concluded  that  it  is  unlikely  that  a  reduction  in  material  cost  will 
contribute to a significant reduction in the overall cost, due to the high 
costs associated with module manufacturing (also supported by [19]). 
Finally,  Hendricks  et  al.  [54]  determined  for  internal  combustion 
engine exhaust gas TEG systems that the costs are usually determined 
by:  

• exhaust gas temperature,  
• ratio of the cold side to the hot side junction temperature,  
• ZT  of the thermoelectric module (mainly the thermal conductivity 

and separately the module power factor),  

• hot side thermal conductance and the ratio of the cold side to hot side 

thermal conductance,  

• heat exchanger cost factor expressed in $/(W/K), and  
• parasitic thermal losses. 

Reviewing  the  literature  presented  in  this  section  finds  efforts 
regarding a system cost analysis for thermoelectric generators installed 
on the exhaust gas recirculation system or on the radiator with both as 
possible heat sources (see Section 6). 

tance.  For  bulk  materials,  the  traditional  manufacturing  process  in-
volves the following steps [61,62]:  

• Ball milling powders of the constituent elements followed by mixing,  
• Hot pressing or spark plasma sintering of the thermoelectric material 

into ingots,  

• Dicing of the ingots to form thermoelectric elements (legs) – for this 
step, the material brittleness is of great concern because any chipping 
or cracking of the thermoelectric element influences its thermal and 
electrical resistance [61],  

• Metallization,  
• thermoelectric element dicing,  
• Brazing or soldering of electrode strips and thermoelectric elements, 

and  

• Module assembly. 

Regarding thermoelectric module design, Glatz et al. [63] suggested 
that there are three approaches, depending on the heat flow through the 
device and the layout of the thermocouples: 

(a) Planar design –  lateral heat flow with laterally fabricated ther-
mocouples have the advantage of flexibility in terms of thermo-
couple  thickness  and  length  (an  increased  length  increases  the 
thermal resistance and consequently the temperature gradient), 
as well as suitability for thin film deposition [64],  

(b)  Vertical  design  –  vertical  heat  flow  with  vertically  fabricated 
thermocouples  are  the  most  commercialized  type  due  to  their 
simplicity,  high  thermocouple  integration,  and  high  output 
voltage [64], and  

(c)  Mixed  design  –  vertical  heat  flow  with  laterally  fabricated 

thermocouples. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010097N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

A more thorough presentation of thermoelectric modules design and 
manufacturing can be found in the effort of He et al. [60], where the 
authors discuss the following architectures: flat bulk, cylindrical bulk, 
thin- and thick-film, as well as flexible. Additionally, their effort covers 
thermoelectric generators used in wearable applications, thermoelectric 
generators with hot side pn junctions, as well as devices with orthogonal 
heat and electrical current flux directions. 

Further  details  concerning  the  manufacturing  process,  both  tradi-
tional  and  alternative,  can  be  found  in  the  works  of  LeBlanc  [61], 
El-Desouky et al. [62], Jaziri et al. [64], and Du et al. [65]. With respect 
to device-level challenges, the efforts of He et al. [60], Liu and Bai [58], 
and  Aswal  et  al.  [66]  provide  thorough  analyses.  Finally,  Araiz  [67] 
discusses  synergistic  efforts  regarding  the  assembly  of  thermoelectric 
generators and how it can impact their performance. 

4.3. Commercially available thermoelectric generators 

A selection based on operating temperature and output of commer-
cially  available  thermoelectric  modules  is  presented  in  Table  2  to 

Table 2. 
Selection of commercially available thermoelectric modules.  

provide an understanding of current TEM technology. For each manu-
facturer, only thermoelectric modules with a power output greater than 
8 W were included. The price evaluation was done considering 50 $ a 
respectively medium price level. 

4.4. Multistage and functionally graded thermoelectric generators 

4.4.1. Segmented thermoelectric generators 

The strong correlation between the figure of merit and temperature 
limits  the  thermal  stability  of  thermoelectric  generators  to  a  narrow 
temperature range and ultimately its use in internal combustion engine 
exhaust waste heat recovery applications considering that the exhaust 
gas temperature depends on the operating conditions (e.g., city traffic 
versus highway travelling). A possible solution to this issue is to use a 
series  of  segments  (layers)  made  of  different  types  of  thermoelectric 
materials that work in narrower temperature ranges [78]. When these 
segments are in thermal and electric contact, they form a segmented leg 
(aka segmented thermoelectric generator or STEG [79]) that is able to 
work  with  a  larger  thermal  gradient,  subsequently  producing  greater 

Manufacturer 

Designation 

Material 

No. 
of 
TCs 

Size (width x 
length x 
height) [mm 
x mm x mm] 

Continuous / 
max power 
[W] 

Tc / Th for 
continuous 
power [
C] 

◦

Maximum 
allowable 
temperature 
◦
[

C] 

Efficiency at Th- 
Tc for 
continuous 
power [%] 

TEM 
Mass 
[g] 

Price 

Custom 

Thermoelectric  
[68] 
European 

Thermodynamics 
[69] 
European 

Thermodynamics 
[69] 
European 

Thermodynamics 
[69] 

Everredtronics 
Limited [70] 

1261G-7L31- 
24CX1 

GM250-241- 
10-12 

GM200-127- 
28-12 

GM250-127- 
28-10 

TEG126-60A 

Hi-Z Technology 

HZ 20 

Inc. [71] 

Hi-Z Technology 

HZ 14HV 

Inc. [71] 

Marlow Industries 

TG12-8-01 

Inc. [72] 

P&N Technology 
Co. Ltd. [73] 

TEGpro [74] 

TEGpro [74] 

TECTEG MFR [75] 

TECTEG MFR [75] 

TECTEG MFR [75] 

TECTEG MFR [75] 

TECTEG MFR [75] 

Thermonamic [76] 

TEG-127020- 
40 × 44-200 
TE-MOD- 
22W7V-56 

TGMT-19W- 
4V 

TEG1-12610- 
4.3 
TEG1-24111- 
6.0 
TEG1B- 
12610-5.1 
TEG1-12611- 
8.0 
TEG1-12611- 
6.0 
TELBP1- 
12656-0.45 

TXL Group [77] 

TXL-199-02Q 

(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se)3 
N/A 

126 

56 × 56 × 5 

19.1 

25/320 

320 

N/A 

40 × 40 × 3.4 

9.32 

30/250 

250 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

62.5 × 62.5 
× 4 

62.5 × 62.5 
× 4 

15.6 

30/200 

200 

28.3 

30/250 

250 

N/A 

56.5 × 56.5 

14.6 

30/300 

400 

71 

126 

N/A 

74.68 ×
74.68 

61.05 ×
71.05 × 7.87 

40.13 ×
44.70 × 3.76 
40 × 44 × 3.3 

N/A 

56.5 × 56.5 
× 5 

20 / 36 

50/250 

350 

17 / 25 

50/250 

350 

7.95 

8.5 

21.6 

50/200 

30/200 

30/330 

230 

250 

400 

N/A 

56 × 56 × 5 

19.3 

30/330 

400 

N/A 

127 

126 

40 × 40 × 4.3 

5.2 

Bi,2Te3 

241 

56 × 56 × 6.0 

17.6 

Bi,2Te3 

126 

40 × 40 × 5.1 

7.1 

Bi,2Te3 

126 

56 × 56 × 8.0 

13 

Bi,2Te3 

126 

56 × 56 × 6.0 

14.7 

N/A 

56.5 × 56.5 

21.7 

30/300 

30/300 

30/300 

30/300 

30/300 

30/350 

320 

320 

320 

320 

320 

400 

(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se)3 
(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se)3 
(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se)3 
N/A 

(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se)3 
(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se)3 
Bi,2Te3 

(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se) 
(Bi, 
Sb)2(Te, 
Se) 

199 

40 × 40 × 4.4 

N/A 

30/200 

200 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

~ 4 

~ 5 

~ 3 

~ 5 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

60 

high 

N/A 

high 

N/A 

medium 

N/A 

high 

N/A 

N/A 

102 

medium 

66 

low 

N/A 

low 

23 

medium 

N/A 

medium 

N/A 

medium 

N/A 

low 

N/A 

medium 

N/A 

low 

N/A 

high 

N/A 

medium 

N/A 

N/A 

21 

low  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010098N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 3. A typical segmented thermoelectric generator.  

power as compared to an unsegmented thermoelectric generator under 
the  same  thermal  condition  [78].  A  typical  example  of  a  segmented 
thermoelectric generator is shown in Fig. 3. Generally, in the case of a 
segmented thermoelectric generator, the pairs of two p and n legs consist 
of two or more segments made of different types of thermoelectric ma-
the 
terials.  For 
medium-temperature segment and combined with bismuth telluride for 
the  low-temperature  segment  [80].  However,  to  obtain  the  highest 
possible efficiency of segmented thermoelectric generators by ensuring 
the  proper  temperature  range  for  each  segment,  it  is  necessary  to 

can  be  used 

skutterudite 

example, 

for 

consider the operating conditions of the internal combustion engine and 
its  application  (e.g.,  a  truck  travelling  at  constant  speed  on  the 
highway). 

For  a  segmented  thermoelectric  generator,  the  length  ratio  of  the 
different  segments  that  form  the  legs  can  affect  its  performance. 
Consequently,  to  achieve  enhanced  performance,  differentiated  seg-
mentation of the p-leg and n-leg is needed because of their respectively 
dissimilar  thermal  conductivity  values.  Generally,  the  parts  of  a 
segmented thermoelectric generator are connected both thermally and 
electrically  in  series.  Subsequently,  the  same  current and  comparable 

Fig. 4. Method to mitigate the compatibility conflict in the direction of flow.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)1010099N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

conduction  of heat  flows through  each  segment  [81].  When  the opti-
mum power output of the individual segments forming the segmented 
thermoelectric  generator  appears  at  different  current  densities,  a 
compatibility issue occurs. In the case of severe incompatibility, certain 
segments can actually deliver negative power output at a current that is 
optimal  for  other  segments  [82].  To  avoid  this  problem,  Snyder  and 
Ursell [81] introduced a compatibility factor (Eq. (14)) as the value of 
the relative current density u ( = J
κ∇T) where the thermoelectric gener-
ator reaches its highest performance: 

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 + ZT
αT

(cid:0) 1

s =

(14) 

If  the  compatibility  factors  differ  by  a  factor  of  2  or  more,  the 
maximum efficiency of the segmented thermoelectric generator might 
decrease [81]. 

To mitigate this compatibility issue, Crane and Bell [82] recommend 
to vary the aspect ratio of individual segments by keeping their cross 
sections constant and varying their length until the value of the current 
matches  the  value  for  the  best  power  output  (Fig.  4).  This  way,  the 
temperature difference for each segment can be set to a near-optimum. 

4.4.2. Cascaded thermoelectric generators 

Another potential solution to the energy conversion efficiency-heat 
source temperature issue is to use several independent thermoelectric 
modules installed in two or three cascade stages (Fig. 5). This design has 
the benefit of a respectively simple structure and easier manufacturing. 
Furthermore, it is recommended for high temperature heat sources like 
the exhaust gas of internal combustion engines. 

Each stage is made of thermoelectric modules adapted to the input 
temperature.  The  main  challenge  in  manufacturing  cascade  thermo-
electric generators is the appropriate choice of thermoelectric modules 
(usually made of different materials) since their combination affects the 
overall energy conversion efficiency [83]. In this area, Zhang et al. [83] 
analyzed two- and three-stage cascaded thermoelectric generators. For 
the first stage (the low temperature stage), the authors used Bi2(Se,Te)3 
and (Bi,Sb)2Te3  at a working temperature of 523 K. The second stage 
(the  mid-temperature  stage)  materials  were  NaxCo2O4  and  SLTO  that 
worked with a relatively hot side temperature of 825 K. For the third 
stage (the high temperature stage), the authors chose TiO1.1 and ZnAlO 
as  suitable  materials  for  temperatures  as  high  as  1223  K.  For  the 
two-stage thermoelectric generator, the efficiency was 13.2%; whereas, 
for the three-stage thermoelectric generator it increased to 13.5%. Since 
there is only a small difference between the two, they state it is prefer-
able to use the two-stage design due to lower costs and a simpler build. 

4.5. Analysis of thermoelectric modules design 

Analyzing the findings described in the previous section, it can be 
concluded that materials are the basis for increasing thermal to electrical 
energy  conversion  efficiency,  but  one  must  also  consider  the  device- 
level  integration.  Improvements  in  this  area  can  also  increase  the 
number  of  potential  applications  for  thermoelectric  devices.  Conse-
quently, it is necessary to continue researching new materials, technical 
and  manufacturing  solutions  that  will  allow  improving  efficiency, 
reducing  the  costs  and  the  specific  weight,  while  also  eliminating 
polluting solutions that are currently used (like thermoelectric modules 
using lead). Additionally, considering the added cost of the system and 

Fig. 5. Cascaded thermoelectric generator design.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100910N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

therefore the long periods for recovering of the investment, the use of 
thermoelectric generators for vehicle waste heat recovery requires the 
evaluation of the mechanical and thermal stress in specific conditions of 
vehicle operation for a better assessment of the thermoelectric generator 
durability and maintenance requirements. Multistage and functionally 
graded  thermoelectric  generators  have  proven  to  provide  superior 
conversion  efficiency,  but  they  also  require  additional  optimization 
effort and have higher costs. Therefore, research should focus on a new 
design approach that combines the benefits of segmented and cascaded 
segmented thermoelectric generators for a further increase in efficiency 
while  ensuring  the  optimal  temperature  operating  range  for  each 
component. 

5. Electrical and thermal characterization of thermoelectric 
generators 

5.1. Electrical characterization of thermoelectric generators 

For  a  constant  temperature  gradient  across  the  thermoelectric 
module, at steady state, there is an almost linear relationship between 
electrical  parameters.  This  allows  for  an  electrical  circuit  analog 
modeling of the thermoelectric module as a series connection between a 
Direct Current (DC) source and an internal resistance (see Fig. 6). It must 
be noted that the internal resistance (RTEG) and the voltage of a ther-
moelectric  generator  depend  on  the  temperature  gradient  and  the 
average  temperature.  More  specifically,  for  a  given  temperature 
gradient, T should be as low as possible to minimize the influence on the 
internal resistance and consequently, on the voltage and power output 
[84]. When connecting a load (Fig. 6) the current passing through the 
circuit and the output will be: 

ILoad =

VOC
RTEM + RLoad

=

α⋅ΔT
RTEM + RLoad

(15)  

where VLoad is the load voltage. Finally, the power of the load (PLoad) is: 

PLoad = VLoad⋅ILoad = RLoad⋅I2

Load = RLoad

)2

(

α⋅ΔT
RTEM + RLoad

(16) 

Often, thermoelectric generators used in automotive exhaust waste 
heat recovery  applications  are made of  many thermoelectric modules 
(Fig. 6 – right) to increase the output. However, since the temperature 
gradient across the thermoelectric generators (Fig. 7) is often not uni-
form [86,87], this can cause circulating currents in the array of ther-
moelectric modules that decreases system efficiency. 

5.2. Thermal characterization of thermoelectric generators 

The heat flow through the thermoelectric generator device is gov-
erned  by  its  electrical  and  thermal  conductivity.  To  maintain  a  tem-
perature gradient across the module, the thermal conductivity must be 
respectively  low  [88];  however,  this  conflicts  with  heat  flux  re-
quirements. As mentioned in Section 3, a low thermal conductivity de-
creases  the  heat flux through  the devices  and  limits its  power output 
[40]. In the case of a system with a minimum required power output, 
this  can  increase  the  number  of  thermoelectric  modules  and  conse-
quently  the  total  weight,  which,  for  automotive  waste  heat  recovery 
applications  would  reduce  the  net  output  of  the  system.  In  addition, 
electrical conductivity influences the temperature gradient by means of 
the  Joule  effect  (see  Section  2,  Eq.  (3)).  To  minimize  this  influence, 
electrical  conductivity  should  be  as  high  as  possible.  Neglecting  the 
spreading  thermal  resistance  and  contraction  thermal  resistance  be-
tween the thermoelectric modules and the heat exchangers, as well as 
the fin efficiency, Fig. 8 shows the equivalent thermal circuit of a ther-
moelectric  generator  installed  on  the  exhaust  system  of  an  internal 
combustion  engine,  which  consists  of  a  hot  side  heat  exchanger,  a 
thermoelectric  module,  and  a  cold  side  heat  exchanger  with  coolant 
cooling. 

If a load is connected to the module, the Thomson effect and the heat 
transferred  from  the  hot  side  to  the  cold  side  around  the  legs  are 
considered negligible; however, the Peltier (Eq. (6)) and Joule (Eq. (3)) 
effects cannot be neglected. Hence, the amounts of energy transferred by 
heat at the two junctions are: 

QTEM, hot = KTEM⋅(Thot (cid:0) Tcold) + αIThot (cid:0)

(cid:0)
1
I2RTEM = KHX,hot⋅
2

Thot,source (cid:0) Thot

)

QTEM, cold = KTEM⋅(Thot (cid:0) Tcold) + αITcold +
(cid:0)
= KHX,cold⋅

Tcold (cid:0) Tcold,sink

)

1
I2RTEM
2

(17)  

(18)  

where  KTEM  is  the  thermoelectric  module  conductance,  while  KHX,  hot 
and KHX, cold designate the thermal conductance of the hot side and cold 
side heat exchangers, respectively. 

5.3. Analysis of electrical and thermal characterization 

The complexity and multitude of physical parameters that govern the 
operating  efficiency  of  thermoelectric  generators  requires  a  thorough 
understanding of the interactions between their thermal and electrical 

Fig. 6. Equivalent electric circuit of a thermoelectric module (left) and generalized structure of thermoelectric generators (right) (adapted from [85]).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100911N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 7. Differences in temperature gradient across different modules of a thermoelectric generator.  

Fig. 8. Equivalent thermal circuit of an automotive exhaust gas thermoelectric generator.  

characteristics  and  the  conflicting  requirements  for  achieving  high 
performance.  This  section  sought  to  present  these  aspects  with  an 
adequate  level  of  detail,  as  means  of  underlining  the  importance  of 
interdisciplinary  research  for  thermoelectric  generator  development. 
Possible research directions can arise from the primary parameter used 
to describe the potential of thermoelectric materials: the figure of merit. 
This links the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and thermal 
conductivity or, in other words, the electrical and thermal characteris-
tics.  Consequently,  to  overcome the  low  efficiency barrier  of  thermo-
electric  generators,  future  research  should  focus  on  decoupling  the 

Seebeck coefficient and the electrical conductivity to increase the power 
factor  without  negatively  influencing  thermal  characteristics.  With 
respect to the thermal conductivity, additional research is required to 
determine  the  optimum  compromise  between  a  large  temperature 
gradient across the thermoelectric generator and a high heat flux. 

6. Design considerations for automotive thermoelectric 
generators 

A  general  schematic  of  a  TEG  system  is  presented  in  Fig.  9  and 

Fig. 9. General schematic of a thermoelectric generator system.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100912N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

consists of the following [85]:  

• Conventional diesel taxi: 3€/W 

• Hot  side  heat  exchanger  –  used  to  extract  the  maximum  possible 
amount of heat from the heat source to ensure a high temperature on 
the hot side of the thermoelectric modules. 

• Thermoelectric  generator  –  the  material  and  number  of  thermo-
electric modules, as well as the size of the thermoelectric generator 
are  chosen  considering  the  operating  temperature  range  and 
required power output. 

• Cold side heat exchanger – used to reject heat to ensure a low tem-
perature on the cold side and, therefore, a significant temperature 
gradient across the module.  

• Power management system –  processes the electrical output of the 
thermoelectric generator and delivers the resulting electrical power 
at a suitable voltage level for the loads. Generally, it consists of a DC- 
DC converter and a control algorithm responsible for maximizing or 
stabilizing the electrical power delivered to the loads.  

• Energy storage device – usually a battery that must compensate for 
any mismatch between the load demand and the generated power. 

When considering the use of thermoelectric generators for waste heat 
regeneration from an internal combustion engine, one important ques-
tion  that  arises  is  whether  the  thermoelectric  generator  system  is 
compatible  with  the  original  design  of  the  heat  source  (i.e.,  exhaust 
system, exhaust gas recirculation, radiator, etc.) regarding the amount 
of heat that can be supplied to the thermoelectric generator, or does the 
latter have to be modified to allow for an optimum heat transfer to the 
thermoelectric  generator  [21].  Here,  a  suggested  TEG  system  design 
approach [8] is the following:  

• Research thermoelectric materials to achieve the highest possible ZT 
through  the  operating  temperature  range  of  the  thermoelectric 
generator, 

• Analyze heat exchanger designs and their coupling to the thermo-

electric modules,  

• Examine the possible connection modes (series / parallel / mixed) 
and the algorithm (maximum efficiency point tracking or maximum 
power  point  tracking)  employed  to  optimize  the  thermoelectric 
generator operating point and transfer maximum power to the load,  
• Complete  numerical  studies  to  optimize  the  thermoelectric 

generator. 

One  key  factor  in  this  process  is  acknowledging  the  fact  that,  in 
practical applications, the power generated by a specific module for a 
certain  temperature  gradient  may  differ  from  the  datasheet  specifica-
tions. One reason for this dissimilarity can be the testing method (i.e., 
the  lack  of  a  standard  testing  method  [89–91]).  Sometimes  testing  is 
done  under  vacuum  and,  in  this  case,  convection  losses  are  lower 
compared to testing in air; hence, the reported thermoelectric generator 
performance  is  higher.  Consequently,  it  is  recommended  to  test  one 
module using application specific conditions to determine any discrep-
ancies with the datasheet [85]. 

Another important factor is the specific cost per W of the TEG system 
(see Eqs. (12, 13)) and the rate of return. A series of studies performed by 
FIAT  and  Chrysler  as  part  of  the  HEATRECAR  (reduced  energy  con-
sumption by massive thermoelectric waste heat recovery in light-duty 
trucks) project [92] estimated a specific cost per W of electrical power 
of  approximately  8.4€/W  of  which  approximately  20%  is  the  cost  of 
Bi2Te3  and 73% the manufacturing cost. The same study underlined a 
maximum  accepted  cost  for  thermoelectric  generation  depending  on 
vehicle type:  

• Personal car or gasoline-hybrid taxi: 0.5€/W  
• Light-duty truck or freightliner in USA: 0.7€/W  
• Light-duty diesel truck or freightliner: 1.5€/W  

A more recent study performed by Heber and Schwab [93] showed 
that  at  peak  power  output  it  is  possible  to  achieve  a  cost  as  low  as 
1.2€/W but this is not always achieved during normal vehicle operation. 
The authors also highlighted that the thermoelectric modules currently 
available  on  the  market  cannot  be  used  to  achieve  an  amortization 
period  of  less  than  three  years.  In  another  study,  Kober  [94]  demon-
strated that it is possible to achieve both a high performance and low 
cost of the thermoelectric generator by applying a holistic approach that 
demands  a  highly integrated  thermoelectric  generator design,  consid-
eration of all system interactions, weight, and installation space, opti-
mization of the thermoelectric generator in driving cycles, as well as cost 
modelling. Using this method, he was able to achieve a cost-benefit ratio 
of  81.3€/(g/km)  (or  2.9  CO2  g/km)  for  a  conventional  vehicle  and 
54.8€/(g/km) (or 5.4 CO2  g/km) for a hybrid vehicle over the World 
Harmonized Light Vehicles Test Cycle (WLTC). 

Reviewing  the  literature  and  the  efforts  of  Schock  et  al.  [95]  and 
Zheng  et  al.  [19],  it  was  found  that  there  are  several  challenges  to 
overcome  before  thermoelectric  generators  can  become  viable  for 
automotive usage:  

• Developing  thermoelectric  materials  with  high  efficiencies  and  an 
appropriate cost to power ratio for the defined operating tempera-
ture ranges [52],  

• Ensuring an appropriate heat transfer on the hot side (Section 7) and 
an appropriate cooling solution (Section 8) with minimum parasitic 
losses [96,97] (see also Table 4), 

• Mitigating  engine/road  induced  vibrations  that  influence  thermo-

electric generator components [19],  

• Improving  robustness,  since  failure  of  a  single  coupling  leads  to 

failure of the entire module [60,95] (see also Fig. 9), and 

• Diminishing  interface  failures  from  mismatches  in  thermal  expan-

sion coefficients and/or poor bonding [95]. 

In  addition  to  these  general  challenges,  the  use  of  thermoelectric 
generators installed on the exhaust pipe, exhaust manifold [98], or the 
exhaust gas recirculation system of an internal combustion engine poses 
the following issues:  

◦
• Temperature of the exhaust gases can be as low as 90
◦
possibly exceeding 1000

C while also 
C (see Figs. 16 and 17 as well as Table 3),  
• Both the exhaust gas mass flow and temperature are influenced by 
load and speed, which are further influenced by the driving condi-
tions and/or style [19,93],  

• Gas temperature decreases along the exhaust pipe (see Fig. 7),  
• Exhaust pipes are usually annular (consequently, high compatibility 
and performance would require an annular thermoelectric generator 
[99]), and  

• Due  to  the  high  temperatures  involved,  thermoelectric  generators 

are prone to sublimation issues [19,95]. 

For radiator thermoelectric generators, the main additional issue is 
that  the  source  temperature  is  relatively  low  (80–100 
C  [30])  and 
consequently the temperature gradient is small. This leads to lower ef-
ficiencies as compared to thermoelectric generators using exhaust gas as 
energy source. 

◦

Another  critical  issue  of  thermoelectric  generators  for  automotive 
applications is its added weight that negatively impacts fuel consump-
tion. According to Rowe et al. [100], the power penalty is approximately 
12 W/kg, meaning that the power output of the TEG system must exceed 
this  value,  otherwise  it  will  lead  to  an  undesired  increase  in  fuel 
consumption. 

Considering the prior mentioned factors, TEG system development 

should focus on: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100913N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 3 
Maximum temperature slopes for different engines  

Engine / Fuel 

SI / Gasoline 
SI / Ethanol 
SI / CNG 
SI / LPG 
SI / H2 
CI / Diesel 
CI / Biodiesel 

Exhaust gas temperature at idle [

◦

C] 

◦
Exhaust gas temperature at high load [

C] 

Maximum temperature slope [

◦

C/s] 

90 
90 
90 
90 
90 
90 
90 

1000 [110] 
775 [111] 
900 [112] 
765 [113] 
450 [114] 
850 
600 [115] 

45.50 
34.25 
45.50 
33.75 
18.00 
38.00 
25.50  

• Stabilization and uniform distribution of temperature on the hot side 
to avoid fluctuations and overheating of the thermoelectric modules 
(see Section 7);  

• Appropriate  selection  of  thermoelectric  materials  with  respect  to 
operating  conditions  to  lower  costs  and  achieve  the  maximum 
possible  efficiency  (good  thermomechanical  properties,  environ-
mentally  friendly,  low  cost,  high  figure  of  merit,  investigation  of 
segmented  legs  and  cascaded  thermoelectric  generators,  etc.  –  see 
Section 4);  

• A  holistic  approach  for  the  thermoelectric  generator  optimization 
together  with  the  consideration of  all system  interactions,  weight, 
and installation space, optimization of the thermoelectric generator 
in driving cycles, as well as cost modelling [94],  

• Testing of the TEG system under the thermal and mechanical stresses 
caused  by  driving  conditions  with  the  aim  of  providing  optimum 
thermal conductivity and a long lifetime [19,93]; and  

• Lightweight thermoelectric generator development (see Section 6.2). 

6.1. Installation position and operating conditions 

For  automotive  applications,  several  factors  must  be  considered 

when choosing TEG system installation position: 

• Ensuring  the  maximum  possible  performance  of  the  system  (tem-

perature and mass flow rate must be considered) [19],  

• Space limitations (depending on the installation location) [19,93],  
• Design of  cooling system  (depending on  the type of cooling fluid) 

[101–103],  

• Avoiding  thermoelectric  generator  damage  from  exposure  to  high 

temperatures [95], and 

• Mitigating  the negative  effect of  the TEG system on  internal com-
bustion engine performance and aftertreatment devices (see Section 
6.2). 

There are several possible locations where the exhaust pipe appears 
to be the most attractive due to high temperatures (Figs. 10 and 11 – it 

must be noted that the temperature values presented in these figures are 
specific  to  compression  ignition  engines;  in  contrast,  the  temperature 
values encountered in the exhaust system of spark ignition engines are 
usually  higher)  and  mass  flow  rates.  However,  this  poses  some 
challenges:  

• The variable nature of vehicle internal combustion engine operation 
leads  to  unsteady  exhaust  gas  temperatures  and  mass  flow  rates. 
Consequently, the temperature on the hot side of the thermoelectric 
generator elements varies constantly. Two issues arise from this:  
○  Fluctuation of generated power – note: this can be addressed with 

the control algorithm (see Section 9),  

○  Under specific engine operating conditions, the temperature of the 
exhaust  gas  may  exceed  the  maximum  threshold  of  the  thermo-
electric generator, thus damaging it; this issue can be solved with a 
bypass (see references [104,105]), heat pipes (see Section 7.1), or 
phase change thermal storage (see Section 7.2).  

• Interference with the exhaust gas aftertreatment system (ATS). The 
use of thermoelectric  generators before the  exhaust gas  aftertreat-
ment  system  can  cause  a  significant  decrease  of  the  exhaust  gas 
temperature and hinder the operation of catalytic converters, par-
ticulate filters, etc. This can be avoided by either limiting the amount 
of extracted heat or by installing the thermoelectric generator after 
the exhaust gas aftertreatment system. 

A good overview of manufactured and tested exhaust gas thermo-
electric generator systems can be found in the efforts of Shen et al. [4] 
and Orr et al. [24]. It must be noted that there are studies which high-
lighted the benefits of using thermoelectric generators with an exhaust 
gas  aftertreatment  system.  For  example,  a  recent  study  performed  by 
Massaguer  et  al.  [106]  showed  that  it  is  possible  to  use  the  energy 
recovered  with  the  TEG  system  to  improve  the  performance  of  the 
exhaust gas aftertreatment system during cold starts events. A different 
study, performed by Wan et al. [107] illustrated that the thermoelectric 
generator, catalytic converter, and muffler could be combined to form a 
single unit with benefits in terms of temperature distribution uniformity, 
as well as weight. 

Fig. 10. Example of TEG installed on the exhaust pipe of a compression ignition engine – peak temperature values.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100914N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 11. Example of thermoelectric generator installed on the exhaust pipe of a compression ignition engine – mean temperature values.  

Approximately 30% of the energy rejected by the internal combus-
tion engine (Section 1) is lost through dissipation in the cooling circuits; 
hence,  other possible  waste recovery  locations exist.  Such a  potential 
location is the radiator, where the coolant containing the larger part of 
the  heat  rejected  through  the  cylinder  walls  is  cooled.  The  main 
advantage  is  that  there  is  no  need  for  an  additional  heat  exchanger. 
However, one must consider the lower temperatures of the coolant as 
compared to the exhaust gas. 

As one of the main means to reduce nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions, 
modern engines employ exhaust gas recirculation. In this case, a part of 
the  hot  exhaust  gases  (high  pressure  exhaust  gas  recirculation)  is 
directed back into the cylinder through an exterior pipe that connects 
the exhaust manifold with the intake pipe. Furthermore, to allow for an 
additional NOx reduction, cooling of these exhaust gases is employed by 
using an exhaust gas recirculation cooler. Since hot exhaust gases (with 
temperatures  on  the  order  of  600–850  K  [95])  pass  through  a  heat 
exchanger  (the  cold  side  is  ensured  by  the  coolant),  this  becomes  an 
attractive installation location for the thermoelectric generator. 

6.2. Thermoelectric generator systems installed on automotive internal 

Pnet = PTEG (cid:0) Pwt

loss (cid:0) PΔp loss (cid:0) Ppump loss (cid:0) Pother loss

= PTEG (cid:0)

WTEG⋅froll⋅vvehicle
ηtransm

(cid:0)

˙V exh⋅Δp (cid:0) Ppump loss (cid:0) Pother loss

= PTEG (cid:0)

WTEG⋅froll⋅vvehicle
ηtransm

(cid:0)

˙mexh
ρexh

Δp (cid:0) Ppump loss (cid:0) Pother loss

(19)  

where Pwt_loss is power loss due to the added weight of the thermoelectric 
generator, PΔp_loss  is the power loss due to the pressure drop across the 
hot  side  heat  exchanger of  the  thermoelectric  generator,  Ppump_loss  the 
cooling pump power consumption (for a forced convection air-cooled 
system,  this  becomes  the  fan  power),  Pother_loss  the  additional  power 
losses that can be caused by increasing the heat input to the radiator 
˙
Vexh  the volu-
(and/or power requirement of power electronics [61]), 
metric flow of exhaust gas, Δp the pressure drop across the hot side heat 
exchanger of the thermoelectric generator,  ˙mexh the mass flow of exhaust 
gas, and ρexh  the density of exhaust gases. Since installing the thermo-
electric generator usually involves a change in the cross-section of the 
exhaust pipe, the pressure drop can be expressed as:  

Δp =

˙mexh
ρexh

(

⋅hL total⋅ρexh⋅g = ˙mexh⋅

KL inlet⋅

vinlet
2

2

+ f

LTEG,HX
DTEG,HX

2

vTEG,HX
2

+ KL exit⋅

vexit
2

)

2

(20)   

combustion engine exhaust 

One of the biggest challenges when using thermoelectric generators 
installed on the vehicle exhaust pipe is to determine the optimum trade- 
off between heat extraction and power loss (due to an increased exhaust 
backpressure,  as well as  its added weight). In the case of forced con-
vection liquid/air cooling systems, the additional power consumption of 
the pump/fan must also be included. Moreover, if engine coolant is used 
as the cooling fluid, this puts additional stress on the radiator due to the 
increased  heat  input  (i.e.,  extracted  by  the  thermoelectric  generator 
from the tailpipe and rejected to the coolant), which could ultimately 
increase the power consumption of the radiator fan. This is of critical 
importance for a correct evaluation of the efficiency benefit to recover 
wasted thermal energy. In this sense, Ezzitouni et al. [108] find that by 
using current thermoelectric materials there is only a limited operating 
range  where  the  use  of  a  thermoelectric  generator  can  lead  to  an  in-
crease in global efficiency. 

Considering that the measured power output of the thermoelectric 
generator is PTEG, the net power Pnet produced by a coolant-cooled sys-
tem can be expressed as [101–103]: 

where hL_total is the total head loss (comprised of expansion, friction, and 
contraction losses), KL_inlet and KL_exit are the loss coefficients for the inlet 
and  exit  section  respectively,  f  is  the  Darcy–Weisbach  friction  factor, 
LTEG,HX,  DTEG,HX,  vTEG,HX  the  length,  hydraulic  diameter,  and  average 
exhaust gas flow velocity inside the TEG heat exchanger, respectively, 
while vinlet and vexit are the average flow velocities at the thermoelectric 
generator heat exchanger inlet and exit, respectively. 

The efficiency (ηe) of an internal combustion engine can be expressed 

as: 

ηe =

Pe
˙mf ⋅LHV

(21)  

where Pe is the brake power of the engine in kW,  ˙mf  the fuel consump-
tion in kg/s and LHV the lower heating value of the fuel in kJ/kg. The 
amount of fuel burnt to produce the electrical power Pel  by using the 
alternator can be expressed as: 

˙mf alt =

Pel
ηaltηeLHV

(22) 

For example, Massaguer et al. [109] determined that, for a mid-size 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100915N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

vehicle under the WLTP cycle, the fuel burnt due to alternator usage can 
be as much as 4.26%. By using an exhaust thermoelectric generator with 
34  bismuth  telluride  thermoelectric  modules  and  water  cooling  they 
were able to achieve a 0.53% improvement in fuel consumption. 

There  are  solutions  proposed  to  solve  this  issue,  like  the  adaptive 
removal and revival method proposed by Chen [120] or the dynamic 
reconfiguration  of  thermoelectric  modules  proposed  by  Baek  et  al. 
[121], both of which are covered in more detail in Section 9. 

When installing a TEG system, the amount of fuel burnt to produce 
the same amount of electrical power depends on the pressure loss across 
the hot side heat exchanger of the thermoelectric generator: 

˙mf TEG =

PΔp loss
ηeLHV

(23) 

By  extracting  enough  electrical  energy  to  replace  the  alternator 
(assuming the same weight for the TEG system and the alternator), the 
efficiency of the internal combustion engine can be improved. For the 
same  amount  of  fuel  burnt,  the  efficiency  of  the  engine  (see  Eqs. 
(19–23)) can be expressed as (Eq. (24)): 
)

(

ηe TEG = ηe⋅

1 +

Pnet
Pe

(24) 

One other challenge in automotive systems is the dynamic modula-
tion in exhaust pipe surface temperature and the peak surface temper-
ature. For example, an internal combustion engine can rapidly switch 
from idle to high loads; thus, leading to dramatic temperature changes. 
Based  on  exhaust  gas  temperatures  usually  encountered  for  various 
engine types, assuming the time interval to achieve maximum operating 
temperature  is  20  s,  the  estimated  maximum  temperature  slopes  for 
several engines are given in Table 3: 

Chen et al. [116] analyzed, among others, the simulated influence of 
temperature oscillation (sinusoidal) at the hot side surface on the per-
formance of thermoelectric generators. Their findings showed that the 
power output can increase when the temperature fluctuates, especially 
under  low  temperature  gradients.  The  efficiency  was  found  to  either 
decrease (negligibly) or remain constant. Shittu et al. [117] arrived at 
similar  conclusion,  but  they  used  a  rectangular  pulsed  heat  input.  In 
contrast,  Fan  and  Gao  [118],  found  that  for  an  annular  segmented 
thermoelectric generator, if the total heat flow is constant, a pulsed heat 
input improves only the peak power output values without any change 
to the  mean values. However,  this increases the  von Mises stress and 
affects its reliability. In another study, Chen et al. [119] determined that 
thermoelectric generator performance is not influenced by the period of 
fluctuation, but only by the amplitude; i.e., the higher the amplitude, the 
greater the output. Furthermore, the authors analyzed only a single p-n 
coupling.  In  case  of  a  TEG  system,  temperature  fluctuations  decrease 
performance  since  there  will  be  modules  performing  under  different 
(lower temperature gradient) operating conditions; thus, leading to an 
electrical  mismatch  of  the  interconnected  thermoelectric  modules. 

The exhaust pipe peak surface temperature has a significant influ-
ence on TEG system design decisions, since it allows the system designer 
to estimate the maximum heat flux, as well as identify the worst-case 
operating  temperature  situation.  For  example,  test  cycles  like  the 
NEDC are inadequate [122] because the engine load and, consequently, 
the  exhaust  gas  temperature  are  well  below  the  optimum  values 
(Fig. 12). 

6.3. TEG systems for other engine components (radiator, exhaust gas 
recirculation path, and oil pan) 

Kim et al. [123] and Baatar and Kim [124] investigated the possi-
bility  of  replacing  the  radiator  with  a  thermoelectric  generator  using 
engine coolant as the heat source and air-cooling for heat rejection. The 
thermoelectric generator uses a sandwich structure that comprises a hot 
side block through which coolant flows and two cold side blocks with 
128 integrated heat pipes connected to air-cooled heat sinks. The ther-
moelectric generator has a width of approximately 80 mm, a height of 
250 mm and a length of 740 mm, thus allowing 72 40 mm x 40 mm 
Bi2Te3 modules to be installed. For the study, the system was integrated 
in  a  vehicle  with  a  2.0  L  engine,  which  itself  was  part  of  a  vehicle 
simulator. The tests were performed at idle and at a vehicle speed of 80 
km/h.  At  idle,  the  measured  hot-side  temperature  ranged  from  90  to 
95 
C. In 
C; whereas, the cold side temperature was approximately 70 
this case, the authors determined a maximum output power of 28.5 W 
(30 V and 3.8 A) for a module efficiency of 0.9%. At 80 km/h, the hot 
side temperature increased to 95–100 
C, while the cold side tempera-
◦
ture decreased to approximately 45 
C. In this case, the system gener-
ated 75 W (50 V and 6 A) for a module efficiency of 2.1%. The overall 
efficiency was estimated to be around 0.3%. 

◦

◦

◦

More  recently,  Abderezzak  and  Randi  [125]  investigated  the  po-
tential of a Bi2Te3 radiator thermoelectric generator using three analysis 
methods:  simulation  (one-dimensional  steady  state  model),  experi-
mental work on a vehicle (the thermoelectric module installed between 
the radiator and an additional heat sink), and experimental work on a 
test bench (the thermoelectric module is installed between two water 
HXs  in  controlled  conditions).  The  experimental  results  showed  a 
maximum output power of 1.68 W for the vehicle test and 1.79 W for the 
test bench test. In contrast, the calculated power was 1.88 W. The au-
thors noted that the peak efficiency was 3.85%. 

Similar low thermoelectric generator efficiency was found by Schock 

Fig. 12. Load and speed range covered by different test cycles.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100916N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

et al. [95] who implemented a skutterudite thermoelectric generator in 
the exhaust gas recirculation cooler of a Cummins ISX engine equipping 
a class 8 truck. A 10 module thermoelectric generator was developed 
◦
which, when operated under a temperature gradient of 550
C, produced 
50.12  W  of  power.  The  measured  module  efficiency  was  4%,  while 
overall efficiency of the thermoelectric generator was estimated at 0.7%. 
Analogous  work  done  by  Lan  et  al.  [105]  studied  a  TEG  system 
mounted in the exhaust gas recirculation path of a CAT C6.6 heavy-duty 
engine. To avoid subjecting the thermoelectric generator to damaging 
temperatures, the authors modified the exhaust gas recirculation valve 
operation  to  control  the  exhaust  gas  flow  rate.  Four  thermoelectric 
modules connected in series were mounted on both sides of the hot side 
heat exchanger. The cold side temperature was maintained using chilled 
water. Based on engine test bench data, the authors validated a simu-
lation that predicted output power of 170–224 W for a thermoelectric 
generator using 20 thermoelectric modules. The authors also noted that 
optimizing the hot side heat transfer can increase system power output 
by as much as 25.8%. Here, it is worth noting that thermoelectric gen-
erators installed in exhaust gas recirculation coolers (EGR-TEG) have a 
significant  advantage  compared  to  exhaust  gas  pipe  thermoelectric 
generators in terms of cost, since the components  required for a TEG 
system (e.g., hot side heat exchanger, coolant flow) are already present. 
Interestingly, Aljaghtham and Celik [126] find that it is possible to 
recover  waste  thermal  energy  from  the  oil  pan.  Using  Multiphysics 
simulations (without experimental validation of the TEG system), the 
authors analyzed three oil pan geometries (flat, with a single step, and 
with multiple steps) with and without fins. Furthermore, they performed 
an optimization study to identify the optimum thermoelectric module 
size, number of thermoelectric modules, and the design (shape and size) 
of the oil pan. The cooling of the thermoelectric modules was accom-
plished  using  the  air  flow  caused  by  the  movement  of  the  vehicle 
(standard passenger car and heavy-duty vehicle). Considering a constant 
◦
engine oil temperature of 110 
C, 192 thermoelectric modules installed 
on the multiple steps oil pan with cooling fins and a vehicle speed of 120 
km/h, the authors showed that it is possible to achieve a output power of 
751  W  at  an  ambient  air  temperature  of  0 
C, 
respectively, for the passenger car. The efficiency of the thermoelectric 
generator ranged between 5 and 9% for temperature gradients of 43 to 
76 
C.  Additionally,  the  authors  analyzed  a  6-cylinder  compression 
ignition Cummins ISX engine with 2100 thermoelectric modules. At a 
◦
vehicle speed of 110 km/h, the peak output power was 2713 W at 0 
C 
and 1636 W at 25 
C. Furthermore, the authors predicted an emission 
reduction of 11 g CO2/km for the passenger car and 38 g CO2/km for the 
heavy-duty vehicle. It must be noted that removing this much heat from 
the oil pan can cause unintended adverse effects on internal combustion 
engine operation due to a decrease in oil temperature which leads to a 
higher viscosity. This will then cause a lower engine efficiency, as well as 
increased pollutant emissions due to lower combustion chamber surface 
temperatures.  The  solution  proposed  by  Aljaghtham  and  Celik  [126] 
could be combined with the one proposed by Lan et al. [127] that sug-
gests a thermoelectric generator can operate both as waste heat recovery 
system and a heat pump to reduce the engine warm-up time. By oper-
ating the thermoelectric generator in engine warm up mode, they were 
◦
able to illustrate through simulations a 7 
C higher oil temperature in the 
first  100  s  after  start  as  compared  to  the  baseline.  Their  study  also 
C at 
showed that the engine oil reached 100 
431  s  (38%)  earlier  than  the  baseline  over  the  NEDC.  However,  to 
recover the energy used during the warm-up phase, longer waste heat 
recovery operating durations are required. 

◦
C at 188 s (25%) and 88 

C  and  453  W  at  25 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

6.4. Analysis of design considerations for automotive thermoelectric 
generators 

The use of thermoelectric generators for waste heat recovery in ve-
hicles requires multiple compromises and optimizations, which opens 
numerous possibilities for further research and innovation. In this sense, 

it necessary to continue researching low impact solutions (tested in real 
driving conditions) that solve the conflict between the efficient use of 
thermoelectric generators for exhaust gas waste heat recovery and the 
operation of the exhaust gas aftertreatment system. For example, one 
possible solution for fast catalyst heat-up is to employ a close-coupled 
three-way  catalyst,  which  reduces  heat  losses  and  ensures  high 
exhaust gas temperatures during the engine cold start. However, after 
the warm-up phase has ended, the close-coupled catalyst is subjected to 
high temperatures that can cause sintering of the active material; thus, 
limiting the amount and type of material used and ultimately its effi-
ciency. Consequently, a thermoelectric generator, with a bypass, could 
be installed before this catalyst to extract a part of the thermal energy 
contained in the exhaust gases before it reaches the catalyst. This will 
help control the exhaust gas temperature and, at the same time, generate 
electrical  energy.  A  similar  approach  could  be  applied  before  the 
exhaust  gas  recirculation  cooler,  which  could  allow  for  reducing  the 
stress on the cooling system. 

The low efficiency of the system and the lack of efficient solutions for 
vehicle waste heat recovery is also owing to the nonuniform tempera-
ture distribution, the large overall dimensions of thermoelectric gener-
ators,  as  well  as  the  negative  impact  on  internal  combustion  engine 
operation  (increasing  heat  exchanger  efficiency  comes  at  the  cost  of 
increased  backpressure).  Consequently,  research  efforts  should  be 
directed  in  these  directions  as  well.  Additional  benefits  could  be  ob-
tained by solving the issue of thermoelectric module efficiency at low 
temperature gradients, which would make it possible to extend the use 
of  radiator  thermoelectric  generators.  Finally,  considering  that  city 
traffic leads to large periods of exhaust gas recirculation operation and 
that  there  are  significant  efforts  to  increase  the  operating  range  of 
exhaust gas recirculation for highway vehicles, more effort should be 
directed towards the use of EGR thermoelectric generators. The main 
advantage of these solutions is the presence of the exhaust gas recircu-
lation cooler that uses coolant for lowering exhaust gas temperature and 
therefore providing all required elements in one location. As described 
in the previous section, the use of the engine oil pan as a heat source has 
shown potential but strongly depends on the vehicle velocity and the 
ambient temperature. 

7. Heat extraction and temperature distribution on the hot side 

For some applications, direct exposure of the thermoelectric modules 
hot side to the heat source can be difficult or even impossible without a 
major system redesign. Therefore, an additional element, usually a heat 
exchanger, is required to extract thermal energy from the heat source 
and transfer it to the hot side of the thermoelectric modules. As a result, 
not all available heat is transferred to the hot side of the thermoelectric 
modules. The amount of heat transferred between the heat source and 
the  thermoelectric  material,  and  ultimately  the  system  efficiency,  de-
pends  on  the  heat  exchanger  efficiency.  In  other  words,  system  effi-
ciency cannot be predicted solely based on the efficiency values of the 
modules or the corresponding materials (see Eq. 11) [41]. In this sense, 
even  if  commercially  available  thermoelectric  modules  have  an  effi-
ciency of 5–10%, system efficiency will be lower. Consequently, the heat 
extraction ability of the hot side heat exchanger is decisive for system 
operation. 

Another critical factor for thermoelectric generator operation is the 
temperature distribution [87]. More precisely, a uniform temperature 
distribution is desired since TEG systems are usually comprised of an 
array of thermoelectric modules connected to a single power converter. 
As more thermoelectric modules are added, the surface area covered by 
the thermoelectric generator increases, and the position of the modules 
relative to the thermal energy source becomes asymmetric. As a result, it 
is possible for the thermoelectric modules to be subjected to different 
temperature gradients [86]. The possible causes of the uneven temper-
ature  distribution  are  thermal  variability  of  the  heat  source  (exhaust 
gases), uneven distribution of the mechanical clamping force among the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100917N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

modules, or different conduction coefficients of the modules. 

Considering  a  given  number  of  identical  thermoelectric  module 
working in the same environment and with the same cold side temper-
ature, if the temperature distribution on the hot side is not uniform, this 
leads  to  a  different  temperature  gradient  across  each  thermoelectric 
module  (Fig.  7).  Using  Eq.  (9)  to  determine  the  efficiency,  it  can  be 
stated the efficiencies of the considered thermoelectric modules will be 
different. Furthermore, having dissimilar temperature gradients across 
each thermoelectric module leads to different power outputs [128,129] 
and this, combined with the connection mode, can cause a system output 
lower than the sum of the individual thermoelectric module outputs (see 
Section 9). 

The heat extraction method on the hot side (with respect to the heat 
transfer mechanism) strongly depends on the heat source. For automo-
tive applications, it can be both conduction (hot surfaces of the engine 
block,  radiator,  oil  pane  etc.)  and  convection  (exhaust  gases).  For 
exhaust gas waste heat recovery systems, one challenge is to overcome 
the relatively large thermal resistance between the exhaust gases and the 
hot side of the thermoelectric generator. This is a result of the low heat 
transfer coefficient, specific to the gas-solid heat transfer, the thermal 
resistance of the heat exchanger and the contact resistance between the 
surfaces of the hot side heat exchanger and the thermoelectric generator 
hot side. In combination with a relatively small heat transfer area, the 
ability  to  extract  heat  is  therefore  limited.  As  a  result,  a  temperature 
gradient  between  the  hot  exhaust  gases  and  the  hot  side  of  the  ther-
moelectric generator is established, which reduces the possible contri-
bution  to  the  power  output  and  efficiency  of  the  thermoelectric 
generator. 

There  are  various  methods  of  reducing  the  thermal  resistance  be-
tween the exhaust gases and the hot side of the thermoelectric generator: 
e.g.,  heat  pipes  (see  Section  7.1),  improved  heat  exchanger  materials 
and/or design etc. For example, Kempf and Zhang [130] studied the use 
of silicon carbide (SiC) for the heat exchanger and found that it has a 
25% higher efficiency than a stainless steel heat exchanger. In parallel, 
Jang  and  Tsai  [131]  studied  the  influence  of  heat  exchanger  wall 
thickness noting that increased thickness can favor axial heat conduc-
tion  and  the  surface  temperature  distribution  on  the  hot  side.  Other 
studies, like the one of Liu et al. [132] found that, if the hot side heat 
exchanger is placed between the catalytic converter and the muffler, the 
pressure drop is at its lowest and the temperature is uniformly distrib-
uted.  In  a  different  heat  exchanger  design  study,  Stobart  et  al.  [96] 
started  with  an open-pipe  design  using computational fluid  dynamics 
(CFD),  but  ended  up  adopting  a  plate-fin  design,  specific  to  that  of 
exhaust gas recirculation coolers equipping heavy duty engines due to 
their  respectively  high  power  output  (2–3  kW/kg).  Using  eight  ther-
moelectric modules, the authors analyzed ten cases in terms of hot gas 
mass flows and temperatures, coolant mass flows and temperatures, as 
well as ZT  values. Their design led to a 90% decrease in the pressure 
drop compared to a conventional exhaust gas recirculation cooler under 
normal  operating  conditions.  The  thermoelectric  generator  with 
plate-fin HX resulted in a power output of 139.1 W and a temperature 
gradient  of  86.1  K  as  compared  to  the  thermoelectric  generator  with 
open-pipe HX with only 13.3 W and 35.0 K. With respect to the use of 
fins  for  enhancing  HX  performance,  He  et  al.  [133]  showed  that  the 
spacing  and  height  of  the  fins  have  a  greater  influence  than  their 
thickness. Marvao et al. [134] arrived at a similar conclusion while also 
highlighting the importance of having a small fin thickness both from a 
thermal  point  of  view  and  via  thermoelectric  generator  net  power 
output. Furthermore, the authors showed that heat exchanger optimi-
zation alone is not enough to achieve the maximum net power output, 
rather it must be combined with optimization of thermoelectric mod-
ules. In a different study, Karana and Sahoo [135] investigated the use of 
a twisted tape as a means of improving the heat transfer. They showed 
that geometric parameters, like the pitch ratio, twist ratio, and tilt angle 
have a significant influence on HX performance. Of the studied designs, 

the authors selected a pitch ratio of 8, twist ratio of 4, and tilt angle of 
◦
, for which they obtained a 0.65% improvement in the brake specific 
60
fuel  consumption  (BSFC).  Other  authors  like  Lou  et  al.  [136]  have 
sought  to  improve  thermoelectric  generator  performance  by  using  a 
convergent HX design. Using simulations, the authors concluded that for 
◦
mass flows greater than 37.25 g/s, an inclination angle of 2
provides 
the  optimum  trade-off  between  the  power  output  and  pressure  drop 
across the HX. With this design, the net power increase was 5.96%. A 
later  simulation  study  of  Lou  et  al.  [137]  further  improved  on  the 
concept and achieved, at an inlet temperature of 500 K and a mass flow 
rate  of  30  g/s,  a  net  power  increase  of  20.2%  over  the  conventional 
thermoelectric  generator  design.  Another  important  aspect  has  been 
highlighted by Bou Nader [21] who found that, in addition to ensuring a 
sufficient and efficient supply of heat, heat exchangers must also allow 
for the expansion of thermoelectric modules with respect to their weight 
and occupied space and be dynamically stable. In this regard, there have 
been numerous studies for the improvement of heat exchangers covering 
design (geometry, size, and weight), materials, installation location, and 
cooling methods among other parameters. 

Table 4 presents the results of several literature studies concerned 
with heat exchanger design and thermoelectric generators. It must be 
noted that not all materials used in these studies are directly suitable for 
the conditions found in the exhaust system of internal combustion en-
gines  (specifically  the  high  temperature  of  exhaust  gases).  However, 
these studies can be useful to understand ways to obtain a more uniform 
temperature distribution when designing heat exchangers. Furthermore, 
considering that pressure drop is a significant concern in the exhaust of 
internal  combustion  engines,  these  studies  can  provide  useful  insight 
into what pressure drops are encountered by heat exchangers designed 
for thermoelectric generators. 

7.1. Heat pipes 

Heat  pipes  (Fig.  13)  are  solid  state  devices  with  a  relatively  high 
thermal conductivity (potentially higher than heat exchangers) used for 
transporting heat remotely with minimal losses. From a design point of 
view, a heat pipe is a metallic pipe sealed at both ends partially filled 
with a working fluid at near vacuum pressure. This causes the fluid to 
change phase at low temperatures. A heat pipe can be divided in three 
main sections: evaporator, adiabatic section, and condenser. Applying 
heat to the evaporator section causes the working fluid to evaporate and 
travel  towards  the  condenser  section.  Since  the  condenser  section  is 
colder, this causes the fluid to condense back to liquid, which returns to 
the evaporator section through a wick using the capillary effect [24]. 

Heat  pipes  can  be  used  with  TEG  systems  installed  on  the  engine 
exhaust  pipe  to:  eliminate  the  need  for  a  direct  contact  between  the 
thermoelectric generator elements and the exhaust pipe (as a result, the 
installation location of the thermoelectric generator can be freely chosen 
[4]),  improve  heat  extraction  from  the  hot  exhaust  gases  (reduced 
thermal  resistance)  while  lowering  the  pressure  losses,  ensure  a 
quasi-constant temperature of the  hot side  (see  reference [150]),  and 
improve  uniformity  of  the  temperature  distribution.  Consequently, 
effort can be redirected towards designing waste heat recovery systems 
with  increased  efficiency,  without  altering/redesigning  the  structur-
e/build of the exhaust system. 

The  main  issues  associated  with  using  heat  pipes  for  exhaust  gas 

waste heat recovery are [4,24]:  

-  Heat pipes have a maximum rate of heat transfer; hence, for high 

heat transfer rates, the system can become impractically large,  

-  Increased attention must be paid to the heat extraction side design to 

avoid high pressure drop values,  

-  The working temperature needs to be limited to avoid damage due to 
high pressure inside the pipe; for temperatures higher than 300 
C, 
fluids other than water need to be used and this can increase the cost 
significantly, 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100918N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 4. 
Literature studies of thermoelectric generator hot side heat exchangers.  

Ref. 

External shape 

Internal structure 

Material 

Test conditions 
Tgas 

wgas 

Average interface 
temperature 

Uniform temperature 
distribution 

Pressure 
drop Δp 

[138]  Hexagonal-prism Plate- 

shaped 

Maze-shaped baffles Fishbone- 
shaped baffles 

[87] 

Plate-shaped 

Parallel-fin-shaped baffles 
Fishbone-shaped baffles 

Brass 
Brass 
Iron 

N/A 

[139] 

Rectangular 

Square with fins 
Square with fins + slopping block 

Al 

[132] 

Plate-shaped placed after, 
between and before TWC 

Two small fins at inlet and small 
fins disorderly set further back 

N/A 

[140] 

Plate-shaped 

Fishbone-shaped 
Accordion-shaped 
Scatter-shaped 

[141] 

Plate-shaped 

[142] 

Plate-shaped 

[143] 

Rectangle 

[144] 

Rectangle 

[2] 

Rectangle 

[145] 

[146] 

Rectangle longitudinal 
Rectangle transversal 
Hexagonal 
Cylindrical 
Rectangle 

[147] 

Rectangle 

[148] 

Rectangular octogon 

[149] 

Octagon 

Fishbone-shaped baffles 
Chaos-shaped baffles 
Scatter-shape inserted fins 
Dimpled surface  

Empty cavity 
Muffler like structure with pipes, 1 
in, 2 out 
Muffler like structure with pipes, 
2in, 2 out 
Empty cavity 
◦
Bafflers at 10
◦
Bafflers at 20
◦
Bafflers at 30
◦
Bafflers at 40
Waffle type labyrinth 
Offset strip fins 
Fins 

Fishbone, Config. 1 
Fishbone, Config. 2 
Fishbone, Config. 3 
Cylindrical grooves 
Random distributed inserted fins 
Empty cavity with 2 deflectors 
Fishbone type 1 
Fishbone type 2 
Clip type fins 
Labyrinth type fins 
Empty cavity 
Parallel fins 
Perpendicular fins 
Skewed fins 
(streamwise arrangements) 

◦

C 

300 sim. 
300 sim. 
+ exp. 
300 sim. 
+ exp. 
300 sim. 
+ exp. 
300 sim. 
+ exp. 
300 sim. 
+ exp. 
300 sim. 
+ exp. 
350 sim. 
+ exp. 
350 sim. 
+ exp. 
350 sim. 
+ exp. 
400 sim. 
+ exp. 
400 sim. 
+ exp. 
400 sim. 
+ exp. 
350 

m/s 

20 sim. 
20 sim. 
+ exp. 

15 
15 

12 
12 

20 
20 
20 

20 

15.2 

◦

C  

120 
>240 
>200 

~172 
~177 

~200 
~240 

210 
270 
280 

~295 
~287 
~278 

~244 
~252 
~214 
~215 

N/A 

Brass 

Brass 

290 sim. 

~20 

N/A 

400 exp. 

N/A 

N/A 

Al 

~519 
exp. 

17 

N/A 

N/A 
N/A 
Cu 

300 sim. 
N/A 
550 

20 
N/A 
N/A 

~250 
N/A 
N/A 

N/A 

500 

N/A 

N/A 

400 

N/A 

Brass 

340 sim. 

20 

N/A 

327 sim. 

22.6 

299.6 
296.2 
294.8 
117.83 
127.83 
110.3 
229.6 
227.9 
228.4 
240.2 
209 
265 
255 
271 

kPa 

N/A 

0 
0 

N/A 

ref. 
127 
695 

N/A 

N/A 

1.697 
1.348 

ref. 
1.004 
2.157 

0.045 
0.067 
0.113 
0.251 
0.675 
1.2 
2 
0.268 
0.182 
0.775 
0.753 
1.29 
0.91 
0.78 
1.300 
2.187 
1.190 
N/A 

N/A 

ref. 
++
+

ref. 
+

- 
+

ref. 
+
++

ref. 
- 
– 

ref. 
+

ref. 
+

ref. 
- 
+

ref. 
++
+
+

- 
ref. 
- 
ref. 
+
– 

- 
ref 
- 
+

- 
ref 
– 

ref 
+
+
++

ref. 
+
+
++

ref – represents the reference heat exchanger for the study. For all other heat exchangers “+” marks an improvement while “–“ a decrease compared to the reference 
case. 
N/A – not available 

-  Designing heat pipe systems is a complex process that must consider 

system particulars,  

-  Due to the unsteady nature of internal combustion engine operation, 
it is not possible to ensure high exhaust gas temperatures and mass 

flows  in  all  cases;  this  leads  to  areas  with  decreased  efficiency  as 
compared to classical systems,  

-  Added  weight  of  the  heat  pipes,  which  ultimately  reduces  the  net 

output of the system. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100919N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 13. Heat pipe working principle.  

◦

With respect  to the  use of  heat pipes and  TEG systems, Cao  et al. 
[151] showed, both experimentally and through simulation, that TEG 
system efficiency increases, especially for high exhaust gas temperatures 
and mass flows. The authors were able to achieve an efficiency of 2.58% 
◦
for a temperature of 300 
C and a mass flow of 80 kg/h. To control the 
heat transfer temperature, Brito et al. [152] designed and tested a var-
iable conductance heat pipe. The authors added an expansion tank to 
control the pressure inside the pipe, and consequently the fluid boiling 
temperature.  By  controlling  the  pressure,  the  authors  modulated  the 
active  length  of  the  condenser  that  causes  thermoelectric  modules  to 
operate at optimal temperatures. Using a Yanmar L100N DI compression 
ignition engine and a thermoelectric generator with 12 bismuth telluride 
modules, the authors were able to extract approximately 38 W at a heat 
◦
pipe temperature of approximately 168 
C and a cold side (water cooled) 
temperature  of  approximately  28 
C.  In  contrast,  Jang  et  al.  [153] 
proposed a different design with a wickless loop heat pipe (loop ther-
mosyphon) for waste heat recovery in hybrid vehicles. In their effort, the 
evaporator  section  (designed  with  fins  to  improve  heat  extraction)  is 
placed  inside  the  exhaust  pipe;  whereas,  thermoelectric  modules  are 
placed  between  the  plate-shaped  condenser  section  (made  of  copper) 
and  an  aluminum  block  cooled  with  air.  The  authors  found  that  the 
power output of this solution is lower than that of a system  installed 
directly on the exhaust pipe with convective heat transfer, but it has the 
advantage  in  that  it  can  transfer  heat  to  remote  locations;  thus, 
bypassing  the  space  limitations.  The  authors  have  also  analyzed  the 
influence of the volume of working fluid on the system output. Of the 
analyzed cases (20, 30, 40 and 50% filled volume of the total volume), 
they found that the best performance is obtained when the working fluid 
fills 30% of the total available volume. In a more recent study, Pacheco 
et al. [154] embedded corrugated exhaust pipes and variable conduc-
tance heat pipes (to act as a thermal spreader) in a cast aluminum ma-
trix.  The  authors  simulated  the  output  of  the  TEG  system  (with  64 
commercially  available  thermoelectric  modules  –  GM250-49-45-25  in 
the first case and GM250-127-28-10 in the second case) installed in a 
generic light-duty vehicle (1400 kg, 1.6 L engine with 118 hp) under two 
cycles: a custom highway cycle and a standard WLTC Class 3 cycle. The 
results showed that, at high exhaust gas inlet temperatures, the setup 
can offer an improved temperature distribution, protection of the ther-
moelectric modules against overheating, as well as high power outputs 
(888 W for GM250-49-45-25 and 1536 W for GM250-127-28-10). The 
main disadvantage was the high pressure drop across the thermoelectric 
generator, but this can be solved by utilizing a by-pass valve. Finally, the 
authors estimated 5.4% savings in fuel consumption and CO2 emissions 
over the highway cycle and 4.2% over the WLTC Class 3 cycle. 

7.2. TEG systems with phase change materials 

In  general,  optimal  performance  of  a  thermoelectric  generator  is 
strongly linked to a quasi-constant temperature on the hot side. This is 
difficult to obtain for internal combustion engine waste heat recovery 
applications due to its unsteady nature. This can be partly compensated 
by using systems with phase change materials (PCMs).  The operating 
principle of a phase change material can be described as follows: when a 
respectively high temperature is supplied, the material starts to melt/ 
vaporize, thus storing thermal energy; as the temperatures drops, the 
material needs to release heat to solidify/liquify again. The main criteria 
for choosing an appropriate phase change material are highlighted in 
[155]  and  include:  type  of  phase  change  (solid-liquid  or  liquid-gas), 
phase  change  temperature  (application  specific),  amount  of  stored 
heat, heat conductivity, volume variations during phase change, specific 
cost of phase change material, and environmental impact. Furthermore, 
Huang  et  al.  [156]  showed  that  it  is  important  to  consider  a  longer 
heating  duration  when  including  phase  change  materials  in  the  ther-
moelectric generator design. 

Using  this  principle  in  thermoelectric  generator  applications,  heat 
can  be  extracted  from  the  hot  exhaust  gases  and  stored  in  the  phase 
change  material  as  internal  energy.  When  the  temperature  of  the 
exhaust gases decreases, the phase change material releases heat on the 
hot side of the thermoelectric generator, thus leading to a quasi-constant 
temperature (it must be noted that the damping depends on the phase 
change  material  accumulator’s  thickness  [157]).  Furthermore,  the 
phase change material can provide thermal protection in case of tem-
perature extremes that could damage the thermoelectric generator [4, 
155]. For example, Klein et al. [155] experimentally showed the benefits 
of using a phase change material in conjunction with a thermoelectric 
generator.  For  an  inlet  temperature  variation  between  approximately 
◦
C, the hot side temperature of the thermoelectric module 
420 and 920 
varied in the interval of 350–410 
C. Furthermore, the authors showed 
(through  simulation  over  the  Artemis  motorway  cycle)  that  the 
PCM-TEG  setup  can  be  29%  more  efficient  than  a  conventional  ther-
moelectric generator. Other authors, like Zhao et al. [158] used simu-
lations  to  show  that  heat  could  be  provided  to  the  thermoelectric 
modules by boiling and condensation of a fluid, which is itself heated by 
the exhaust gases. This solution has the advantage of a limited hot side 
temperature, thus avoiding overheating of the thermoelectric modules. 
Finally, if the stored heat in a phase change material is not converted 
to electrical energy, it can be used to heat the engine coolant and/or the 
lubricating oil of the internal combustion engine or battery pack (in case 
of  hybrid  vehicles)  that  ultimately  leads  to  lower  pollutant  emission 
values and increased durability. 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100920N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

7.3. Analysis of heat extraction and temperature distribution on the hot 
side 

backpressure. Their investigation showed that the optimum coolant flow 
rate  depends  on  the  temperature  gradient  across  the  thermoelectric 
modules. 

The  hot  side  heat  exchanger  of  the  thermoelectric  generator  in-
fluences both the operation of internal combustion engine, due to the 
increased backpressure, as well as the heat flow to the thermoelectric 
modules. Furthermore, it also limits the possible installation locations of 
the thermoelectric generator. Research efforts to counteract the down-
sides and to increase the amount of heat extracted from the heat sources 
are essential for improving overall benefits of the TEG system. This re-
quires  low  impact  solutions  with  low  thermal  resistance.  Heat  pipes 
solve the limitations with respect to the installation position, but they 
require lightweight design, increase of operating ranges and reduction 
of  costs. One promising solution, but which requires further  develop-
ment  is  the  use  of  phase  change  materials.  This  direction  should  be 
pursued since it offers the possibility to provide not only thermoelectric 
generator protection at high operating temperatures, but also a quasi- 
constant and uniform temperature distribution. 

8. Heat rejection on the cold side 

8.1. General considerations 

To ensure a high heat flux through the thermoelectric generator, heat 
rejection  on  the  cold  side  is  critically  important.  In  their  study,  Hen-
dricks [55] determined that, for an optimized power output, the cold 
side  heat  exchanger  needs  to  have  a  thermal  resistance  10–30  times 
lower than the hot side heat exchanger. In general, there are three fluids 
commonly used in literature (see for example Tables 6 and 7) for cold 
side cooling: air, water, and engine coolant. Each of these has its benefits 
and downsides as presented in Table 5 [4]: 

The main issue with air cooling is the low convective heat transfer 
coefficient of air which does not allow for a sufficiently low temperature 
on the cold side, thus impacting thermoelectric generator performance. 
For  example,  Elghool  et  al.  [159]  determined  the  maximum  limiting 
heat flux for air cooled thermoelectric generators (air speed variation 
0 to 5 m/s) varied between 40.3 and 76.7 W/m2. Water cooling involves 
the  issue  of  additional  equipment  to  ensure  the  flow  of  water  (tank, 
pump, pipes, and radiator) and consideration of the space required. In 
comparison,  using  engine  coolant  requires  a  redesign  of  the  engine 
cooling system to avoid possible engine damage (due to an increased 
thermal  stress  on  the  system)  and  a  decrease  in  performance;  hence, 
demanding more power from the coolant pump. Here, it was proven via 
experimental measurements [105] that by maintaining the temperature 
◦
of the coolant around 80 
C, with a flow of 0.2 kg/s, and a difference of 
◦
C between the hot and the cold side, the generated power can 
around 50
vary between 178 and 224 W, when using GM250-127-28-10 thermo-
electric modules on the non-road transient cycle (NRTC). In a different 
type of study, Lei et al. [160] analyzed the optimum flow rate of the 
coolant to achieve maximum performance with respect to pump energy 
consumption,  thermoelectric  generator  output  power,  and  exhaust 

Table 5 
Advantages and disadvantages of different cooling methods for heat rejection on 
the cold side.  

Fluid 
Air  

Water  

Advantages 
• Low cost  
• Simple design / structure  
• Limited effect on engine 

performance  

• High heat transfer rates  
• Limited effect on engine 

performance  

Engine 

coolant  

• High heat transfer rates  
• Does not require 

additional devices  

Disadvantages 
• Low heat transfer rates  
• Relatively large power 

consumption (when using fans) 

• Additional space required  
• High cost  
• Increased complexity 
• Engine cooling system must be 

redesigned  

8.2. Analysis of heat rejection 

Like the extraction of heat from the exhaust gases, heat rejection is of 
equal  importance  for  achieving  high  system  performance  considering 
the dependency of the power output on the heat flux through the ther-
moelectric  generator.  However,  there  are  only  a  limited  number  of 
studies  endeavoring  to  cover  cooling  facets  (i.e..,  cooling  method, 
additional losses, etc.) of thermoelectric generation. As described in the 
previous section, as well as in Section 10, the findings illustrate that the 
currently employed cooling methods (with water, engine coolant or air, 
each  with  its  own  advantages  and  disadvantages  in  terms  of  cooling 
performance, complexity, and parasitic losses) are directly linked to the 
cooling processes of internal combustion engines. Furthermore, it was 
found that the solutions are not suitable for all applications and they 
need to be application specific (i.e., passenger car, heavy-duty vehicle, 
stationary  engine,  etc.).  Consequently,  a  possible  research  direction 
would be the development of a dual cooling system (with low parasitic 
losses) that is able to adapt to vehicle operating conditions (e.g., city 
traffic or traveling at constant speed on the highway). It is also necessary 
to analyze the potential of solutions proposed for other applications like 
refrigerant cooling for battery thermal management in hybrid-electric 
vehicles  [161].  Finally,  instead  of  rejecting  the  heat  to  the  environ-
ment, this energy could be stored in phase change materials for later use 
(e.g., cold starts) to further improve the overall efficiency. 

9. TEG system output 

9.1. General considerations 

The output of a thermoelectric generator depends on several factors, 
such  as  the  number  of  thermocouples  in  the  module,  the  number  of 
modules,  the  configuration/connection  of  the  modules,  the  thermo-
electric materials properties, and the temperature gradient. Building on 
Section  5.1  (Eqs.  (15,  16)),  the  power  output  of  one  thermoelectric 
module (PTEM) [3] can be written as: 

(cid:0)

IRTEM

I = α(Thot (cid:0) Tcold)I (cid:0)

I2RTEM

(25)  

(

PTEM =

)

α⋅ΔT
⏟̅⏞⏞̅⏟
open circuit voltage

⏟̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏞⏞̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⏟
output voltage

where I [A] is the current flow and RTEM [Ohm] the internal resistance 
(see  Section  5).  Since  the  power  output  depends  on  the  temperature 
gradient between the two sides of the thermoelectric module, it can be 
deduced  that  it  is  desirable  to  increase  ΔT.  However,  one  must  also 
consider the Peltier effect and Joule heating (see Section 2) which can 
negatively affect thermoelectric module operation. This makes it desir-
able for thermoelectric modules to operate with lower current values. 

Theoretically, the power output of a TEG system (Pdevice) is the sum of 
the individual power output of each thermoelectric module (PTEM- Eq. 
(25)) and can be expressed as: 

Pdevice =

∑nTEM

i=1

Pi,TEM =

(cid:0)

∑nTEM

i=1

αi,p (cid:0) αi,n

(cid:0)
)2
⋅
(

Ti,hot (cid:0) Ti,cold

)2

)2

Ri,Load

Ri,TEM
Ri,Load

+ 1

(26)  

where  i  is  the  ith  thermoelectric  module,  nTEM  the  total  number  of 
thermoelectric modules, and RLoad the external load. 

Furthermore, the dynamics of the generated power are proportional 
to  the  rates  of  change  of  the  temperature  gradient  input  (see  Section 
6.1). Consequently, when modeling a TEG system, the associated ther-
mal  time  constants  need  to  be  considered.  This  issue  is  addressed  by 
using appropriated control algorithms to accurately track the maximum 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100921N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

power point (MPP) during transient phases. One significant challenge 
that needs to be addressed by the control method is the interaction be-
tween the convertor MPP set-point and the parasitic Peltier effect, since 
the latter causes a slow temperature change response on both the hot 
side and the cold side of the thermoelectric generator (e.g., such delayed 
responses have been reported by Luo et al. [162]). In turn, this leads to a 
gradual temperature gradient change and affects system power output. 
Overall,  thermoelectric  generator  current  response  is  on  the  order  of 
nanoseconds; whereas, the thermal effect can take up to a few minutes to 
manifest [85]. 

For  engine  exhaust  thermoelectric  generators,  adding  more  ther-
moelectric modules does not necessarily increase the power output due 
to two reasons [4]:  

• Thermal  resistance  and  the  corresponding  temperature  difference 
between  the  two  sides  of  thermoelectric  modules  (Eqs.  (17,  18)) 
decrease  along  the  exhaust  pipe  affecting  the  individual  power 
output as a result of the sandwich arrangement between the hot and 
the cold side, as well as the parallel thermal connection; 

• Temperature  along  the  exhaust  pipe  and,  consequently,  the  tem-
perature of the hot side of consecutive thermoelectric modules de-
creases due to heat extraction and losses. Furthermore, there is an 
uneven distribution of temperature between adjacent thermoelectric 
modules causing these to operate at different voltage-current points, 
which in turn leads to a decrease in generated current, voltage, and 
power  along  the  flow  direction.  The  employed  connection  mode 
leads  to a power loss and to  internal losses, where the  total power 
output of the system is less than the sum of the individual thermo-
electric module output. 

Stevens et al. [9] developed a model that estimates the theoretical 
limit of the maximum power output of a thermoelectric system in con-
tact with a hot stream by using a variational model. The model predicts 
an  optimum  number  of  thermoelectric  modules  that  can  be  used  to 
generate  the  maximum  possible  power  of  any  system.  The  optimum 
number of thermoelectric modules is influenced by several factors like 
the  temperature  and  mass  flow  rate  of  the  exhaust  gas,  the  heat 
extraction/dissipation ability of the hot/cold side etc. In another study, 
Li et al. [163] demonstrated that there is an optimum number of ther-
moelectric modules that provides the maximum power output. The au-
thors highlighted the importance of their optimization process (a 3-step 
process), which led to an 53.05% and 110.07% increase in power output 
and  conversion  efficiency,  respectively,  as  compared  to  the  initial 
design. 

Different  thermoelectric  generator  designs,  optimized  heat  ex-
changers and operating strategies have been studied for the purpose of 
reducing  the  internal  losses  and  lowering  the  thermal  resistance  be-
tween the exhaust gases and the hot side of the thermoelectric generator. 
Another  factor  that  needs  consideration  is  the  pressure  drop,  which 
should be lower than 15-40 kPa to avoid impairing engine operation. 
Furthermore, when analyzing the temperature distribution of heat ex-
changers used in TEG systems with the aid of simulations, thermoelec-
tric modules must also be included [143,144]. 

Alghoul et al. [21] identified several elements affecting the output of 

thermoelectric generators:  

• Heat exchanger (or stabilizer)  

○  captures energy and transfers it to the thermoelectric module;  
○  acts as a thermal spreader, meaning that it must provide a uniform 
distribution of temperature for the hot side of the thermoelectric 
module;  

• Interfaces  (between  thermoelectric  module  and  the  hot  and  cold 

sides)  
○  critical  importance  since  they  define  the  contact  thermal 

resistance;  
• Contact pressure 

○ influences the operation of the module since, if the applied pres-
sure is not evenly distributed and/or is too large, this can lead to a 
deformation  or  even  permanent  damage  of  the  module,  thus 
causing a non-uniform temperature distribution and consequently, 
poor performance;  

• Insulation  

○  clamping  method  has  a  significant  influence  on  parasitic  heat 

losses;  
• Cooling 

○ passive  or  active;  passive  cooling  is  done  using  natural  air  con-
vection (metal plate, finned heat sink) and/or heat pipes; active 
cooling is using a forced air/water/coolant cooling with the aid of 
a fan/pump;  

○  influences the amount of heat that can be rejected on the cold side 
and  ultimately  the  cold  side  temperature,  thus  being  of  critical 
importance for the device efficiency;  

○  for most applications active cooling is preferred since it allows for a 

larger heat flux compared to passive cooling.  

• Thermoelectric module integrity  

○  extracting the maximum power from a thermoelectric module is 
possible by choosing an optimum ratio between the external load 
resistance and its internal resistance, the latter being a function of 
temperature;  

○  the  external  and  internal  resistances  are  equal  when  the  load 
voltage  is  half  of  the  open  circuit  voltage,  the  latter  being 
measurable by breaking the circuit;  

○  the  resistor  voltage  can  be  measured  once  the  thermoelectric 
module temperature is stabilized and the external load resistor is 
connected;  

○  matching loads corresponding to the optimal power output can be 

linked in series;  

○  after the load has been connected, the value of the temperature 
difference between the hot and the cold side of the thermoelectric 
module decreases due to the Peltier, Thomson, and Joule effects. 

Ultimately,  the  authors  identified  four  factors  that  cause  the  low 

levels of extracted power:  

• Low value of the temperature gradient between the hot and the cold 

sides;  

• Immature thermoelectric module integrity;  
• Inaccurate  measurement  of  the  temperature  difference  (in  some 

cases);  

• Improper selection of thermoelectric modules. 

To achieve maximum performance (power and efficiency), a good 
design and control algorithm are required. Currently, there two main 
directions for thermoelectric generator optimization, namely maximum 
power point tracking and maximum efficiency point tracking. According 
to the maximum power transfer theorem, power is maximized when m 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 + ZT
= 1.  Conversely, the maximum efficiency condition is  m =
Considering m = 1, for a single module this leads to: 

√

. 

RTEM = RLoad = R

Pmax = RI2

Load =

(αΔT)2
4R

For a TEG system with ntotal modules Eqs. (26, 27) become: 

RGenerator = RLoad =

nseries⋅RTEM
nparallel

= R

Pmax, generator = RI2

Load =

ntotal(αΔT)2
4R

(27) 

(28) 

For a given temperature gradient, thermoelectric generator outputs 

the maximum possible power (Eq. (28)) for the load when: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100922N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

VLoad =

1
VOC or I =
2

1
2

ISC  

where ISC is the short-circuit current. 

However, Baranowski et al. [164] show that during the design stage 
it is possible to achieve both maximum power and maximum efficiency, 
provided that the thermoelectric module leg length is a design variable. 
Considering  a  constant  property  model  (CPM)  generator,  the  authors 
prove that the electrical condition for maximum efficiency is also the 
condition for maximum: power, power density, power/cost of thermo-
electric material, and power to weight ratio of thermoelectric material. 
Achieving maximum power output and maximum efficiency at the same 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 + ZT
operating  point  of  the  CPM  generator  requires  that  m  =
. 
Compared to m = 1 the result is an improved generator that has better 
performance and is lighter while having a lower material cost. Based on 
their  calculations,  achieving  maximum  thermoelectric  generator  per-
formance requires optimizing thermoelectric generator geometry, elec-
trical  operating  conditions  (current  and  load  resistance),  and  heat 
exchanger design. 

√

There are various solutions proposed to solve the connection mode 

issue, each with its advantages and disadvantages:  

• Distributed MPPT (DMPPT) – this means individual control of each 
module or, in other words, a MPPT power converter for each module. 
The downsides of this solution are the added size, cost, weight and 
complexity; 

• Differential  power  processing  (DPP)  –  power  convertors  are  con-
nected to neighboring modules. Compared to the DMPPT solutions, 
this needs one less converter;  

• Removal and revival method – Chen [120] proposed and tested the 
removal  from  the  array  of  thermoelectric  modules  working  under 
lower temperature gradients. More specifically, when the tempera-
ture gradient of some thermoelectric modules decreases so that the 
system would produce more power without them, these are removed 
from the array. If the temperature gradient increases enough to in-
crease the power output of the complete system, the removed ther-
moelectric modules are reconnected. The removal or revival of the 
thermoelectric  modules  is  determined  based  on  the  predicted 
behavior  (which  is  dominantly  determined  by  temperature)  of 
thermoelectric module models [165];  

• Dynamic TEG reconfiguration –  using measured data an algorithm 
developed  by  Baek  et  al.  [121]  seeks  to  find  the  optimal  thermo-
electric module array configuration (series and parallel connections) 
for  the  current  condition.  The  optimal  configuration  is  changed 
dynamically with the aid of a reconfigurable switch network. 

Various  authors  have  studied  the  effect  of  electrical  configuration 
(connection modes) of thermoelectric modules on system output. During 
operation, individual thermoelectric modules are subjected to different 
temperature  gradients  or,  in  other  words,  they  are  working  under  a 
thermal  imbalance  condition  (uneven  temperature  distribution)  that 
leads to dissimilar outputs. Thermoelectric modules with lower power 
output  will consume power  from thermoelectric  modules with higher 
power output and, as a result, the system output will be lower than the 
sum of individual outputs (Eq. (26)). Furthermore, the wiring and con-
nectors used contribute to an increase in electrical resistance, thereby 
reducing the total power output. 

In  this  area,  Montecucco  et  al.  [129]  studied  the  electro-thermal 
effects occurring in arrays of three thermoelectric modules connected 
in series and parallel when individual modules are subjected to different 
temperature gradients (100, 150, and 200 
C). They found that series 
connections lead to lower values of Joule heating losses as compared to 
parallel  connections.  This  could  be  associated  with  the  lower  current 
values found in series connections. The temperature mismatch created 
for  the  experiments  led  to  a  power  reduction  of  9.22%  for  the  series 
connection and 12.9% for the parallel connection as compared to the 

◦

sum of individual power outputs. 

Other efforts by Vadstrup et al. [166] studied power losses for both 
connection  modes  using  four  thermoelectric  generators.  The  authors 
used the MPPT algorithm applied at both stack and module level. The 
authors found that, when the conditions are the same (for example the 
modules  are  subjected  to  the  same  temperature  gradient),  applying 
MPPT at the stack level does not have any downsides in terms of power 
output in comparison to the case where it is applied at module level. If, 
however,  there  is  a  temperature  difference,  the  authors  noted  a 
maximum decrease of 8.4% in power output for the series connection 
and 16.7% for the parallel connection when MPPT is applied at stack 
level instead of the module level. 

Negash et al. [128] tested eight different electrical configurations of 
thermoelectric  modules  on  thermoelectric  generator  power  output. 
Their experiments showed that system output can decrease by more than 
41% as compared to the reference  power output determined by sum-
ming individual thermoelectric module outputs (34.2 W). For a constant 
inlet temperature, the authors noted that the number of junctions in the 
circuitry and an unbalanced number of thermoelectric modules in the 
arrays  also  decreases  the  power  output  of  the  system.  For  the  series 
configuration,  the  power  output  decreased  by  6%;  whereas,  for  the 
parallel  configuration,  the  system  generated  11.5%  less  power.  By 
balancing  the  number  of  thermoelectric  modules  in  the  arrays  and 
minimizing the number of junctions, power losses were reduced to 4.6%. 
Overall, the main idea that can be drawn from these results is that 

connecting the modules in parallel causes higher power losses. 

9.2. Analysis of TEG system output 

The output of a TEG system depends on more than just the thermo-
electric  modules.  It  is  also  influenced  by  the  connection  modes,  the 
overall  design  of  the  thermoelectric  generator,  as  well  as  the  control 
algorithm. Based on a critical analysis of the literature in this section it 
can be concluded that efforts are still required to identify solutions with 
low overall dimension and high reliability for optimizing thermoelectric 
generator  operation  with  respect  to  the  operating  conditions.  More 
specifically, these solutions should be able to remove low performance 
thermoelectric modules (either due to the lower temperature gradients, 
or  potential  failure)  from  the  grid,  to  reconfigure  the  connections 
without  causing  parasitic  losses,  and  finally  to  solve  the  issue  of  the 
optimum  number  of  thermoelectric  generators  with  respect  to  the 
operating point and/or application. 

10. Experimental and simulation results concerning 
thermoelectric generators in automotive applications 

10.1. General findings 

◦

With the current emphasis on electrified vehicles [167,168], direct 
conversion of waste heat into electrical energy could provide a strategic 
advantage for automobile manufacturers. Studies like the one performed 
by  Dabadie  et  al.  [169]  have  shown  possible  improvements  in  fuel 
consumption  for  all  considered  cases  (diesel  hybrid  electric  vehicle 
(HEV), gasoline HEV, and Compressed Natural Gas HEV) at -25, -7, 20 
C  over  four  cycles  (NEDC,  Urban,  Road,  and  Motorway). 
and  35 
Oetringer et al. [170] analyzed the potential of thermoelectric generator 
in HEVs and showed that it is possible to obtain a 3% improvement in 
fuel consumption over all ECE R101 test cycles (3.018% for WLTP). In 
addition,  under  optimum  driving  conditions,  the  power  output  of  a 
thermoelectric  generator  can  be  increased  as  compared  to  a  conven-
tional  vehicle  since  the  engine  load  grows  in  HEV  applications;  thus, 
providing respectively high exhaust gas temperatures. Wang et al. [171] 
compared  three  mild  hybrid  cases:  without  thermoelectric  generator, 
with thermoelectric generator, and with a thermoelectric generator and 
refined  mode  transition strategy  between  three  possible  modes  (engi-
ne-only,  charge,  and  hybrid  mode).  The  authors  found  that  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100923N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

thermoelectric generator can help improve fuel consumption by up to 
3.64%  on  the  Urban  Dynamometer  Driving  Schedule  (UDDS)  driving 
cycle and 2.17% on the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) High-
way  Fuel  Economy  Test  Cycle.  Hussain  et  al.  [172]  performed  a  nu-
merical study on a 2.5 L gas-electric hybrid vehicle after determining the 
optimal thermoelectric generator design with respect to channel length, 
channel  number,  channel  width,  and  thermoelectric  layer  thickness. 
They found that it is possible to generate 300 to 400 W of electric power, 
which is sufficient to improve fuel economy – provided that the back-
pressure offset is kept at minimum. Kim et al. [173] investigated both 
experimentally and through simulations the potential of using a ther-
moelectric  generator  with  heat  pipes  to  transport  heat  from  the  hot 
exhaust gases to the hot side surface of the thermoelectric generators as 
a means of improving hybrid vehicle efficiency. The authors found that, 
◦
for  a  hot  side  temperature  of  170 
C  and  a  cold  side  temperature  of 
◦
22.5 
C, it is possible to recover up to 350 W. In this case, the offset due 
to the added system weight (51.5 kg) was not considered. Fang et al. 
[174] reported a 14.7% improvement in NEDC cycle fuel economy for 
the integrated starter-generator (ISG)-type hybrid electric vehicle with 
thermoelectric  generator  installed  on  the  exhaust  pipe  over  the  con-
ventional system for a 2.0 L engine. Deng et al. [175] compared three 
vehicle models: a conventional internal combustion engine, an ISG-type 
42-V,  and  an  ISG-type  42-V  with  TEG  model.  Both  hybrid  models 
showed  significant  improvement  over  the  conventional  internal  com-
bustion  engine  model  both  in  terms  of  fuel  consumption  (~7%  for 
ISG-type  model  and  ~8.3%  for  the  ISG-type  with  TEG  model)  and 
pollutant emissions (32.2% HC, 37.4% CO, and 38.5% NO for ISG-type 
model and 32.2% HC, 37.6% CO, and 40% NO for the ISG-type with TEG 
model) over the NEDC. Lan et al. [176] investigated the potential of a 
thermoelectric generator to improve fuel consumption for a mild hybrid 
vehicle. After validating the model against experimental and literature 
data,  it  was  found  that  for  the  NEDC  cycle  the  amount  of  energy 
recovered varies between 80 and 200 W, which translates into a 3.4% 
fuel economy benefit (approximately 253 €  over the vehicle lifetime). 
The authors also estimated an annual reduction in CO2 emissions of 39.4 
kg. Muralidhar et al. [177] simulated the benefits of installing a ther-
moelectric generator on a hybrid electric bus using real world engine 
operating  parameters  (speed  and  torque).  They  estimated  that  fuel 
consumption can be lowered by 7.2% for a Skutterudite-based thermo-
electric generator and by 6.5% for a silicon germanium-based thermo-
electric generator over the Nuremberg cycle. In a recent study, Nader 
[97] studied the possibility of replacing the internal combustion engine 
range extender of an hybrid electric vehicle with an auxiliary power unit 
using a thermoelectric generator as energy converter. Several designs 
were  analyzed  and  the  most  promising  design  was  found  to  be  a 
two-stage recuperator reheat thermoelectric generator, which was able 
to achieve an efficiency of 39%. The simulation results showed that in 
both  modes  (Plug-In  and  Self-Sustaining),  the  fuel  consumption 
decreased by approximately 7.7% as compared to an internal combus-
tion engine baseline. Finally, Sulaiman et al. [178] devised an experi-
ment to show that it is possible to use a thermoelectric generator even 
for  energy  recovery  in  Proton  Exchange  Membrane  (PEM)  fuel  cells. 
Using a 2 kW open-cathode PEM fuel cell and a single thermoelectric 
module, the authors achieved a peak output of 218.79 mW for a hot side 
temperature  of  36.7 
C.  Other 
relevant findings found in literature are presented in Tables 6 and 7 and 
the results have been split in experimental and simulation findings. 

C  and  a  temperature  gradient  of  7.7 

◦

◦

10.1.1. Main findings for experimental results 

For the efforts presented in Table 6, most tests were performed in the 
laboratory,  either  with  engines  (approx.  57%)  or  using  test  benches 
(approx. 23%), while the remaining 20% were performed using vehicles. 
Furthermore,  only  a  few  vehicle  tests  were  done  under  real  driving 
conditions. Considering the variations in atmospheric conditions (pres-
sure, temperature, humidity), vehicle/engine operating conditions due 
to traffic, road grade, etc., as well as the effects of adding the generated 

power  into  the  electrical  system  of  the  vehicle,  some aspects  of  ther-
moelectric  generator  operation  are  not  included.  For  example,  road 
induced  vibrations  can  cause  interface  failures  and  the  possibility  of 
using the relative speed between the vehicle and the surrounding air can 
generate an added cooling effect. The preferred thermoelectric material, 
used in more than 70% of studies, was Bi2Te3 (Fig. 14). Other materials, 
like PbTe, half-Heusler, and SnTe1-xSex  were also used. The laboratory 
tests illustrate possible fuel improvements of approximately 1 to 7.38%; 
however, only two of the presented efforts provided the parasitic losses 
which varied from 20 to 50 W. Hence, more focus should be placed on 
highlighting  all  aspects  of  energy  flows,  both  positive  and  negative. 
Based on the data reported in Table 6, laboratory tests indicate signifi-
cantly higher efficiency values as compared to vehicle results. This could 
be attributed to the fact that unlike on-road testing, where the engine 
usually operates under transient conditions, laboratory testing involves 
operating the engine under steady state conditions and disregarding the 
additional mass of the system. This issue could be solved by employing 
hardware-in-the-loop  testing  with  and  without  the  thermoelectric 
generator. 

◦

In  terms  of  system  power  output,  this  varied  greatly  (from  0.8  to 
1002.6  W),  depending  on  the  number  of  thermoelectric  modules 
(ranging from 1 to 458). Considering the values reported by the authors, 
it was found that the power ranged from 0.80 to 9.83 W/TEM, with a 
maximum specific output of 41.6 W/kg. Analyzing Fig. 14 and consid-
ering  the  operating  ranges,  it  appears  that  Bi2Te3  remains  the  most 
promising solution, but only in the low temperature range (up to approx. 
250 
C). The preferred medium of cooling employed water or coolant, 
with only a few efforts reporting air as the cooling fluid. One potential 
extension of this work could be to investigate Diesel Exhaust Fluid as a 
possible cooling medium for compression ignition engine-based studies. 
Another  possible  solution  that  requires  investigating  is  the  use  of 
refrigerant cooling, since it does not depend on engine type. In contrast 
with the laboratory tests, the efforts covering vehicle tests reported fuel 
consumption improvements of 0.25 to 4.00% and one case of increased 
fuel consumption (in all cases where the speed was below 110 km/h). 
For the analyzed cases, the outputs varied between 0.6 and 618.0 W, 
depending on the number of thermoelectric modules (ranging from 1 to 
240).  Furthermore,  it  was  found  that  the  power  ranged  from  0.6  to 
28.13 W/TEM, with a maximum specific output of 11.25 W/kg. Unfor-
tunately, only a few of the efforts provided a cost-to-power ratio, which 
makes it difficult to compare the cost of thermoelectric generation to 
current  fuel  prices.  Hence,  it  is  important  to  also  provide  the  cost 
analysis for the break-even point between adding a TEG system and the 
time  required  to  recover  the  investment  (due  to  a  reduced  fuel  con-
sumption) to be highlighted. 

10.1.2. Main findings for simulation results 

For  the  efforts  presented  in  Table  7,  it  was  found  that  the  used 
simulation application/environment varied greatly: COMSOL, Matlab- 
Simulink,  FloTHERM,  ADVISOR,  ANSYS-CFX,  and  other.  The  input 
data for thermoelectric generator models were obtained either using an 
internal  combustion  engine  simulation  environment  (e.g.,  AVL  Boost 
and GT-Power) or from experiments. Like the experimental testing of 
thermoelectric generators, the material of choice in more than 50% of 
studies, was Bi2Te3 (Fig. 15). The rest of the studies concentrated their 
efforts  on  half-Heuslers,  skutterudites,  PbTe,  SnTe1-xSex,  SiGe,  and 
others.  The  simulation  tests  findings  illustrate  possible  fuel  improve-
ments  of  up  to  11%;  thus,  highlighting  a  significantly  greater  benefit 
than real-world testing scenarios. There are several aspects that result in 
this  enhanced  benefit  of  thermoelectric  generators  in  a  simulation 
environment:  

• electrical and thermal properties are estimated based on average p- 

type and n-type legs values,  

• heat radiation, air gaps between the thermoelectric module legs and/ 

or the Thomson effect are neglected, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100924N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

3,88 – 7,38% 
(FC) 

2.28 – 2.4% (for 
Diesel) 
2.36 – 2.61% 
(for B5) 
Max 2.46 – 3% 
(for B10) 
(conversion 
efficiency) 
- 

10% TEG 
efficiency 
0.4% overall 
efficiency 

4.1% 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Table 6 
Review of literature results – experimental results.  

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

~175 

Engine (lab.) 

HZ-14 

8 

- 

Longitudinally 
finned stainless 
steel 

Chilled 
coolant 

68 

- 

- 

25 

125 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Exp. 

Exp. 

[6] 

[2] 

Investigate the 
possibility of 
replacing the 
alternator with TEGs 
and an economic 
analysis 
Test the recovery 
potential of a TEG 
installed in the 
exhaust system of a 
single cylinder 
engine 

[179]  Measure the vehicle 
wasted heat (brake 
disc and exhaust) 
and experiment on a 
TEM in the lab. Use 
fuzzy logic algorithm 
to produce the extra 
data for various 
conditions. 
Fabricate a TEG 
prototype that 
replaces the radiator 
of an internal 
combustion engine 

[124] 

[180] 

Create an 
experimental testing 
bench for TEMs 

Exp 

[181] 

Exp. 

Proof of concept of a 
lightweight heat 
exchanger design 
(made of sheet 
metal) with 
integrated modules 

[151] 

Design and test a 
heat pipe assisted 
TEG prototype 

Exp. 

Experimental test on 
a 1.9 L TDI engine 
with the TEG 
installed at approx. 2 
m from the turbine 
outlet 
Experimental test on 
a single cylinder 4 
stroke engine 
Fuels used: Diesel, B5 
and B10 

Experimental test on 
a vehicle (make and 
model not 
mentioned) with 
data from the 
exhaust and brake 
disc for highway and 
city driving 

Experimental test on 
a 2.0 L diesel engine, 
mounted on a test 
vehicle driving at 80 
km/h. 

Two testing benches 
were created, one for 
small scale 4-6 TEMs 
and one for 100 
TEMs, with 
controlled 
temperature hot and 
cold sides. 
Test bench with a 
diesel hot-gas 
generator, and the 
operating 
temperatures 
◦
between 600
700
between 400
600
Test bench with an 
electric heater that 
was used to heat the 
air. Experiments 
were done on two 

C and 
C for PbTe and 
◦
C and 

C for Bi2Te3. 

◦

◦

Engine (lab.) 

TEG1-12610-5.1 

20 

- 

Water 

Waffle heat 
exchanger with 2 
× 5 TEG mounted 
on each side 

Max 72 (for 
Diesel) 
Max 80 (for B5) 
Max 86 (for 
B10) 

Vehicle (model 
not mentioned) 

TEG SP1848 

1 

- 

Water 

Measurement on 
one TEM, in a 
testing lab, on a 
test bench 

0.6 – 0.9 (TEG 
on disc) 
2 – 2.5 (TEG on 
exhaust) 

Test vehicle with 
diesel engine, 
front wheel 
drivetrain and 
electric power 
brake system 
Experimental 
testing bench 

Bi2Te3 

72 

- 

80mm x 250mm x 
740mm prototype 
TEG system 

Chilled 
coolant 

75 

TG12-4 

- 

Case 
1: 4-6 
Case 
2: 
100 

Water 

Case 1: 8-12 
Case 2: 130 

400 

Experimental 
testing bench 

1. PbTe 
2. Bi2Te3 

20 

4.3-5.8 

max. ~280  

Experimental 
testing bench 

Bi2Ti3 (TEP1- 
142T300) 

36  

TEMs were 
sandwiched 
between 
aluminum fluid 
channels 
containing a hot 
and cold heat 
transfer fluid 
TEMs were 
mounted on a 
brazed exhaust 
system. 

TEMs were 
sandwiched 
between 
alternating hot 
and cold layer. 

Water 

Water 

- 

- 

1. 2.25 – 4 
(temperature 
dependent) 2. 
1.8 – 3.9 

- 

2.58 

◦

6.5 -13 (for 
300
C on the 
hot side and 
cold water flow 
rate of 50 L/h) 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

Exp. 

[182] 

Test a TEG with 
custom TEMs and 
plate-type porous 
medium with 
different porosity 

[101] 

Comparative study 
between TEG and 
Electric Turbo- 
Generator (eTG) 

Exp. 

[183] 

Test a new low- 
temperature waste 
heat thermoelectric 
generator setup 

Exp. 

[139] 

Simulate energy 
recovery from a 
prototype and 
validate the results 
using a test bench 

[184] 

Simulate and 
construct a TEG 
system 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

C) flow rate 

prototypes, with and 
without heat pipes. 
Temperatures varied 
◦
between 100-300
C 
and coolant (water, 
◦
18.4
between 10-50 L/h 
Experimental test on 
a 6-cylinder 
turbocharged diesel 
engine, with the TEG 
mounted on the 
exhaust. 
Experiments were 
done at 1000, 1200 
and 1400 rot/min. 
Two engines were 
used, with TEG and 
eTG mounted to 
determine the 
electrical power 
recovery potential. 
Case 1. Nissan YD22, 
2.2 L diesel engine 
Case 2. Ford 
Ecoboost, 1.6 L 
gasoline engine.  
A test bench was 
constructed to test 
standard commercial 
TEMs. The test bench 
allows two cases of 
study: 
Case 1. With natural 
convection cooling 
Case 2. With forced 
convection cooling 
A second-generation 
prototype was 
created and tested to 
measure the energy 
recovery of 
commercial TEMs. 
A prototype was 
created and then 
simulated that has 8 
TEMs mounted on 
the exhaust pipe. The 
simulations were 
done for three cases, 
with different 
number of fins on the 

- 

Engine (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

30 

- 

Engines (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

40 

- 

Water 

Fabricated TEG 
was installed in 
the middle of the 
tailpipe of the 
engine at a 
distance of 1.5m 
from the engine 
exhaust manifold. 

TEGs installed on 
the exhaust of the 
engines. 

Engine 
coolant at 
50
C 

◦

- 

98.3 @ 1400 
rot/min, for the 
plate with the 
lowest porosity 
(0.121). 

2.83% @ 1400 
rot/min, for the 
plate with the 
porosity of 
0.461 (second 
highest 
porosity). 

- 

- 

Case 1. 55.4 
(full-load 
conditions) 
Case 2. 126.9 
(full-load 
conditions) 

Case 1. 4 
Case 2. 18 

Test bench (lab.) 

TEC1- 
03180T125 

10 

- 

Recirculating hot 
water bath. 

Air (Heat sink 
and axial fan) 

Case 1. 0.015 
Case 2. 0.85 

- 

- 

30 

Test bench and 
prototype 

TMH400302055 
(Bi2Te3) 

24 

- 

Exhaust gases 
(exhaust pipe 
going through the 
prototype) 

Air (Heat 
sinks with 
axial fans) 

12.41 

88.3 (at 
3500 rpm) 

Prototype 
mounted on an 
engine exhaust 

Bi2Te3 

8 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Air (Heat 
sinks with 
axial fans) 

44.13 (at 3500 
rpm) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

cold side, and for a 
variation of engine 
speed with 500 rpm 
increments from 
1000 to 3500 rpm. 
Calculus, simulation 
using FloTHERM and 
real measurements 
were done on a heat 
recovery system. 
Cases taken into 
consideration: 
Case 1. Natural 
convection 
Case 2 Forced 
convection 
Experiments were 
made on a diesel 
engine with 
prototype heat sinks 
with triangle and 
rectangular shape 
pillars. Engine was 
kept at a constant 
speed of 1500 rpm 
with loads from 6 
kg•m to 18 kg•m. 
Case 1: triangular, 
forward direction (a 
triangle tip facing the 
exhaust flow) 
Case 2. triangular, 
reverse direction (a 
triangle side facing 
the exhaust flow) 
Case 3. rectangular. 
An SUV with a TEG 
mounted on the 
exhaust was tested at 
different velocities, 
to determine how 
much energy can be 
obtained and how 
does the fuel 
efficiency improve. 
Experiments were 
done at ~ 50, 80 and 
115 km/h 
A 2 L engine was 
used to measure the 
output of a prototype 
TEG that is placed 

[185] 

Simulate and 
validate a three- 
dimensional 
resistance analysis 
model 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

[186] 

Exp. 

Underline the 
influence of the heat 
sink pillars shape on 
power generation 

[187] 

Underline the 
differences between 
two TEG types 

Exp. 

[123]  Measure the output 
of a fabricated TEM 
mounted on an 
engine 

Exp. 

80 (max) 

Prototype on an 
experimental 
testbench 

TMH400302055 

8 

- 

Heater and 
blower 

Air, cooling 
fan 

Case 1. 3.21 
Case 2. 9.28 

- 

- 

80 to 120 

Prototype on an 
experimental 
testbench 

HZ-14 × 10 
HZ-20 × 10 

20 

0.082 

Exhaust gases 

Constant 
temperature 
water bath 

200 to 260 for 
all 20 TEGs 

- 

- 

Vehicle 

~320 - 480 
(depending 
on the 
velocity) 

Bi2Te3 based 
Case 1: HZQW 
Case 2: HZ20M 

16 

40 

Exhaust gases 

Engine 
coolant 

- 

Case 1: 100 - 
450 
Case 2: 33 - 140 
(depending on 
the velocity) 

Case 1: 1.1 – 
1.5% 
Case 2: -0.25 - 
0% 
(depending on 
the velocity) 

~55 

Lab 
measurements 
on a vehicle 

Bi2Te3 

72 

- 

Engine coolant 

Engine 
coolant 

75  

2.1% 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100927 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

[188]  Measure the power 
generation of a TEG 
with hexagonal 
internal fins. 

Exp. 

[189] 

Exp. 

Experimentally 
investigate the waste 
heat recovery 
performance of a 
TEG 

[190] 

Sim. 
+

Exp 

Experimentally 
investigate a direct 
contact 
thermoelectric 
generator (DCTEG) 
on a diesel engine 

[191] 

Create and validate a 
model of TEG and 
underline its 
performance 

Exp. 
+

Sim. 

instead of the 
conventional 
radiator of an engine. 
The vehicle was 
driven at 80 km/h 
(on the test bench). 
An engine mounted 
on the test bench was 
used to generate the 
heat (loaded by a 
dynamometer) 
recovered by the 
hexagonal TEG. 
Engine was operated 
in a steady state 
mode (on a speed 
characteristic), until 
exhaust temperature 
was relatively 
constant. 
A turbocharged 6- 
cylinder diesel 
engine was used as 
the heat source and 
the TEG was 
mounted on the 
exhaust. Engine was 
operated at 1000, 
1500 and 2000 rpm. 
A diesel engine was 
used as a heat 
generator for the 
experimental 
measurements, taken 
at three speeds 
(1700, 2000 and 
2300 rpm) and 
different loads. The 
cold side of the TEG 
was kept at 25, 35 
and 45
C 
respectively. 
◦
Case 1: 25
C 
◦
C 
Case 2: 35
◦
Case 3: 45
C 
A 6.6 L engine was 
used as the heat 
source to validate the 
model of a TEG. Gas- 
in temperature was 
varied, obtaining 
three cases: 

◦

~240 
(@ 3000 
rpm) 

Engine (lab.) 

1261G-7L31- 
05CQ 

18 

- 

Prototype 
hexagonal fins 
placed in the 
exhaust 

Engine 
coolant 

21.2 - 98.8 
(depending on 
the speed of the 
engine 1200 – 
3000 rpm) 

- 

1.3 - 2.6% 

~300 

Engine (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

40 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Water from a 
cooling tower 

119 
(max @ 2000 
rpm) 

- 

2.8% 

Case 1: 342 
Case 2: 352 
Case 3: 362 
(@2300 
rpm) 

Case 1: 197 
Case 2: 224 
Case 3: 250 

Engine (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

40 

- 

Exhaust gases 

- 

1 – 2% 

50–50% 
water and 
ethylene 
glycol 
mixture 
cooled 
separately 

Case 1: ~28 – 
43 
Case 2: ~22 – 
36 
Case 3: ~20 – 
32 
(varies with the 
speed of the 
engine 1700 – 
2300 rpm) 

Engine (lab.) 

HZ-14 (Bi2Te3) 

2 

- 

EGR Path 

Coolant @4

◦

C 

- 

- 

Case 1: ~9.8 
Case 2: ~6.2 
Case 3: ~2.5 
(max values) 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Exp. 

Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

[192] 

Determine the 
benefits of using an 
intermediate fluid to 
damp the dynamic 
heat input of the 
vehicle engine 
exhaust 

[193]  Measure the power 

Exp. 

output of a TEG 
installed in a vehicle 

[194]  Waste heat recovery 

Exp. 

performance of a 
TEG installed in a 
light commercial 
vehicle 

[195] 

A method to assess 
the fuel economy of 
an automotive TEG 

Exp. 
+

Sim. 

[87] 

Optimize TEG 
internal structure for 
ICE WHR 

Exp. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

◦

◦

◦

C 
C 
C 

Case 1: 181
Case 2: 228
Case 3: 254
An engine was used 
as a heat source, 
operating at different 
speeds and torques. 
The TEG was 
mounted with an 
intermediary oil 
circuit on the hot 
side, that exchanges 
heat with the 
exhaust. 
A vehicle was 
operated on a 
dynamometer at 80 – 
125 km/h in 5th gear 
(equivalent to road 
test) with a TEG 
system mounted on 
the exhaust. 
A vehicle equipped 
with a 2.3 L diesel 
engine was operated 
on different driving 
cycles and different 
vehicle speeds to 
determine the 
benefit of the system. 
The system was also 
tested on the test 
bench. 
A TEG was installed 
in the exhaust system 
of a 1.4 L TSI engine, 
after the TWC, to 
analyze the fuel 
economy 
improvement of such 
a system. The engine 
equipped a virtual 
vehicle operating at 
four different driving 
speeds. 
The study analyzes 
the thermal 
performance of 
ETEGs with differing 
internal structures 
(see cases) to outline 
interface 

~300 
(max) 

Engine (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

105 

- 

Oil circuit 
(independent 
from the engine 
oil circuit) 

Engine 
coolant 

51 – 551.2 

-  

Case 1: ~90 
Case 2: 
~185 
Case 3: 240 

Whole vehicle 
on 
dynamometer 

Bi2Te3 

240 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Water from 
tanks 

Case 1: ~150 
Case 2: ~550 
Case 3: 944 

390 on the 
bench 
270 on the 
vehicle 

Engine on test 
bench and after 
that vehicle on 
dynamometer 

Bi2Te3 

504 

4 (core 
weight) 

Exhaust gasses 
pass through 63 
tubes 

Water at 60

◦

C 

482 on the test 
bench 
220 on the 
WLTP cycle 

Engine on dyno 
(lab.) 

TELBP1-12656- 
0.45 
PbTe-Bi2Te3 

12 

7 

Water 

Exhaust gasses 
pass trough a heat 
exchanger with 6 
circular channels 

Case 1: 5.5 
Case 2: 37.7 
Case 3: 111.3 
Case 4: 106.8 

Case 1: 63.4 
Case 2: 
153.3 
Case 3: 
259.5 
Case 4: 
255.8 

- 

- 

- 

1.28 – 1.85% 

4% fuel 
economy 
improvement 
on the WLTP 
cycle 

0.18%, after 
weight penalty 
is considered 

~250 

Engine (lab.) 

- 

8 

- 

Plate shaped with 
fishbone fins 

Water 

Case 1: ~27 
Case 2: ~18 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

[142] 

Evaluate the 
performance of an 
automotive TEG with 
different internal 
structures 

Exp. 
+

Sim. 

[196] 

Experimentally 
demonstrate the 
possibility to recover 
1kW of electrical 
energy using TEMs 

Exp. 
+

Sim. 

[197] 

Performance analysis 
of a TEG system used 
in diesel engines 

Exp. 

[86] 

Exp. 

Assess the 
performance of half- 
Heusler TEG in 
automotive 
applications 

[198]  Modeling, 

simulating, and 
validating a TEG on a 
diesel engine 

[199] 

Test the influence of 
TEGs on the exhaust 
backpressure 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Exp. 

temperature and 
thermal uniformity. 
4 TEGs were 
installed on a 3.9 L 
diesel vehicle and 
tests were conducted 
with two different 
internal structures. 
The internal 
structure was 
modified to reduce 
the pressure drop 
compared to the 
reference case. 
A high-power- 
density TEG was 
installed in the 
exhaust of a 
Caterpillar engine 
and tested to 
highlight the energy 
recovery efficiency 
of nanostructured 
TEMs. 
The performance of a 
TEG was analyzed on 
a FIAT 1.9 L engine. 
The speed varied 
between 1500 and 
(cid:0) 1, while 
3500 min
the applied load was 
50 and 100 Nm 
respectively in each 
case. 
A half-Heusler TEG 
was installed in a 2.0 
L gasoline engine 
running on premium 
gasoline. The engine 
was operated after a 
matrix of steady- 
state engine 
operating conditions. 
A TEG was modeled 
and the results were 
validated on a 4 
cylinder diesel 
engine 
A Nissan diesel 
engine was tested on 
NEDC, WLTP and in 
different operation 

Case 1: 205 
Inserted fins 
Case 2: 205 
Dimpled 
surface 

Vehicle 

Bi2Te3 

240 

200 
190 

Plate shaped with 
fins 
Plate shaped with 
dimples 

Coolant 

Case 1: 609 
Case 2: 618 

- 

0.25% eff. 
Increase 
0.68% eff. 
increase 

339 

Engine (lab.) 

half-Heusler 
elements 

400 

30 

Plate fin heat 
exchanger with 
Nickel alloy fins 

Coolant 

1002.6 

- 

2.1% heat to 
electricity 
efficiency 

145 max 50 
Nm 
170 max 
100 
Nm 

Engine (lab.) 

- 

40 

- 

Plate and cylinder 
type, turned into 
an octagonal 
structure 

Water 

- 
156.7 

20 

- 

520-820 

Engine (lab.) 

half-Heusler 

72 

~20 

Rectangle finned 
heat exchanger 
with 6 passages  

Coolant 

Max. 250 

~50 

1-2% fuel 
economy 
improvement 

317 (max) 

Engine (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

28 

- 

Engine (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

80 

- 

(not of 
interest in 
the article) 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
exhaust 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
exhaust 

42 

Flowing 
water in a 
copper tubing 
network 

Coolant 

68 

- 

- 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100930 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

points to determine 
the power generation 
and the pumping 
losses when using 
TEGs in the exhaust. 
A Nissan diesel 
engine was tested on 
NEDC, WLTP and in 
different operation 
points to underline 
the power generation 
and the pumping 
losses that TEGs have 
on the exhaust. 
Results were 
compared 
(experimental and 
simulation results) 
for a single-channel 
TEG, at a single 
operating point, with 
emphasis on the 
economical 
approach. 
An experimental test 
rig was built to 
analyze the effect of 
using a PCM in 
conjunction with a 
TEM to improve 
transient 
performance. The 
results with and 
without the PCM 
were compared: 
Case 1. Without PCM 
Case 2. With PCM 
The hot side of the 
TEG is the coolant 
system, and the cold 
side of the TEG is the 
fuel recirculated 
inside the prototype. 
Measurements were 
done in mixed 
driving conditions, 
over a period of more 
than 30 minutes. 
The shape and the 
dimensions of the 
TEG prototype were 
optimized to meet 

[108] 

Exp. 

Test a TEG prototype 
installed in the 
exhaust of a diesel 
engine 

[93] 

Test a TEG installed 
in the exhaust of a 
heavy-duty natural 
gas engine 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

[156] 

Determine the 
influence of a PCM 
on TEG operation 

Exp. 

[200] 

Exp. 

Test the power 
output of a TEG 
prototype with 6 
TEMs installed in an 
Audi 80 

[201] 

Analyze the power 
output of a TEG 
installed in the 
exhaust system of a 

Exp. 

Engine (lab.) 

Bi2Te3 

80 

- 

350 (max) 
@2400 rpm, 
110 Nm 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
exhaust 

Coolant at 
C 
50

◦

70 (max) 
@2400 rpm, 
110 Nm 

- 

1.8% (max) 

465 

Test bench 

SnTe1-xSex 

56 

6-6.8 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
exhaust 

Cooling 
system 

282.9 

- 

3% 

180 

Test bench 

Bi2Te3 

1 

- 

Heating plate 

Water from a 
water bath 

Case 1. 2.859 
Case 2. 2.892 

- 

- 

43 

Vehicle engine 

TEC1–12710 
(Bi2Te3) 

6 

- 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
coolant 
(antifreeze) 

Cooling by 
circulating 
the fuel in the 
TEM 
prototype 

12 

- 

- 

~150-198 

HEV Engine 

1261G-7L31- 
05CQ (Bi2Te3) 

12 

- 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
exhaust 

Engine 
coolant 

18-118  

2.1% 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

hybrid electric 
vehicle 

[202] 

Exp. 

Determine the power 
output of two TEGs 
when installed in the 
exhaust system of an 
engine 

[203] 

Exp. 

Analyze the 
influence of the 
location and porosity 
of a TEG system 

[204] 

Exp. 

Determine the TEG 
output installed in 
the exhaust system of 
a diesel engine 
operating with three 
different fuels. 

[205] 

Determine the heat 
flow and power 
output of a TEG 
installed in the 
exhaust system of a 
gasoline engine 

[206] 

Analyze the 
performance of a 
hexagonal shaped 
housing TEG 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Exp. 
+

Sim. 

the maximum 
allowable pressure 
drop of a 2 L 4-cyl-
inder engine 
operating between 
1200 and 3400 rpm 
under different loads 
The 1.4 L diesel 
engine was operated 
at different loads and 
speeds (2000-3500 
rpm). 
TEGs used: 
Case 1: TEG12-8 
Case 2: TEG1-199 
The TEG was 
installed in the 
exhaust pipe of a 6- 
cylinder engine, with 
different flow 
straighteners at 
different distances 
from the TEG inlet. 
The experimental 
design included nine 
operation points of 
the engine, for all the 
fuels. The emissions 
were also monitored. 
The fuels were: 
Case 1. Diesel 
Case 2. B5 
Case 3. B10 
Using a 0.4 L 
gasoline engine the 
experiments were 
done at full load and 
different speeds: 
Case 1. 1250 rpm 
Case 2. 1750 rpm 
Case 3. 2250 rpm 
A comparison was 
made between two 
heat exchangers with 
a hexagonal cross 
section and a 
traditional (round) 
cross section. The 
experiments were 
done using a 3.8 L V6 
SI engine. 

65-70 

Engine (lab.) 

Case 1: TEG12-8 
Case 2: TEG1- 
199 

1 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Electrical 
blower 

Case 1: 0.8 
Case 2: 0.9 

- 

- 

125 

Engine (6- 
cylinder diesel 
engine) 

Bi2Te3 

30 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Coolant from 
a chiller 

Engine (lab.) 

TEG1-12610-5.1 

20 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Chilled water 

Engine (lab.) 

automotive TEG 

20 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Water 

Case 1. 218 
(avg) 
Case 2. 228 
(avg) 
Case 3. 236 
(avg) 

Case 1. 50 
Case 2. 75 
Case 3. 100 

- 

- 

- 

- 

52 (without 
flow 
straightener) – 
83 (with E type 
flow 
straightener al 
265mm from 
TEG inlet) 
Case 1. 57.99 
(max) 
Case 2. 65.59 
(max) 
Case 3. 71.18 
(max) 

Case 1. 7.36 
Case 2. 21.52 
Case 3. 32.8 

- 

- 

10-85 

Engine (lab.) 

BiTe 

6 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Coolant 

14.1-45.4 

- 

- 

[103] 

Exp. 

34 

8 

Exhaust gases 

Coolant 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100932 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦
ΔT [

C] 

Test bench / 
engine (lab. / 
vehicle) 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. 
of 
TEMs 

Syst. 
mass 
[kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

Power 
Output [W] 

Case 1. 38.65 
Case 2. 76.38 
Case 3. 101.09 
Case 4. 197.77 

Table 6 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Assess the fuel 
economy 
improvement of a 
TEG based on the 
power generation, 
backpressure and 
ATEG weight 

[207] 

Determine the power 
output of a TEG for a 
diesel generator 

Exp. 
+

Sim. 

[208] 

Exp. 

Analyze the power 
output, temperature 
distribution, 
efficiency, internal 
resistance and 
backpressure of a 
TEG installed in the 
exhaust system of an 
SUV with respect to 
vehicle speed, 
clamping pressure, 
engine coolant flow, 
andambient 
temperature 

FC – Fuel consumption 

ATEG on real 
vehicle 

ATEG (H-199-14- 
06L2) 

Generator diesel 
engine 

Bi2Te3 

Case 1. 27.3 
Case 2. 45.6 
Case 3. 57.8 
Case 4. 
126.2 

Case 1. 9.2 
Case 2. 9.45 
Case 3. 
35.67 
Case 4. 
41.81 

Engine 

Bi2Te3 

60-170 
(speed 
dependent) 

A vehicle equipped 
with a 1.5 L 3-cylin-
der engine and 
automatic gearbox 
was tested at 
different speeds and 
loads. 
Case 1. 50 km/h 
Case 2. 80 km/h 
Case 3. 100 km/h 
Case 4. 120 km/h 
Different cases were 
studied, with 
different positioning 
of the TEG. The fuel 
for the generator was 
20% mahua oil 
biodiesel. The whole 
system was validated 
as a cogeneration 
system (electricity 
and heated water). 

The vehicle, 
equipped with a 3.9 L 
4-cylinder diesel 
engine, was tested on 
the highway at 
speeds ranging from 
80 to 125 km/h. The 
engine speed ranged 
from 1600 to 2500 
rpm. 

Case 
1. 
458 
Case 
2. 
455 
Case 
3. 
102 
Case 
4. 
100 
240 

- 

- 

Case 1. 7.74 
Case 2. 8.11 
Case 3. 25.86 
Case 4. 34.62 

- 

Case 1. Heated 
wall from water 
from exhaust 
Case 2. Heated 
water from 
exhaust 
Case 3. Exhaust 
tube 
Case 4. Exhaust 
gases 

Case 1. Air 
Case 2. 
Rectangular 
tube – air 
Case 3. 
Water-tube- 
air 
Case 4. 
Exhaust tube- 
heated water- 
air 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Coolant 

100 – 608.85 
(speed 
dependent) 

- 

- 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 
Review of literature results – simulation results.  

Ref. 

Goal 

[6] 

Investigate the 
possibility of 
replacing the 
alternator with 
TEG and an 
economic analysis 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

[209] 

Recover the heat 
from an exhaust of 
a combustion 
chamber designed 
for heating water 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Sim. 

Sim. 

[122]  Modelling and 
analyzing the 
integration of TEG 
in a conventional 
vehicle for 
exhaust gases 
WHR 

[210] 

Determine the 
hypothetical 
thermoelectric 
performance and 
operating 
characteristic of a 
TEG mounted on a 
medium-duty 
turbocharged 
diesel engine 

[116] 

Simulate the 
differences 

Sim. 

The vehicle was modeled 
using Simulink. The 
exhaust and TEG heat 
transfer was analyzed 
using CFD. The TEG 
model was validated 
against experimental 
data. 
Experimental test on a 
prototype with two levels 
of recovery. 
ANSYS Fluent simulation 
of the prototype, to 
compare the temperature 
loss and the 
thermoelectric 
generation to the 
experimental values. 
Numerical simulation of 
a TEG installed in a Fiat 
Punto 1.3 L diesel engine 
with the exhaust gas as 
the hot side of the TEG 
and the engine coolant as 
the cool side of the TEG. 
The testing was done 
under the NEDC, FUDS 
and FHDS cycles. 
Modelling the TEG and 
different configurations 
and placements of TEG 
systems, with real input 
data from a 6.7 L 
Cummins diesel engine 
working at 2000 rpm, 
475Nm torque load. 
TEG configurations: 
Case 1: TEG before 
turbine; 
Case 2: TEG after turbine; 
Case 3: TEG after 
aftertreatment system; 
Case 4: TEGs before and 
after aftertreatment 
system; 
Case 5: TEGs before 
turbo and after after- 
treatment system; 
Three cases were 
considered: 
I. where cold surface was 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

Power 
Output [W] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

68 

- 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

3,88 – 7,38% 
(FC) 

Longitudinally 
finned stainless 
steel 

Chilled 
coolant 

4-sided exhaust x 
2 TEM x 2 levels 

Air (finned 
surfaces) 

- 

- 

11.21 – 26.39 
(depending on 
the mass flow 
and input 
temperature) 

~175 (Exp.) 

HZ-14 

8 

- 

- 

68 – 92.7 
(depending on 
the mass flow 
and input 
temperature) 
(Sim.) 

- 

- 

- 

Bi2Te3 

80 TC 

- 

- 

Engine coolant 

60-90 

- 

17-24% electric 
energy savings 
15-20% 
alternator 
energy 

~280 

MnSi1.75 for the p- 
type leg 
Mg2Si0.5Sn0.5 for 
the n-type leg 

Engine coolant 

- 

26 for basic heat 
exchanger 
module, 
26 for finned 
configuration, 
78 for multiple 
parallel duct 
counterflow 
configuration 

TEG types: basic 
heat exchanger 
module, finned 
configuration, 
and multiple 
parallel duct 
counterflow 
configuration 

320 for basic 
heat exchanger 
module 
975 for finned 
configuration, 
1060 for 
multiple 
parallel duct 
counterflow 
configuration 

- 

- 

25 - 175 

Case 1. Bi2Te3 
Case 2. 
(Bi0.2Sb0.8)2Te3 

1 

- 

TEG installed 
between hot and 
cold surface 

- 

Case 1. 8.2 
Case 2. 4.1 

- 

Case 1. 6.8 % 
Case 2. 5.6% 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100934 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

Power 
Output [W] 

Case 3. 3 
Case 4. 0.5 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Case 3. 4.6% 
Case 4. 1.2% 

Case 3. 
Cu11Ni1Sb4S13 
Case 4. 
AgxSb2(cid:0) xTe3(cid:0) x 
x=0.93 

321 - 445 

Case 1. 
CaMn0.98Nb0.02O3 
as n-type, 
La1.98Sr0.02CuO4 as 
p-type. 
Case 2. 
CaMn0.98Nb0.02O3 
as n-type, 
GdCo0.95Ni0.05O3 as 
p-type. 

Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

between four 
types of TEMs 

[211] 

Sim. 

Demonstrate the 
efficiency of novel 
combined 
thermoelectric 
materials 

[212] 

Sim. 

Simulate and 
compare results to 
a previous paper 
(Exp.) 

Sim. 

[213] 

Investigate the 
output of a TEM 
for different hot 
and cold side 
conditions 

[214] 

Underline the 
recuperation 

Sim. 

◦

◦

C 

C. 

C and the hot 

C, with the cold 

C with a pace of 

◦
fixed at 25
surface varies from 50- 
◦
200
II. where the difference is 
◦
fixed at 100
C, and the 
cold surface varies from 
◦
5-25
◦
5
C. 
III. Sine wave variation 
of the hot surface with 
mean values of 50, 100 
and 150
surface fixed at 25
Three different 
Perovskite-type oxide 
combined thermoelectric 
materials 
(CaMn0.98Nb0.02O3, 
La1.98Sr0.02CuO4 and 
GdCo0.95Ni0.05O3) were 
selected and analyzed 
numerically. Two 
configurations were 
considered, with 
different lengths and 
diameters. Simulation 
was done in COMSOL. 
Simulation was done for 
a vehicle with a 11.2 L 
turbocharged diesel 
engine (303 kW), on the 
world transient vehicle 
cycle (WTVC). 
The TEG was used in two 
modes: 
Case 1. cooperative with 
a smaller alternator. 
Case 2. thermostat mode 
(alternator passes the 
electricity to the battery 
and electrical loads 
intermittently). 
A simulation was made 
using the CFD software 
Fluent. The influence of 
the cooling type, coolant 
flow rate, length, number 
and location of bafflers, 
and flow arrangement 
were investigated 
Based on real 
measurements done on 

- 

- 

TEG installed in 
the exhaust of an 
ICE 

Engine 
coolant. 

- 

Case 1. 158.4 
◦
@ ΔT=409
C 
Case 2. 55.6 @ 
◦
ΔT=409

C 

◦

Case 1. 0.51% 
@ ΔT=409
C 
Case 2. 0.18% 
@ ΔT=409
C 

◦

- 

Bi2Te3 

240 

494 

- 

20 TEM 

- 

TEG model (half- 
Heusler 

- 

115 
(from a 
previous 
Exp. 
paper) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

995 

- 

Case 1. 2.92% 
Case 2. 4.1% 

TEGs were 
sandwiched on 
the exhaust 

Case 1. ICE 
coolant/water 
Case 2. Air @ 
30km/h 
Case 3. Air @ 
60km/h 
Case 4. Air @ 
100km/h 
Cooling water 

Case 1. 15.2 
Case 2. 12.2 
Case 3. 10.5 
Case 4. 12.1 

Case 1. 150 
Case 2. 30 

Case 1. 
0.005 
Case 2. 
0.57 
Case 3. 
1.64 
Case 4. 
4.04 
- 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

potential of half- 
Heusler 
thermoelectric 
materials 

[215]  Model TEGs used 
for WHR from the 
exhaust of a diesel 
engine 

Sim. 

[216] 

TEG Modelling 
and optimization 

Sim. 

[217] 

Sim. 

Underline the 
power output 
depending on the 
cooling method 

[184] 

Simulate and 
build a TEG for 
exhaust gas WHR 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

◦

WLTC, simulations were 
done to evaluate the 
energy recovery 
potential of half-Heusler 
thermoelectric materials, 
for two locations of the 
TEG: 
Case 1. Before 
turbocharger 
Case 2. After the ATS 
Engineering equation 
solver (EES) software 
was used to simulate a 
non-transient drive 
cycle. The model was 
validated against 
experimental data of two 
commercial TEMs. 
A simulation was done in 
GT-POWER for a 2 L 
engine to provide input 
data for a TEG Model. 
Two temperatures were 
taken into consideration 
for the hot side: 
Case 1. 120
C 
C 
Case 2. 150
A numerical analysis was 
done with four cooling 
methods for the TEG heat 
recovery system: the 
water coflow (WCO), 
water counterflow 
(WCOU), 
Case 3. air coflow (ACO), 
and air counterflow 
methods (ACOU). The 
model was validated by 
comparing the power 
output with 
experimental data. 
Both for hot and cold 
side, either water or air 
was used. 
A TEG prototype with 8 
TEMs for the exhaust 
pipe was built and 
simulated. The 
simulations were done 
for different number of 
fins on the cold side, and 
for various engine speeds 

◦

thermoelectric 
materials) 

TEGs installed in 
the exhaust 
system 

- 

TEG Model (Mg2Si/ 
Zn4Sb3 for the high 
temperature 
Bi2Te3 for the low 
temperature) 

Authors varied the 
number of 
thermoelements 
(maximum 
10000) for a fixed 
TEG size.  

Case 1. 40 
Case 2. 70 

Bi2Te3-based TEM 

56 

520 

TEG1-127-1.4-1.6 
40 × 40 × 3.8 mm 

1 

- 

- 

- 

TEMs installed in 
the exhaust 
system 

Water 

Up to 1200 

-  

TEG was fixed on 
the exhaust with 
copper plates for 
conductivity 

Numeric 
calculation for 
the given surface. 

Coolant 

Case 1. 70 
Case 2. 150 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Case 1. 320 
Case 2. 320 
Case 3. 100 
Case 4. 120 

Case 1. the 
water coflow 
(WCO), 
Case 2. water 
counterflow 
(WCOU), 
Case 3. air 
coflow (ACO), 
Case 4. air 
counterflow 
methods 
(ACOU) 

88.3 (at 3500 
rpm) 

Bi2Te3 

8 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Air (Heat sinks 
with axial 
fans) 

Case 1. 36.74 
Case 2. 51.36 
Case 3. 55.11 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

ranging from 1000 to 
3500 rpm with a 500 rpm 
increment. 
Cases: 
Case 1. 10 fins 
Case 2. 22 fins 
Case 3. 44 fins 
Simulations of the WHR 
system in FloTHERM 
were validated with 
experimental data. 
Cases: 
Case 1. Natural 
convection 
Case 2 Forced convection 
Experimental results for 
a vehicle driving on the 
highway and introduced 
were used as input data 
for the simulation. The 
simulation was done for 
different aspect ratios 
(sandwiching between 
hot and cold side) 
Case 1: 1/72, 
Case 2: 2/36, 
Case 3: 3/24, 
Case 4: 4/18, 
Case 5: 6/12. 
Furthermore, the height 
of the hot side heat 
exchanger fins was 
varied from 10mm to 
40mm. 
A simulation was 
developed to determine 
the energy recovery 
potential from a hybrid 
vehicle. The heat input 
from the ICE (hot side of 
TEG on the catalyst) is 
converted into electrical 
which is then fed to the 
battery of the vehicle. 
The vehicle is simulated 
on the NEDC. The TEG 
model was validated 
with experimental data. 
Measurements from a 2 L 
diesel engine (under the 
NEDC) were used as 
input data for a 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Sim. 

[185] 

Simulate and 
validate a three- 
dimensional 
resistance 
analysis model 

[130] 

Simulate the 
conversion of heat 
to energy for 
automotive 
applications, with 
different aspect 
ratios 

[176] 

Sim. 

Analyze the WHR 
potential from an 
ICE of a hybrid 
vehicle 

[127] 

Study the 
feasibility of a 
TEG to generate 
energy, and 

Sim. 

Case 1: 55 
(max) 
Case 2: 85 
(max) 

TMH400302055 

8 

- 

Heater and 
blower 

Air, cooling 
fan 

Case 1: 4 (max) 
Case 2: 11 
(max) 

- 

- 

~620 

Nanostructured 
bulk half-Heusler 
TEG 

72 

- 

Exhaust gases 

Water 

- 

- 

Case 1: 155 to 
185 
Case 2: 190 to 
215, 
Case 3: 205 to 
225, 
Case 4: 210 to 
230, 
Case 5: 220 to 
240 
(for 40 to 
10mm fins) 

~ 125 – 480 
(overall on all 
NEDC) 

GM250-127-28-10 
(Bi2Te3) 

4 

- 

Exhaust gases 

80 – 200 
(overall on all 
NEDC) 

- 

3.4% fuel 
saving 

Chilled water 
from a 
laboratory 
recirculation 
chiller (for 
validation of 
TEG) 

- 

GM250-127-28-10 
(Bi2Te3) 

1 

20 

Exhaust pipe 

Engine oil 
circuit 

Case 1: max 
110 
Case 2: max 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

Power 
Output [W] 

150 
(on NEDC) 

Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

bifunctional TEM 
development 

[105] 

Validate a TEG 
model for exhaust 
gas WHR 

Sim. 

[218] 

Predict fuel 
economy 
potential when 
using TEGs 

Sim. 

[102] 

Sim. 

Simulate the 
energy generation 
of a TEG for three 
types of engines 

simulation. The TEM 
model was also validated 
experimentally. 
Following validation, the 
module was used for heat 
recovery and for engine 
warmup. 
Case 1: strategy with 
warmup and recovery 
Case 2: strategy without 
warmup, with recovery 
The data from a 6.6-liter 
engine running on NRTC 
and was used as input for 
the simulation model. 
Two scenarios with 
different coefficients for 
heat transfer, electrical 
contact resistance and 
thermal contact 
conductance were 
considered. 
A previously validated 
skutterudite TEG model 
was integrated in a semi- 
empirical model 
comprising a quasi-static 
light-duty vehicle model, 
and dynamic models for 
the exhaust, coolant and 
TEG. Six simulation cases 
were considered: 
Case 1: NEDC 
Case 2: WLTP 
Case 3: FTP-75 
Case 4: FTP-highway 
Case 5: 90km/h constant 
Case 6: 120 km/h 
constant 
Also, there are two 
scenarios, then the TEG is 
mounted before (A) and 
after (B) the catalytic 
converter. 
For the three engine 
types (see cases), 
simulations were done in 
ADVISOR for vehicle 
speeds ranging from 10 
to 120 km/h with a TEG 
system installed in the 
exhaust. 

~ 200 

GM250-127-28-10 
(Bi2Te3) 

20 

- 

Exhaust pipe 

Engine coolant 

- 

- 

170 – 224 
(averages for 
scenario 1 and 
2) 

~ 200 

Skutterudite TEM 

400 

20 

Exhaust pipe 

Engine coolant 

Bi2Te3 

10 

- 

Exhaust pipe 

Air flow 

Case 1: ~160 - 
180 
Case 2: ~160 - 
240 
Case 3: ~160 – 
240 (but a 
bigger average 
than case 2) 

- 

- 

Case 1: (A) 
144, (B) 71 
Case 2: (A) 
209, (B) 119 
Case 3: (A) 
157, (B) 80 
Case 4: (A) 
275, (B) 145 
Case 5: (A) 
327, (B) 190 
Case 6: (A) 
661, (B) 461 
(average 
values for the 
specific cycles) 

Case 1: ~18 - 
82 
Case 2: ~18 - 
110 
Case 3: ~22 – 
110 (but a 
bigger average 
than case 2) 

Case 1: (A) 
1.7%, (B) 0.5% 
Case 2: (A) 
3.1%, (B) 1.4% 
Case 3: (A) 
2.1%, (B) 0.5% 
Case 4: (A) 
3.3%, (B) 2.1% 
Case 5: (A) 
3.1%, (B) 1.6% 
Case 6: (A) 
3.6%, (B) 2.4% 
(average values 
for the specific 
cycles) (FC) 

1 – 1.028% 
(energy eff. 
gain) 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

(all depending 
on the velocity 
of the vehicle) 

350 for 
validation 
~160 when 
the 
performance 
improvement 
is investigated 

TEP1-12656-0.6 
CoSb3(p1/n1) 
Bi2Te3(p2/n2) 

108 

- 

Exhaust pipe 

Engine coolant 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

- 

- 

Power 
Output [W] 

(all depending 
on the velocity 
of the vehicle) 

78.9 in the 
traditional 
layout 
83.4 in the 
optimizes 
layout 

Sim. 

[219] 

Investigate the 
optimal STEG 
ratio to enhance 
system 
performance 

[195] 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Validating a TEG 
design to 
highlight 
potential fuel 
consumption 
improvements 

[177]  Hybrid electric 

Sim. 

heavy-duty 
vehicle energy 
recovery using 
TEG 

[142] 

Evaluate the 
performance of an 
automotive TEG 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Case 1: light duty vehicle 
Case 2: midsize vehicle 
Case 3: heavy-duty 
vehicle 
A segmented TEG was 
validated based on 
experimental results in 
order to underline the 
effects of structural and 
thermodynamic 
conditions on a optimal 
segmented ratio design. 
After that, the potential 
of power generation in 
consideration of 
disparate p-n segmented 
ratios is studied. Finally, 
the performance 
improvement at the 
system level by applying 
optimal segmented ratio 
is investigated 
A TEG module was 
validated to simulate its 
behavior under various 
vehicle operating 
conditions. Four cases 
were simulated: 
Case 1: 50 km/h constant 
Case 2: 80 km/h constant 
Case 3: 100 km/h 
constant 
Case 4: 120 km/h 
constant 
A hybrid bus was 
modelled and used on the 
Nuremberg cycle and 
engine operating 
parameters were 
collected to provide 
inputs to the engine 
simulation software 
(AVL BOOST). Those 
inputs were then used to 
simulate energy recovery 
and fuel saving using two 
different TEGs 
(MATLAB-SIMULINK). 
4 TEGs were installed on 
a 3.9 L diesel vehicle and 
tests were conducted 
with two different 

Case 1: 60.6 
Case 2: 172 
Case 3: 235 
Case 4: 244 

TELBP1-12656- 
0.45 
PbTe-Bi2Te3 

12 

~7 

Water 

Exhaust gasses 
pass through a 
heat exchanger 
with six circular 
channels 

Case 1: 5.47 
Case 2: 34.35 
Case 3: 102.9 
Case 4: 94.9 

277 

SiGe 
Skutterudite 

96 

- 

Heatsink 

Exhaust gas is 
passed through a 
rectangular heat 
exchanger 

SiGe – 1618 
Skutterudite – 
1926.7 

- 

- 

0.18% fuel 
saving 

SiGe: 6.5% 
Skutterudite: 
7.2% 

Bi2Te3 

240 

205 Inserted 
fins 
205 Dimpled 
surfaces 

200 
190 

Plate shaped with 
fins 
Plate shaped with 
dimples 

Coolant 

612 
- 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

with different 
internal structures 

[144] 

Optimizing the 
design of an ETEG 
for ICE 

Sim. 

Sim. 

Sim. 

Sim. 

[220] 

[171] 

[221] 

Evaluate the 
performance of a 
TEG with respect 
to driving 
conditions 
Performance 
investigation and 
energy 
optimization of a 
TEG for a mild 
hybrid vehicle 

Investigate the 
possibility of 
combining a TEG 
with a TWC and 
optimize the 
model to achieve 
uniform 
temperature 
distribution and 
low backpressure 

[222] 

Sim. 

Simulate the 
impact on fuel 
economy of a TEG 
installed in a 
hybrid and a 
conventional 
vehicle 

[223]  Modeling, 

simulation, and 
validation of a 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

internal structures. The 
internal structure was 
modified to reduce the 
pressure drop compared 
to the reference case. 
The heat exchanger of an 
ETEG was optimized to 
fully exploit the potential 
of the system. The 
modified parameter was 
the angle of the baffles. 
A vehicle equipped with 
a TEG was simulated on 
the Japanese 10-15, 
NEDC and UDDS cycle. 

A mild hybrid vehicle 
equipped with a TEG was 
simulated under the 
UDDS and HWFET 
driving cycle. 
Simulations were also 
done without the TEG to 
have a reference case. 
The electric motor was a 
10 kW ISG type. 
A simulation model of a 
TEG integrated into a 
TWC was validated and 
different cases with 
respect to TWC 
positioning were 
explored to achieve 
optimum conditions for 
the TEG. 
The TWC was positioned 
in front, middle and at 
the back of the TEG heat 
exchanger. 
A TEG installed in a 
conventional and in a 
hybrid vehicle was 
simulated using 
MATLAB-SIMULINK to 
assess the fuel economy 
potential under the ECE, 
EUDC, HWFET and FTP 
driving cycles. 
An electro-thermo- 
structural coupled 
numerical analysis was 
done using ANSYS-CFX 

- 

- 

Rectangle with 
internal baffles 

Coolant 

- 

- 

427 

Bi2Te3 

20 

HZ-20, Bi2Te3 

16 

10-15 cycle: 
25.8 
NEDC: 46 
UDDS: 144.3 

UDDS A: 623 
HWFET A: 656 
UDDS C: N/A 
HWFET C: N/A 

PbTe 
Quinary alloy 

20 

14.3 

Rectangle heat 
exchanger placed 
after the TWC 

Coolant 

Front: 60 
Middle: 70 
Rear: 90 

TEP1-12656-0.6 
Bi2Te3 

7 

- 

- 

60 

Skutterudite 

12 

Case 1. 270 
Case 2. 370 
Case 3. 470 
Case 4. 570 

- 

- 

- 

◦

Empty: 63 
◦
: 65 
BA 10
BA 20
: 74 
BA 30
: 83 
: 95 
BA 40

◦

◦

13.1 
41 
32.1 

277.3 max. 
149.6 avg. 
250.9 max. 
184 avg. 
- 
- 

Front: 17.42 
Middle: 22.28 
Rear: 27.28 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

~0.6% lower 
fuel 
consumption 

0.52% 
0.78% 
0.74% 
increase in 
power output 
3.64% 
2.17% 
reduction in 
fuel 
consumption 

16% increased 
power output of 
the TEG with 
integrated TWC 
with respect to 
a conventional 
configuration 

2.5% and 7.5% 
fuel economy 
improvement 
for the parallel 
hybrid and 
conventional 
vehicle 
respectively 

- 

Hexagonal heat 
exchanger with 
hollow center 
body, which also 
contains the TWC 

Rectangular heat 
exchanger 

Coolant 

ECE: 430.7 
EUDC: 644.6 
HWFET: 700 
FTP: 466.5 

Different designs 
of fins. 

Coolant water 

- 

- 

Case 1. 5.5 
Case 2. 11.5 
Case 3. 20 
Case 4. 32 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

TEG on a 
testbench 

[133] 

[93] 

[224] 

Sim. 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Sim. 

Analyze the 
performance of a 
TEG for exhaust 
WHR 

Simulate a TEG 
installed in the 
exhaust of a 
heavy-duty 
natural gas engine 

Development of a 
TEG model to 
analyze the power 
output for light, 
mid and heavy- 
duty engines 

[225] 

[226] 

Optimize the 
output of a TEM 
using thermal- 
electric 
multiphysics 
simulation 
Develop a 
converging heat 
exchanger design 
for TEG WHR 

Sim. 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Power 
Output [W] 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

to evaluate the thermal, 
electrical, and structural 
performances of a 
prototype TEG. 
Simulations were done at 
different temperatures 
for the hot side, with 
different designs. 
A mathematical model 
was developed, and 
several structural 
influences were 
analyzed. 
Results were compared 
(experimental and 
simulation results) for a 
single-channel TEG, in an 
operating point, with 
emphasis on the 
economical approach. 
The engine power and 
relative power caused by 
the application of TEG 
system for traditional 
cars were modeled. 
Simulations were made 
for all three types of 
engines/vehicles at 
vehicle speeds ranging 
from 10 to 120 km/h: 
Case 1: Light duty 
Case 2: Midsize 
Case 3: Heavy-duty. 
An air to water system 
was used to model the 
CFD performance of the 
TEM. Model was also 
validated with a test rig. 

A multiphysics fluid- 
thermoelectric coupled 
field was used to 
simulate the TEG. The 
model was validated 
using a test rig. A 
comparison was made 
between the 
conventional and the 
converging TEG: 
Case 1. Conventional 
Case 2. Converging 

248-396 

TEP1-1264-3.4 

126 pair of p and n 
type 
semiconductors 

- 

Multi layered 
exhaust/coolant 

Cooling water 

185-605 

465 

SnTe1-xSex 

56 

6-6.8 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
exhaust 

Cooling 
system 

405 

Bi2Te3 

20 

3.5 

Case 1: 301 
Case 2: 376 
Case 3: 356 
(max @ 120 
km/h) 

Prototype 
mounted on the 
exhaust 

Cooled by air 
flows from the 
front grill of 
the vehicle 

Case 1: 82 
Case 2: 110 
Case 3: 108 
(max @ 120 
km/h) 

200 

Bi2Te3 

1 

~190 

TEG-127020 

16 

- 

- 

Exhaust 
simulation 

Cooling device 

3.5 

Air heater 

Water chiller 

Case 1. 11.5 
(max) 
Case 2. 12.5 
(max) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

3.3-4.1% 

3.4% 

- 

- 

- 

[227] 

Sim. 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Exhaust 

- 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100941 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Method 
Exp./ 
Sim. 

Sim 

Table 7 (continued ) 

Ref. 

Goal 

[117] 

Several heat 
exchanger designs 
were studied for 
TEMs 

Compare the 
performance of 
conventional TEM 
with a segmented 
asymmetrical 
thermoelectric 
generator 
(SASTEG) 

[228] 

Simulated the 
power output of 
roof TEG from a 
parked vehicle 
exposed to the sun 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

[229] 

[230] 

[231] 

Sim. 

Sim. 
+

Exp. 

Sim. 

Simulated the 
power output of a 
TEG installed in 
the exhaust of a 
diesel engine 
The concept of net 
power ratio was 
introduced to 
properly evaluate 
the heat transfer 
enhancement of a 
TEG HX 
Simulate the 
effect of varying 
model parameters 
of a two-stage 
TEG using the 
Latin hypercube 
sampling method 

For all the structures of 
the heat exchanger, the 
simulation was made for 
a light-duty vehicle on 
NEDC. 
The COMSOL 5.3 
multiphysics software 
was used to optimize the 
electrical performance 
for transient and steady 
conditions of the 
SASTEG. Different duty 
cycles were simulated by 
applying transient and 
pulsed heat inputs. 
Simulations cases: 
Case 1. TEG 
Case 2. SASTEG 
Results showed that in 
both the real vehicle and 
the model temperature 
inside the cabin rose 
sufficiently in 
comparison to the 
outside so that TEMs can 
be mounted to recover 
the energy. 
The TEG structure was 
installed in a 3.2 L 4-cyl-
inder turbocharged 
engine exhaust for 
validation. 
An annular TEG model 
installed in the exhaust of 
an engine was developed 
and validated by using 
experimental data. 

It was determined that 
the output power and 
efficiency can be 
improved by improving 
the heat transfer 
coefficient of the cold 
source and mean heat 
exchange area. Results 
were validated by 
comparing the values 
with experimental 
measurements from 
another paper. 

Description 

◦

ΔT [

C] 

TEG system design 
TEM / material 

No. of TEMs 

Syst. 
mass [kg] 

Structure on the 
hot side 

Cooling 
method 

Bi2Te3 

1 

- 

- 

- 

Case 1. 206 
(max) 
Case 2. 286 
(max) 

Eff. / FC gain 
[%] 

Parasitic 
losses 
[W] 

N
V

.

.

B
u
r
n
e
t
e

e
t

a
l
.

- 

- 

Power 
Output [W] 

250 to 650 
(increase in 
power of ICE) 
depending on 
the structure 
Case 1. 0.06 
(max) 
Case 2. 0.125 
(max) 

- 

eTEG HV37 

- 

218.8-232.6 

BiTe 

112 

225-525 

HZ-20-type 
thermoelectric 
material 

30 

300 

- 

1 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Inside of a 
vehicle cabin 

Outside of a 
vehicle cabin 

- 

- 

280 (for a roof 
area of 1 m2 
covered in 
TEMs) 

Engine exhaust 

Cooling water 

- 
(focus on the 
temperature 
difference) 

Hot air 

Cooling water 

9-43 

- 

- 

3.55 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

(continued on next page) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

n
i
a
g
C
F

/

.
f
f
E

r
e
w
o
P

]

%

[

c
i
t
i
s
a
r
a
P

]

W

[

t
u
p
t
u
O

-
0
0
0
4
(

%
1
1

)

m
p
r

0
0
2
5

s
e
s
s
o
l

]

W

[

-

r
o
f
(

5
7
-
0
6

d
e
e
p
s
-
h
g
i
h

-
0
0
0
4

s
t
s
e
t

)

m
p
r

0
0
2
5

g
n
i
l
o
o
C

d
o
h
t
e
m

e
d
i
s

t
o
h

]
g
k
[

s
s
a
m

e
h
t

n
o

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
S

.
t
s
y
S

s

M
E
T

f
o

.
o
N

l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
/
M
E
T

n
g
i
s
e
d
m
e
t
s
y
s
G
E
T

]
C

◦

[
T
Δ

n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

d
o
h
t
e
M

/
.
p
x
E

.

m
i
S

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

7

e
l
b
a
T

l
a
o
G

.
f
e
R

t
n
a
l
o
o
C

s
e
s
a
g

t
s
u
a
h
x
E

-

m
m
5
2
×
5
2
(

1

k
c
e
b
e
e
S

h
g
i
H

0
0
6
~

o
t

s
a
w
e
s
o
p
r
u
p

e
h
T

.

m
i
S

d
i
r
b
y
h

a

e
t
a
l
u
m
i
S

]
2
3
2
[

)
e
l
u
d
o
m

l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m

t
n
e
i
c
fi
f
e
o
c

t
u
p
t
u
o
r
e
w
o
p
e
h
t
e
z
y
l
a
n
a

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

r
o
f

,

G
E
T

e
h
t

f
o

0
0
2
5

–

0
0
0
1

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
s
a
c

e
h
t

f
o

e
g
n
a
r

d
e
e
p
s

m
p
r

s
a
w
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

e
h
T

.
e
n
i
g
n
e

C
D
E
N
e
h
t

n
o

d
e
t
a
l
u
m

i
s

d
n
a

,
s
e
l
c
y
c
C
T
L
W
d
n
a

s
e
u
l
a
v

y
m
o
n
o
c
e

l
e
u
f

e
n
o
d

e
r
e
w
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
m
i
S

r
e
b
m
u
n

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

h
t
i

w

e
h
t

f
o

s
e
z
i
s

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

d
n
a

.

d
e
t
a
d
i
l
a
v

e
r
e
w

.
s

M
E
T

d
e
p
p
i
u
q
e

e
l
c
i
h
e
v

r
o
f

G
E
T

a

h
t
i

w

R
H
W

s
a
g

t
s
u
a
h
x
e

• thermoelectric modules models are validated against manufacturer 
data without experimental testing from the authors (see Section 6),  
• the figure of merit is often considered independent of temperature 
leading to an overestimation of the power output at low tempera-
tures and underestimation at high temperatures,  

• the  contact  pressure  (and  therefore  thermal  contact  resistance)  is 
disregarded or considered constant resulting in an overestimation of 
heat flow values, 

• for  thermoelectric  generator  systems  consisting  of  many  thermo-
electric modules, validation is done for a single module and not the 
system as  a whole, thus disregarding the  additional losses (due to 
non-uniform  temperature  distribution  and  consequently  tempera-
ture  gradients)  and  requirements  for  providing  the  proper  voltage 
levels for the storage system and/or load, 

• the parasitic losses (exhaust backpressure, added weight of the sys-
tem and/or auxiliary components, efficiency of the DC-DC converter, 
different  power outputs  of  the  individual modules etc.)  associated 
with  the  thermoelectric  generator  system  are  neglected  or 
underestimated, 

• simulation models usually consist of many submodels that are indi-
vidually validated – in many cases each submodel overestimates the 
performance and consequently, the complete model provides more 
optimistic results. 

When  including  realistic  assumptions,  simulations  yielded  results 
closer to real-world testing values. Thus, more focus should be placed on 
incorporating the real aspects of employing thermoelectric generators in 
on-road  operation  to  simulations.  Only  one  effort  estimated  parasitic 
losses: for a thermoelectric generator with 20 thermoelectric modules, 
the maximum losses were estimated at 4 W. Again, like the experimental 
findings, more focus should be placed on highlighting all energy flows. 
Compared to the experiments (Table 6), simulations (Table 7) showed 
possible outputs of up to 1926.7 W, depending on the number of ther-
moelectric modules (ranging from 1 to 240). This value was achieved for 
a thermoelectric generator with 96 thermoelectric modules or 20.1 W/ 
TEM.  The  maximum  specific  output  was  the  same  as  in  the  case  of 
laboratory tests since it was obtained by the same authors 41.6 W/kg. 
For cooling, the authors used in their studies coolant, water, and air. 

Given that the experimental results find improvements in fuel con-
sumption are possible, as stated prior in Section 6, research should focus 
on current hindrances, such as the stabilization and uniform distribution 
of  temperature  on  the  hot  side,  testing  of  the  TEG  system  under  the 
thermal  and  mechanical  stresses,  lightweight  development,  and  the 
appropriate selection of the thermoelectric material. 

10.2. Analysis of experimental and simulation results concerning 
thermoelectric generators in automotive applications 

As described in the previous section, the findings covering experi-
mental research of thermoelectric generators illustrate that most efforts 
are concentrated on the use of thermoelectric generators for exhaust gas 
waste heat recovery, with a limited number of studies covering exhaust 
gas recirculation and radiator thermoelectric generators. Furthermore, 
the testing is done in laboratory conditions, which limits the possibility 
to identify all the challenges of using thermoelectric generators as well 
as to quantify the benefits. Further advances in the field can be obtained 
by  employing RDE testing, which  can provide a  more comprehensive 
understanding  of  the  benefits  and  challenges  of  using  thermoelectric 
generators in this field. With respect to the simulation of thermoelectric 
generators  for  vehicle  waste  heat  recovery,  the  proposed  models  are 
generally  only  briefly  presented  (therefore  limiting  the  possibility  to 
reproduce the results), cover only particular problems of thermoelectric 
generator use, and are not integrated with specialized software for the 
automotive industry. Consequently, directing research efforts towards 
the integration of such simulation solutions in specialized software, as 
well  as  providing  more  detailed  presentations  of  the  models  can 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100943 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 14. Power output results for a selection of cases (based on available data) presented in Table 6 (experimental results).  

Fig. 15. Power output results for a selection of cases (based on available data) presented in Table 7 (simulation results).  

positively impact the interest in further developing efficient solutions to 
use thermoelectric generators for vehicle waste heat recovery. Finally, it 
must be noted that recent developments in the automotive sector are 
pushing (and therefore gradually limiting) internal combustion engines 
research and development in the direction of hard-to-electrify applica-
tions. Furthermore, the technologies that are being deployed for internal 
combustion engines are pushing the efficiency limits. Since this requires 
that more heat is converted into useful work, the result will be lower 
exhaust gas temperatures and ultimately, lower thermoelectric gener-
ator efficiencies. 

11. Conclusions 

Since  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century,  the  internal  combustion 
engine has been the main propulsion source for both passenger cars and 
freight  transport.  However,  its  future  is  uncertain  due  to  its  negative 
impact  on  climate  change  and  the  current  proliferation  of  electrified 
vehicles. While the issue of pollutant emissions can be solved by modern 
aftertreatment  systems,  the  efficiency  problem  is  harder  to  rectify, 

mainly due to the unavoidable losses accompanying the conversion of 
heat into work. Therefore, by partially recovering some of this otherwise 
wasted heat, the energy balance could be significantly improved. Of the 
thermal  energy  recovery  methods  options  proposed  for  internal  com-
bustion  engines,  thermoelectric  generators  have  several  advantages: 
lack of moving parts and working fluids, environmentally friendly, high 
reliability, the direct conversion of thermal energy into electrical energy 
and other. Despite all these advantages, the use of such systems has not 
seen general adoption mainly due to its poor efficiency. However, recent 
advances  in  thermoelectric  materials  could  provide  the  required 
breakthrough  resulting  in  their  continued  need  for  study  with  an 
emphasis on achieving high energy efficiency. 

The present study has sought to aid this effort by bringing together 
all aspects concerning the use of thermoelectric generators for internal 
combustion  engines  waste  heat  recovery  as  well  as  delivering  two 
thorough  summaries  of  both  experimental  and  simulation  results. 
Finally, this effort covers aspects regarding both thermoelectric gener-
ators installed on the exhaust system, which are usually preferred due to 
high  temperatures  of  the  exhaust  gas,  and  in  other  regions  that  can 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100944N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

provide  heat  for  power  generation  (i.e.,  radiator  and  exhaust  gas 
recirculation). 

Making thermoelectric generators more attractive for vehicle man-
ufactures,  especially  for  heavy-duty  vehicles  used  in  road  transport, 
requires a significant boost in their efficiency. Consequently, research 
efforts should be focused on the identification of new solutions, tech-
nologies, and materials that can further improve the figure of merit to 
reach a value of at least 5. However, the complexity and multitude of 
physical  parameters  that  govern  the  operating  efficiency  of  thermo-
electric  generators  make  it  difficult  to  achieve  such  a  high  figure  of 
merit.  This  requires  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  interactions  be-
tween  their  thermal  and  electrical  characteristics  and  conflicting  re-
quirements  (e.g.,  heat  flux  vs.  thermal  conductivity).  Therefore, 
achieving this target requires solutions to break the correlation between 
the  three  factors  influencing  ZT:  Seebeck  coefficient,  electrical  re-
sistivity, and thermal conductivity. 

The design of thermoelectric modules seeks to solve the problem of 
module  efficiency  with  respect  to  its  application.  In  this  respect,  re-
searchers and manufacturers alike need to overcome several challenges 
with respect to thermoelectric materials: improvement of Z (by solving 
the conflicting requirements of the electrical and thermal characteris-
tics), growth of operating range, and/or development of low-cost ma-
terials,  while  also  considering  environmental  impact,  mechanical 
vibrations,  and  shocks.  Thermoelectric  module  efficiency  can  also  be 
increased  by  using segmented  thermoelectric generators,  which use a 
series of segments made of different types of thermoelectric materials 
that work in narrower temperature ranges, but at the cost of increased 
manufacturing  and  optimization  efforts.  As  opposed  to  segmented 
thermoelectric  generators,  cascaded  thermoelectric  generators  use 
several  independent  thermoelectric  modules  installed  in  two  or  three 
cascade  stages,  thus  benefiting  from  a  simpler  structure  and  easier 
manufacturing. The main challenge is the appropriate selection of the 
thermoelectric modules. 

Reviewing the literature, it has been found that there are numerous 
challenges  to  overcome  before  thermoelectric  generators  can  become 
viable for automotive usage: development of thermoelectric materials 
with  high  efficiencies  appropriate  for  the  internal  combustion  engine 
operating temperature ranges, ensuring an appropriate heat transfer on 
the hot side, improving robustness, lightweight design (not an issue for 
applications using stationary engines) and others. In addition to these 
general  challenges,  there  are  specific  challenges  depending  on  the 
installation  position  of  the  thermoelectric  generator  system  (exhaust 
pipe,  the  exhaust  gas  recirculation  system,  radiator,  and  oil  pan): 
decreasing temperature along the flow direction, too high or too low hot 
side  temperatures,  non-uniform  distribution  of  temperature,  etc.  The 
positioning  of  the  thermoelectric  generator  system  also  requires 
consideration of other factors like the availability of installation space 
and mitigating the negative effect of the thermoelectric generator sys-
tem.  Furthermore,  depending  on  the  installation  location  there  is  the 
issue  of  heat  extraction  and  uniform  temperature  distribution 
(compared to the exhaust gas thermoelectric generator, the radiator and 
exhaust  gas  recirculation thermoelectric  generators do not  require  an 
additional  hot  side  heat  exchanger).  Exhaust  gas  and  exhaust  gas 
recirculation  thermoelectric  generators  pose  further  issues  due  to  the 
large thermal resistance between the exhaust gases and the hot side of 
the thermoelectric generator. Several methods have been proposed to 
solve  these issues like heat pipes, improved  heat exchanger materials 
and/or design, as well as phase change materials. Heat exchanger ma-
terials  and  design  can  significantly  impact  the  power  output  of  the 
system,  but also the  performance of  the  engine  (due to  the increased 
backpressure). The ability of heat pipes to transport heat at remote lo-
cations have made it possible to solve several issues: eliminate the need 
for a direct contact between the thermoelectric generator elements and 
the  exhaust  pipe,  reduce  the  thermal  resistance  while  lowering  the 
pressure losses, and improve uniformity of the temperature distribution. 

However, their use also poses some challenges like the limited rate of 
heat transfer, high design effort, added weight etc. Phase change ma-
terials  have  the  advantage  that  they  can  store  and  release  heat,  thus 
maintaining a quasi-constant temperature. Furthermore, phase change 
materials  can  provide  thermal  protection  in  case  of  temperature  ex-
tremes that could damage the thermoelectric generator. However, they 
would also increase the cost and weight of the system. 

As described in the previous sections, the findings illustrate that the 
output of a thermoelectric generator depends on several factors, such as 
the number of thermocouples in the thermoelectric modules, the num-
ber  of  thermoelectric  modules,  the  configuration/connection  of  the 
modules, the thermoelectric materials properties, and the temperature 
gradient. Therefore, to achieve maximum performance (power and ef-
ficiency), a good design and control algorithm are required. 

Finally, the use of thermoelectric generators for waste heat recovery 
in  vehicles  requires  multiple  compromises  and  optimizations,  which 
opens  numerous  possibilities for  further  research and  innovation.  For 
example, solving the conflict between the efficient use of thermoelectric 
generators for exhaust gas waste heat recovery and the operation of the 
exhaust gas aftertreatment system. One example could involve the use of 
thermoelectric  generators  for  both  electrical  energy  generation  and 
temperature  control  for  a  close-coupled  three-way  catalyst.  Another 
could  consider  that  city  traffic  leads  to  large  periods  of  exhaust  gas 
recirculation operation and that there are significant efforts to increase 
the operating range of exhaust gas recirculation for highway vehicles; 
hence,  use  of  thermoelectric  generators  could  reduce  stress  on  the 
exhaust gas recirculation cooler. In addition, solving the issue of ther-
moelectric module efficiency at low temperature gradients can extend 
their use to radiator thermoelectric generators. Research efforts should 
also  be  directed  towards  lowering  the  negative  impact  on  internal 
combustion  engine  operation  where  increasing  heat  exchanger  effi-
ciency comes at the cost of an increased backpressure. Here, the use of 
the engine oil pan as a heat source can be a solution but its performance 
strongly depends on the vehicle velocity and the ambient temperature. 
Overall,  the  findings  presented  in  this  effort  illustrate  that  it  is 
feasible to use thermoelectric generation to partially recover the waste 
heat of internal combustion engines, but there are still important bar-
riers that must be overcome before this solution can be commercially 
adopted for vehicles. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Nicolae  Vlad  Burnete:  Conceptualization,  Resources,  Writing  – 
original  draft,  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Visualization.  Florin 
Mariasiu: Writing –  original draft. Christopher Depcik: Conceptuali-
zation, Writing – review & editing. Istvan Barabas: Writing – original 
draft. Dan Moldovanu: Resources. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgment 

This paper was supported by the Project POCU/380/6/13/123927 
“Entrepreneurial competences and excellence research in doctoral and 
postdoctoral  programs - ANTREDOC”, project co-funded by  the Euro-
pean Social Fund. The authors also wish to thank Richard Balint for his 
help in collecting the data for this effort. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100945N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

References 

[1] Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Energy Flow Charts: Charting the 

Complex Relationships among Energy. Water, and Carbon 2019. https://flowch 
arts.llnl.gov/ (accessed November 6, 2019). 

[2] Ramírez R, Guti´errez AS, Cabello Eras JJ, Valencia K, Hern´andez B, Duarte 

Forero J. Evaluation of the energy recovery potential of thermoelectric generators 
in diesel engines. J Clean Prod 2019;241:118412. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
JCLEPRO.2019.118412. 

[3] Rodriguez R, Preindl M, Cotton JS, Emadi A. Review and trends of thermoelectric 
generator heat recovery in automotive applications. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 
2019;68:5366–78. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2019.2908150. 

[4] Shen ZG, Tian LL, Liu X. Automotive exhaust thermoelectric generators: current 
status, challenges and future prospects. Energy Convers Manag 2019;195: 
1138–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2019.05.087. 

[5] Brignone M, Ziggiotti A. Impact of novel thermoelectric materials on automotive 
applications. AIP Conf Proc 2012;1449:493. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4731601. 
[6] Stobart RK, Wijewardane A, Allen C. The potential for thermo-electric devices in 

passenger vehicle applications. SAE Tech Pap 2010. https://doi.org/10.4271/ 
2010-01-0833. SAE International. 

[7] Stobart R, Milner D. The Potential for Thermo-Electric Regeneration of Energy in 
Vehicles. SAE Technical Paper 2009. https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-1333. 
2009-01-1333. 

[8] Champier D. Thermoelectric generators: a review of applications. Energy Convers 
Manag 2017;140:167–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2017.02.070. 
[9] Stevens RJ, Weinstein SJ, Koppula KS. Theoretical limits of thermoelectric power 
generation from exhaust gases. Appl Energy 2014;133:80–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.07.075. 

[10] Battiston S, Boldrini S, Fiameni S, Famengo A, Fabrizio M, Barison S. Multilayered 
thin fi lms for oxidation protection of Mg 2 Si thermoelectric material at middle – 
high temperatures. Thin Solid Films 2012;526:150–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tsf.2012.10.114. 

[11] Bennett GL, Skrabek EA. Power performance of U.S. space radioisotope 

thermoelectric generators. In: Proceedings of the 15th international conference 
on thermoelectrics; 1996. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICT.1996.553506. 
[12] Goodson K, Nolas GS, Kozinsky B. NSF-DOE Thermoelectrics Partnership: 
Automotive Thermoelectric Modules with Scalable Thermo- and Electro- 
Mechanical Interfaces. 2012, https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/ 
03/f10/ace067_goodson_2012_o.pdf (accessed November 6, 2019). https://www. 
energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/03/f13/goodson.pdf. 

[13] Gao Y, Marconnet AM, Panzer MA, Leblanc S, Dogbe S, Ezzahri Y, Shakouri A, 

Goodson KE. Nanostructured interfaces for thermoelectrics. Journal of Electronic 
Materials 2010;39:1456–62. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11664-010-1256-7. 
[14] Goodson PK, Barako MT, Marconnet A, Park W, Leblanc S. Novel nanostructured 
interface solution for automotive thermoelectric modules application. Dep Energy 
2012. 

[15] Leszczynski J, Wojciechowski KT, Malecki AL. Studies on thermal decomposition 

and oxidation of CoSb3. J Therm Anal Calorim 2011;105:211. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10973-011-1461-5. 

[16] Li F, Huang X, Jiang W, Chen L. Microstructure and contact resistivity of (Bi, Sb) 
2Te 3/Sb interface. AIP Conf Proc 2012;1449:458–62. https://doi.org/10.1063/ 
1.4731595. 

[17] Salvador JR, Cho JY, Ye Z, Moczygemba JE, Thompson AJ, Sharp JW, K¨onig JD, 
Maloney R, Thompson T, Sakamoto J, et al. Thermal to Electrical Energy 
Conversion of Skutterudite-Based Thermoelectric Modules. J. Electron. Mater. 
2013;42:1389. 

[18] Crane D, Jackson G, Holloway D. Towards Optimization of automotive waste heat 

recovery using thermoelectrics. SAE Tech Pap 2001. https://doi.org/10.4271/ 
2001-01-1021. SAE International. 

[19] Zheng XF, Liu CX, Yan YY, Wang Q. A review of thermoelectrics research – recent 
developments and potentials for sustainable and renewable energy applications. 
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;32:486–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
RSER.2013.12.053. 

[20] Saidur R, Rezaei M, Muzammil WK, Hassan MH, Paria S, Hasanuzzaman M. 

Technologies to recover exhaust heat from internal combustion engines. Renew 
Sustain Energy Rev 2012;16:5649–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
RSER.2012.05.018. 

[21] Alghoul MA, Shahahmadi SA, Yeganeh B, Asim N, Elbreki AM, Sopian K, et al. 

A review of thermoelectric power generation systems: roles of existing test rigs/ 
prototypes and their associated cooling units on output performance. Energy 
Convers Manag 2018;174:138–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ENCONMAN.2018.08.019. 

[22] Yang J. Potential applications of thermoelectric waste heat recovery in the 

automotive industry. In: Proceedings of the 24th international conference on 
thermoelectrics. 2005; 2005. p. 170–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ICT.2005.1519911. 

[23] Patil DS, Arakerimath RR, Walke PV. Thermoelectric materials and heat 

exchangers for power generation – a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;95: 
1–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2018.07.003. 

[24] Orr B, Akbarzadeh A, Mochizuki M, Singh R. A review of car waste heat recovery 
systems utilising thermoelectric generators and heat pipes. Appl Therm Eng 2016; 
101:490–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APPLTHERMALENG.2015.10.081. 
[25] Hatami M, Ganji DD, Gorji-Bandpy M. A review of different heat exchangers 
designs for increasing the diesel exhaust waste heat recovery. Renew Sustain 
Energy Rev 2014;37:168–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2014.05.004. 

[26] Kusano D, Hori Y. Effects of PbTe doping on the thermoelectric properties of 

(Bi2Te3)0.2(Sb2Te3)0.8. In: Twenty-First International Conference on 
Thermoelectrics, 2002. Proceedings ICT ’02.; 2002. p. 13–6. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ICT.2002.1190254. 

[27] Zhu P, Imai Y, Isoda Y, Shinohara Y, Jia X, Zou G. Enhanced thermoelectric 

properties of PbTe alloyed with Sb2Te3. J Phys Condens Matter 2005;17:7319–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/17/46/015. 

[28] Chen ZG, Han G, Yang L, Cheng L, Zou J. Nanostructured thermoelectric 

materials: current research and future challenge. Prog Nat Sci Mater Int 2012;22: 
535–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnsc.2012.11.011. 

[29] Snyder GJ, Toberer ES. Complex thermoelectric materials. Nat Mater 2008;7: 

105–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2090. 

[30] Yoo K, Simpson K, Bell M, Majkowski S. An engine coolant temperature model 

and application for cooling system diagnosis. SAE transactions 2000;950-960. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2000-01-0939. 

[31] Cairns A, Fraser N, Blaxill H. Pre versus post compressor supply of cooled EGR for 
full load fuel economy in turbocharged gasoline engines (No. 2008-01-0425). SAE 
Technical Paper 2008. https://doi.org/10.4271/2008-01-0425. 

[32] Cairns A, Blaxill H, Irlam G. Exhaust gas recirculation for improved part and full 
load fuel economy in a turbocharged gasoline engine (No. 2006-01-0047). SAE 
Technical Paper. 2006. https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-0047. 

[33] Yang L, Chen ZG, Dargusch MS, Zou J. High performance thermoelectric 

materials: progress and their applications. Adv Energy Mater 2018;8:1701797. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201701797. 

[34] Pei Y, Gibbs ZM, Gloskovskii A, Balke B, Zeier WG, Snyder GJ. Optimum carrier 
concentration in n-Type PbTe thermoelectrics. Adv Energy Mater 2014;4: 
1400486. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201400486. 

[35] Pei Y, LaLonde AD, Wang H, Snyder GJ. Low effective mass leading to high 

thermoelectric performance. Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:7963–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C2EE21536E. 

[36] Pei Y, Heinz NA, Snyder GJ. Alloying to increase the band gap for improving 

thermoelectric properties of Ag2Te. J Mater Chem 2011;21:18256–60. https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/C1JM13888J. 

[37] UncorrelaTEd Project - Solid-liquid thermoelectric systems with uncorrelated 

properties, http://uncorrelated.uji.es/documents/ (accessed October 12, 2021). 
http://uncorrelated.uji.es/. 

[38] Hamawandi B, Batili H, Paul M, Ballikaya S, Kilic NI, Szukiewicz R, et al. Minute- 
made, high-efficiency nanostructured Bi2Te3 via high-throughput green solution 
chemical synthesis. Nanomater 2021:11. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
nano11082053. 

[39] Crane D, Lagrandeur J. Automotive waste heat conversion to power 

program—2011 vehicle technologies program annual merit review. DOE OVT 
Review. 2011 https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/03/f11/ace051_la 
grandeur_2011_o_0.pdf. 

[40] Love ND, Szybist JP, Sluder CS. Effect of heat exchanger material and fouling on 
thermoelectric exhaust heat recovery. Appl Energy 2012;89:322–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.07.042. 

[41] Ikoma K, Munekiyo M, Furuya K, Kobayashi M, Izumi T, Shinohara K. 
Thermoelectric module and generator for gasoline engine vehicles. In: 
Proceedings of the 17th international conference on thermoelectrics; 1998. 
p. 464–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICT.1998.740419. 

[42] Fakheri A. Efficiency and effectiveness of heat exchanger series. J Heat Transf 

2008;130. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2927404. 

[43] Yazawa K, Shakouri A. Fuel-burning thermoelectric generators for the future of 

electric vehicles. Energy Convers Manag 2021;227:113523. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113523. 

[44] Soleimani Z, Zoras S, Ceranic B, Shahzad S, Cui Y. A review on recent 

developments of thermoelectric materials for room-temperature applications. 
Sustain Energy Technol Assessments 2020;37:100604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
seta.2019.100604. 

[45] Sch¨onecker A, Pichon PY, K¨onig J, J¨agle M, den Heijer M, Kraaijveld B. Novel 

process for metal silicide nanostructures regarding cheap and large-scale material 
synthesis BT. In: Proceedings of the 11th European conference on 
thermoelectrics; 2014. p. 43–51. Amaldi A, Tang F, editors., Cham: Springer 
International Publishing. 

[46] Zhang L, Rogl G, Grytsiv A, Puchegger S, Koppensteiner J, Spieckermann F, et al. 
Mechanical properties of filled antimonide skutterudites. Mater Sci Eng B 2010; 
170:26–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mseb.2010.02.022. 

[47] Liu W, Jie Q, Kim HS, Ren Z. Current progress and future challenges in 

thermoelectric power generation: from materials to devices. Acta Mater 2015;87: 
357–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2014.12.042. 

[48] Yang J, Stabler FR. Automotive applications of thermoelectric materials. 

J Electron Mater 2009;38:1245–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-009-0680- 
z. 

[49] LeBlanc S, Yee SK, Scullin ML, Dames C, Goodson KE. Material and 

manufacturing cost considerations for thermoelectrics. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 
2014;32:313–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2013.12.030. 

[50] Liu W, Hu J, Zhang S, Deng M, Han CG, Liu Y. New trends, strategies and 

opportunities in thermoelectric materials: a perspective. Mater Today Phys 2017; 
1:50–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MTPHYS.2017.06.001. 

[51] Wei J, Yang L, Ma Z, Song P, Zhang M, Ma J, et al. Review of current high-ZT 
thermoelectric materials. J Mater Sci 2020;55:12642–704. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10853-020-04949-0. 

[52] Ouyang Z, Li D. Design of segmented high-performance thermoelectric generators 
with cost in consideration. Appl Energy 2018;221:112–21. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/J.APENERGY.2018.03.106. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100946N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[53] Yee SK, LeBlanc S, Goodson KE, Dames C. $ per W metrics for thermoelectric 

power generation: beyond ZT. Energy Environ Sci 2013;6:2561–71. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C3EE41504J. 

[54] Hendricks TJ, Yee S, LeBlanc S. Cost scaling of a real-world exhaust waste heat 

recovery thermoelectric generator: a deeper dive. J Electron Mater 2016;45: 
1751–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-015-4201-y. 

[55] Hendricks TJ. Integrated thermoelectric–thermal system resistance optimization 
to maximize power output in thermoelectric energy recovery systems. MRS Proc 
2014;1642. https://doi.org/10.1557/opl.2014.443. mrsf13-1642-bb02-04. 

[56] Hendricks TJ. New paradigms in defining optimum cost conditions in 

thermoelectric energy recovery designs. Mater Today Proc 2019;8:613–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MATPR.2019.02.061. 

[57] Anderson K, Brandon N. Techno-economic analysis of thermoelectrics for waste 
heat recovery. Energy Sources Part B Econ Plann Policy 2019;14:147–57. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/15567249.2019.1632976. 

[58] Liu W, Bai S. Thermoelectric interface materials: a perspective to the challenge of 

thermoelectric power generation module. J Mater 2019;5:321–36. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jmat.2019.04.004. 

[59] Barako MT, Park W, Marconnet AM, Asheghi M, Goodson KE. Thermal cycling, 

mechanical degradation, and the effective figure of merit of a thermoelectric 
module. J Electron Mater 2013;42:372–81. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664- 
012-2366-1. 

[60] He R, Schierning G, Nielsch K. Thermoelectric devices: a review of devices, 

architectures, and contact optimization. Adv Mater Technol 2018;3:1700256. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.201700256. 

[61] LeBlanc S. Thermoelectric generators: linking material properties and systems 
engineering for waste heat recovery applications. Sustain Mater Technol 2014; 
1–2:26–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SUSMAT.2014.11.002. 

[62] El-Desouky A, Carter M, Andre MA, Bardet PM, LeBlanc S. Rapid processing and 
assembly of semiconductor thermoelectric materials for energy conversion 
devices. Mater Lett 2016;185:598–602. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
MATLET.2016.07.152. 

[63] Glatz W, Schwyter E, Durrer L, Hierold C. Bi2Te3-based flexible micro 

thermoelectric generator with optimized design. J Microelectromech Syst 2009; 
18:763–72. https://doi.org/10.1109/JMEMS.2009.2021104. 

conference on thermoelectrics; 2006. p. 11–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ICT.2006.331259. 

[83] Zhang L, Tosho T, Okinaka N, Akiyama T. Design of cascaded oxide 

thermoelectric generator. Mater Trans 2008;49:1675–80. https://doi.org/ 
10.2320/matertrans.MRA2008085. 

[84] Risseh AE, Nee HP, Goupil C. Electrical power conditioning system for 

thermoelectric waste heat recovery in commercial vehicles. IEEE Trans Transp 
Electrif 2018. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2018.2796031. 

[85] Man EA. Design considerations for thermoelectric power generation. Aalborg 
Universitetsforlag; 2016. https://doi.org/10.5278/vbn.phd.engsci.00132. 

[86] Szybist J, Davis S, Thomas J, Kaul BC. Performance of a Half-Heusler 

thermoelectric generator for automotive application. Society of Automotive 
Engineers Technical Paper Series 2018;1(01). https://www.sae.org/publications 
/technical-papers/content/2018-01-0054/. 

[87] Su CQ, Zhan WW, Shen S. Thermal optimization of the heat exchanger in the 

vehicular waste-heat thermoelectric generations. J Electron Mater 2012;41: 
1693–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-012-2095-5. 

[88] Yin Y, Baskaran K, Tiwari A. A review of strategies for developing promising 

thermoelectric materials by controlling thermal conduction. Phys Status Solidi 
2019;216:1800904. https://doi.org/10.1002/pssa.201800904. 

[89] Wang H, McCarty R, Salvador JR, Yamamoto A, K¨onig J. Determination of 

thermoelectric module efficiency: a survey. J Electron Mater 2014;43:2274–86. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-014-3044-2. 

[90] Wang H, Porter WD, B¨ottner H, K¨onig J, Chen L, Bai S, et al. Transport properties 
of bulk thermoelectrics: an international round-robin study, part II: Thermal 
diffusivity, specific heat, and thermal conductivity. J Electron Mater 2013;42: 
1073–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-013-2516-0. 

[91] Wang H, Porter WD, B¨ottner H, K¨onig J, Chen L, Bai S, et al. Transport properties 
of bulk thermoelectrics—an international round-robin study, part I: seebeck 
coefficient and electrical resistivity. J Electron Mater 2013;42:654–64. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s11664-012-2396-8. 

[92] European Commission (EC), CORDIS: Final Report Summary - HEATRECAR - 

Reduced energy consumption by massive thermoelectric waste heat recovery in 
light-duty trucks, 2013. https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/218541/reporting 
(accessed February 15, 2021). 

[64] Jaziri N, Boughamoura A, Müller J, Mezghani B, Tounsi F, Ismail M. 

[93] Heber L, Schwab J. Modelling of a thermoelectric generator for heavy-duty 

A comprehensive review of thermoelectric generators: technologies and common 
applications. Energy Rep 2020;6:264–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
EGYR.2019.12.011. 

natural gas vehicles: techno-economic approach and experimental investigation. 
Appl Therm Eng 2020;174:115156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2020.115156. 

[65] Du Y, Chen J, Meng Q, Dou Y, Xu J, Shen SZ. Thermoelectric materials and 

[94] Kober M. Holistic development of thermoelectric generators for automotive 

devices fabricated by additive manufacturing. Vacuum 2020;178:109384. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.VACUUM.2020.109384. 

[66] Aswal DK, Basu R, Singh A. Key issues in development of thermoelectric power 

generators: High Fig.-of-merit materials and their highly conducting interfaces 
with metallic interconnects. Energy Convers Manag 2016;114:50–67. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2016.01.065. 

[67] Araiz M, Catalan L. The importance of the assembly in thermoelectric generators. 
Rijeka: IntechOpen; 2018. p. 7. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.75697. 
editorCh. 

applications. J Electron Mater 2020;49:2910–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11664-020-07966-6. 

[95] Schock H, Brereton G, Case E, D’Angelo J, Hogan T, Lyle M, et al. Prospects for 
Implementation of thermoelectric generators as waste heat recovery systems in 
class 8 truck applications. J Energy Resour Technol 2013;135. https://doi.org/ 
10.1115/1.4023097. 

[96] Stobart R, Wijewardane MAA, Yang Z. Comprehensive analysis of thermoelectric 
generation systems for automotive applications. Appl Therm Eng 2017;112: 
1433–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.09.121. 

[68] Custom Thermoelectric, https://customthermoelectric.com/products/thermoelec 

[97] Bou Nader W. Thermoelectric generator optimization for hybrid electric vehicles. 

tric-power-generators/tegs (accessed October 12, 2021). 

[69] European Thermodynamics Ltd., https://www.europeanthermodynamics.com/ 

products/thermoelectric-modules/seebeck-generator (accessed February 15, 
2021). 

[70] EVERREDtronics Ltd, Thermoelectric Generator, http://everredtronics.com/ther 

moelectric.generator.html (accessed October 12, 2021). 

[71] Products - Hi-Z Technology - San Diego https://hi-z.com/products/ (accessed 

October 12, 2021). 

[72] Marlow Industries Inc., https://www.digikey.com/en/product-highlight/m/mar 

low/thermoelectric-generator-tg-series (accessed October 12, 2021). 
[73] P&N Technology, http://www.pengnantech.com/power-generator.html 

(accessed October 12, 2021). 

[74] TEGpro, https://www.tegmart.com/index.php?p=catalog&mode=manufac 

turer&mid=2 (accessed October 12, 2021). 

[75] TECTEG MFR, thtps://thermoelectric-generator.com/product-category/teg 

-modules/ (accessed October 18, 2021). 

[76] 江西纳米克热电电子股份有限公司, TEHP series is the bismuth telluride based 
thermoelectric modules for converting heat into electricity. It is designed to 
optimize its performance for around 250-300C heat source n.d. http://www.the 
rmonamic.com/pro_view.asp?id=801 accessed October 12, 2021. 

[77] TE generators, TXL Group, Inc. n.d. https://txlgroup.com/te-generators/ accessed 

October 12, 2021. 

[78] Hadjistassou C, Kyriakides E, Georgiou J. Designing high efficiency segmented 
thermoelectric generators. Energy Convers Manag 2013;66:165–72. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2012.07.030. 

[79] Kishore RA, Sanghadasa M, Priya S. Optimization of segmented thermoelectric 

generator using Taguchi and ANOVA techniques. Sci Rep 2017. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41598-017-16372-8. 

[80] Tian H, Sun X, Jia Q, Liang X, Shu G, Wang X. Comparison and parameter 

optimization of a segmented thermoelectric generator by using the high 
temperature exhaust of a diesel engine. Energy 2015;84:121–30. 

[81] Snyder GJ, Ursell TS. Thermoelectric Efficiency and Compatibility. Phys Rev Lett 

2003;91:148301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.148301. 

[82] Crane DT, Bell LE. Progress towards maximizing the performance of a 

thermoelectric power generator. In: Proceedings of the 25th international 

Appl Therm Eng 2020;167:114761. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
APPLTHERMALENG.2019.114761. 

[98] Royale A, Simic M, Lappas P. Engine exhaust manifold with thermoelectric 
generator unit. Int J Engine Res 2020:1468087420932779. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/1468087420932779. 

[99] Zhang M, Wang J, Tian Y, Zhou Y, Zhang J, Xie H, et al. Performance comparison 

of annular and flat-plate thermoelectric generators for cylindrical hot source. 
Energy Rep 2021;7:413–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.01.008. 
[100] Rowe DM, Smith J, Thomas G, Min G. Weight penalty incurred in thermoelectric 
recovery of automobile exhaust heat. J Electron Mater 2011;40:784. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11664-011-1571-7. 

[101] Fern´andez-Y´a˜nez P, Armas O, Kiwan R, Stefanopoulou AG, Boehman AL. 

A thermoelectric generator in exhaust systems of spark-ignition and compression- 
ignition engines. A comparison with an electric turbo-generator. Appl Energy 
2018;229:80–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2018.07.107. 

[102] Luo D, Wang R, Yu W, Sun Z, Meng X. Theoretical analysis of energy recovery 

potential for different types of conventional vehicles with a thermoelectric 
generator. Energy Procedia 2019;158:142–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
egypro.2019.01.061. 

[103] Comamala M, Massaguer A, Massaguer E, Pujol T. Validation of a fuel economy 
prediction method based on thermoelectric energy recovery for mid-size vehicles. 
Appl Therm Eng 2019;153:768–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2019.03.004. 

[104] Crane D, LaGrandeur J, Jovovic V, Ranalli M, Adldinger M, Poliquin E, et al. TEG 
on-vehicle performance and model validation and what it means for further TEG 
Development. J Electron Mater 2013;42:1582–91. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11664-012-2327-8. 

[105] Lan S, Yang Z, Chen R, Stobart R. A dynamic model for thermoelectric generator 
applied to vehicle waste heat recovery. Appl Energy 2018;210:327–38. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2017.11.004. 

[106] Massaguer A, Pujol T, Comamala M, Massaguer E. Feasibility study on a vehicular 

thermoelectric generator coupled to an exhaust gas heater to improve 
aftertreatment’s efficiency in cold-starts. Appl Therm Eng 2020;167:114702. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.114702. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100947N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[107] Wan Q, Liu X, Gu B, Bai W, Su C, Deng Y. Thermal and acoustic performance of an 
integrated automotive thermoelectric generation system. Appl Therm Eng 2019; 
158:113802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.113802. 

[108] Ezzitouni S, Fern´andez-Y´a˜nez P, S´anchez L, Armas O. Global energy balance in a 

[131] Jang JY, Tsai YC. Optimization of thermoelectric generator module spacing and 
spreader thickness used in a waste heat recovery system. Appl Therm Eng 2013; 
51:677–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2012.10.024. 

[132] Liu X, Deng YD, Chen S, Wang WS, Xu Y, Su CQ. A case study on compatibility of 

diesel engine with a thermoelectric generator. Appl Energy 2020;269:115139. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115139. 

[109] Massaguer E, Massaguer A, Pujol T, Comamala M, Montoro L, Gonzalez JR. Fuel 

automotive exhaust thermoelectric generation system, catalytic converter and 
muffler. Case Stud Therm Eng 2014;2:62–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
csite.2014.01.002. 

economy analysis under a WLTP cycle on a mid-size vehicle equipped with a 
thermoelectric energy recovery system. Energy 2019;179:306–14. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.05.004. 

[110] Rood S, Eslava S, Manigrasso A, Bannister C. Recent advances in gasoline three- 

way catalyst formulation: a review. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part D J Automob Eng 
2019;234:936–49. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954407019859822. 

[111] Costa RC, Sodr´e JR. Compression ratio effects on an ethanol/gasoline fuelled 

engine performance. Appl Therm Eng 2011;31:278–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.applthermaleng.2010.09.007. 

[112] Jahirul MI, Masjuki HH, Saidur R, Kalam MA, Jayed MH, Wazed MA. 

[113] Çinar C, S¸ ahin F, Can 

Comparative engine performance and emission analysis of CNG and gasoline in a 
retrofitted car engine. Appl Therm Eng 2010;30:2219–26. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2010.05.037. 

¨
O, Uyumaz A. A comparison of performance and exhaust 
emissions with different valve lift profiles between gasoline and LPG fuels in a SI 
engine. Appl Therm Eng 2016;107:1261–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2016.07.031. 

[114] Kahraman E, Cihangir Ozcanlı S, Ozerdem B. An experimental study on 

performance and emission characteristics of a hydrogen fuelled spark ignition 
engine. Int J Hydrog Energy 2007;32:2066–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2006.08.023. 

[115] AL-Shemmeri TT, Oberweis S. Correlation of the NOx emission and exhaust gas 

temperature for biodiesel. Appl Therm Eng 2011;31:1682–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2011.02.010. 

[116] Y.X.Y.L. Chen WH, Lin YL, Wang XD, Lin YL. A comprehensive analysis of the 

performance of thermoelectric generators with constant and variable properties 
Appl Energy 2019;241:11–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
APENERGY.2019.02.083. 

[133] He M, Wang E, Zhang Y, Zhang W, Zhang F, Zhao C. Performance analysis of a 

multilayer thermoelectric generator for exhaust heat recovery of a heavy-duty 
diesel engine. Appl Energy 2020;274:115298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2020.115298. 

[134] Marv˜ao A, Coelho PJ, Rodrigues HC. Optimization of a thermoelectric generator 
for heavy-duty vehicles. Energy Convers Manag 2019;179:178–91. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2018.10.045. 

[135] Karana DR, Sahoo RR. Performance assessment of the automotive heat exchanger 

with twisted tape for thermoelectric based waste heat recovery. J Clean Prod 
2021;283:124631. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124631. 
[136] Luo D, Wang R, Yu W, Sun Z, Meng X. Modelling and simulation study of a 

converging thermoelectric generator for engine waste heat recovery. Appl Therm 
Eng 2019;153:837–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
APPLTHERMALENG.2019.03.060. 

[137] Luo D, Wang R, Yu W, Zhou W. Performance optimization of a converging 

thermoelectric generator system via multiphysics simulations. Energy 2020;204: 
117974. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117974. 

[138] Deng YD, Liu X, Chen S, Tong NQ. Thermal optimization of the heat exchanger in 
an automotive exhaust-based thermoelectric generator. J Electron Mater 2013;42: 
1634–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-012-2359-0. 

[139] Hsu CT, Huang GY, Chu HS, Yu B, Yao DJ. Experiments and simulations on low- 

temperature waste heat harvesting system by thermoelectric power generators. 
Appl Energy 2011;88:1291–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
APENERGY.2010.10.005. 

[140] Su CQ, Wang WS, Liu X, Deng YD. Simulation and experimental study on thermal 
optimization of the heat exchanger for automotive exhaust-based thermoelectric 
generators. Case Stud Therm Eng 2014;4:85–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
csite.2014.06.002. 

[117] Shittu S, Li G, Zhao X, Ma X, Akhlaghi YG, Ayodele E. Optimized high 

[141] Liu X, Deng YD, Zhang K, Xu M, Xu Y, Su CQ. Experiments and simulations on 

performance thermoelectric generator with combined segmented and 
asymmetrical legs under pulsed heat input power. J Power Sources 2019;428: 
53–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.04.099. 

heat exchangers in thermoelectric generator for automotive application. Appl 
Therm Eng 2014;71:364–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2014.07.022. 

[118] Fan S, Gao Y. Numerical analysis on the segmented annular thermoelectric 
generator for waste heat recovery. Energy 2019;183:35–47. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/J.ENERGY.2019.06.103. 

[119] Chen WH, Huang SR, Wang XD, Wu PH, Lin YL. Performance of a thermoelectric 
generator intensified by temperature oscillation. Energy 2017;133:257–69. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2017.05.091. 

[120] Chen M. Adaptive removal and revival of underheated thermoelectric generation 

modules. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2014;61:6100–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TIE.2014.2304934. 

[121] Baek D, Ding C, Lin S, Shin D, Kim J, Lin X, et al. Reconfigurable thermoelectric 
generators for vehicle radiators energy harvesting. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ 
ACM international symposium on low power electronics and design (ISLPED); 
2017. p. 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISLPED.2017.8009166. 

[122] Arsie I, Cricchio A, Marano V, Pianese C, De Cesare M, Nesci W. Modeling analysis 
of waste heat recovery via thermo electric generators for fuel economy 
improvement and CO2 reduction. Small Diesel Engines 2014;7:246–55. https:// 
doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-0663. 

[123] Kim SS, Park S, Kim SS, Rhi SH. A thermoelectric generator using engine coolant 

for light-duty internal combustion engine-powered vehicles. J Electron Mater 
2011;40:812. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-011-1580-6. 

[124] Baatar N, Kim S. A Thermoelectric generator replacing radiator for internal 

combustion engine vehicles. TELKOMNIKA 2011;9:523–30. 

[125] Abderezzak B, Randi S. Experimental investigation of waste heat recovery 

potential from car radiator with thermoelectric generator. Therm Sci Eng Prog 
2020;20:100686. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsep.2020.100686. 

[126] Aljaghtham M, Celik E. Design optimization of oil pan thermoelectric generator to 
recover waste heat from internal combustion engines. Energy 2020;200:117547. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117547. 

[127] Lan S, Smith A, Stobart R, Chen R. Feasibility study on a vehicular thermoelectric 

generator for both waste heat recovery and engine oil warm-up. Appl Energy 
2019;242:273–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2019.03.056. 

[128] Negash AA, Kim TY, Cho G. Effect of electrical array configuration of 

thermoelectric modules on waste heat recovery of thermoelectric generator. 
Senso Actuators A Phys 2017;260:212–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
SNA.2017.04.016. 

[129] Montecucco A, Siviter J, Knox AR. The effect of temperature mismatch on 

thermoelectric generators electrically connected in series and parallel. Appl 
Energy 2014;123:47–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2014.02.030. 

[130] Kempf N, Zhang Y. Design and optimization of automotive thermoelectric 

generators for maximum fuel efficiency improvement. Energy Convers Manag 
2016;121:224–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.05.035. 

[142] Wang Y, Li S, Xie X, Deng Y, Liu X, Su C. Performance evaluation of an automotive 
thermoelectric generator with inserted fins or dimpled-surface hot heat 
exchanger. Appl Energy 2018;218:391–401. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
APENERGY.2018.02.176. 

[143] Lu H, Wu T, Bai S, Xu K, Huang Y, Gao W, et al. Experiment on thermal uniformity 

and pressure drop of exhaust heat exchanger for automotive thermoelectric 
generator. Energy 2013;54:372–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2013.02.067. 

[144] Niu Z, Diao H, Yu S, Jiao K, Du Q, Shu G. Investigation and design optimization of 

exhaust-based thermoelectric generator system for internal combustion engine. 
Energy Convers Manag 2014;85:85–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ENCONMAN.2014.05.061. 

[145] Kumar S, Heister SD, Xu X, Salvador JR, Meisner GP. Thermoelectric generators 

for automotive waste heat recovery systems part II: Parametric evaluation and 
topological studies. Journal of Electronic Materials 2013;42:944–55. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/S11664-013-2472-8. 

[146] Tang ZB, Deng YD, Su CQ, Yuan XH. Fluid Analysis and Improved Structure of an 

ATEG Heat Exchanger Based on Computational Fluid Dynamics. J. Electron. 
Mater. 2014;44:1554–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-014-3472-z. 
[147] Wang Y, Li S, Zhang Y, Yang X, Deng Y, Su C. The influence of inner topology of 

exhaust heat exchanger and thermoelectric module distribution on the 
performance of automotive thermoelectric generator. Energy Convers Manag 
2016;126:266–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.08.009. 

[148] Wang X, Deng Y. Research on and Thermal Performance of the Heat Exchanger in 
Automotive Exhaust-Based Thermoelectric Generator. SAE Technical Paper 2014. 
https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-2594. 

[149] Yuan X, Bai W, Deng Y, Su C, Liu X, Liu C, et al. Numerical investigation on the 
performance of an automotive thermoelectric generator integrated with a three- 
way catalytic converter. J Renew Sustain Energy 2016:8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1063/1.4962028. 

[150] Brito FP, Pacheco N, Vieira R, Martins J, Martins L, Teixeira J, et al. Efficiency 

improvement of vehicles using temperature controlled exhaust thermoelectric 
generators. Energy Convers Manag 2020;203:112255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2019.112255. 

[151] Cao Q, Luan W, Wang T. Performance enhancement of heat pipes assisted 

thermoelectric generator for automobile exhaust heat recovery. Appl Therm Eng 
2018;130:1472–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APPLTHERMALENG.2017.09.134. 
[152] Brito FP, Martins J, Hançer E, Antunes N, Gonçalves LM. Thermoelectric exhaust 

heat recovery with heat pipe-based thermal control. J Electron Mater 2015;44: 
1984–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-015-3638-3. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100948N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[153] Jang JC, Chi RG, Rhi SH, Lee KB, Hwang HC, Lee JS, et al. Heat pipe-assisted 

thermoelectric power generation technology for waste heat recovery. J Electron 
Mater 2015;44:2039–47. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-015-3653-4. 
[154] Pacheco N, Brito FP, Vieira R, Martins J, Barbosa H, Goncalves LM. Compact 

automotive thermoelectric generator with embedded heat pipes for thermal 
control. Energy 2020;197:117154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2020.117154. 

[155] Klein Altstedde M, Rinderknecht F, Friedrich H. Integrating phase-change 

materials into automotive thermoelectric generators. J Electron Mater 2014;43: 
2134–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-014-2990-z. 

[156] Huang K, Yan Y, Wang G, Li B. Improving transient performance of thermoelectric 
generator by integrating phase change material. Energy 2021;219:119648. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.119648. 

[157] Yang Y, Wang S, He W. Simulation study on regenerative thermoelectric 

generators for dynamic waste heat recovery. Energy Procedia 2019;158:571–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2019.01.154. 

[158] Zhao Y, Wang S, Ge M, Liang Z, Liang Y, Li Y. Performance investigation of an 
intermediate fluid thermoelectric generator for automobile exhaust waste heat 
recovery. Appl Energy 2019;239:425–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
APENERGY.2019.01.233. 

[159] Elghool A, Basrawi F, Ibrahim TK, Habib K, Ibrahim H, Idris D. A review on heat 
sink for thermo-electric power generation: classifications and parameters 
affecting performance. Energy Convers Manag 2017;134:260–77. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.12.046. 

[160] Lei X, Wang Y, Deng Y, Su C, Liu X, Chen G. Combined numerical and 

experimental investigation on the optimum coolant flow rate for automotive 
thermoelectric generators. J Electron Mater 2019;48:1981–90. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s11664-018-06879-9. 

[161] Tete PR, Gupta MM, Joshi SS. Developments in battery thermal management 

systems for electric vehicles: a technical review. J Energy Storage 2021;35: 
102255. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EST.2021.102255. 

[162] Luo D, Yan Y, Wang R, Zhou W. Numerical investigation on the dynamic response 
characteristics of a thermoelectric generator module under transient temperature 
excitations. Renew Energy 2021;170:811–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2021.02.026. 

[163] Li X, Xie C, Quan S, Shi Y, Tang Z. Optimization of thermoelectric modules’ 

number and distribution pattern in an automotive exhaust thermoelectric 
generator. IEEE Access 2019;7:72143–57. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ACCESS.2019.2919689. 

[178] Saufi Sulaiman M, Singh B, Mohamed W. Experimental and theoretical study of 
thermoelectric generator waste heat recovery model for an ultra-low temperature 
PEM fuel cell powered vehicle. Energy 2019;179:628–46. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.energy.2019.05.022. 

[179] Abbasi V, Tabar VS. Measurement and evaluation of produced energy by 

thermoelectric generator in vehicle. Measurement 2020;149:107035. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.MEASUREMENT.2019.107035. 

[180] Bjørk R, Sarhadi A, Pryds N, Lindeburg N, Viereck P. A thermoelectric power 
generating heat exchanger: part I – experimental realization. Energy Convers 
Manag 2016;119:473–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2016.04.042. 
[181] Bosch H. From modules to a generator: an integrated heat exchanger concept for 
car applications of a thermoelectric generator. J Electron Mater 2016;45: 
1606–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-015-4129-2. 

[182] Choi Y, Negash A, Kim TY. Waste heat recovery of diesel engine using porous 
medium-assisted thermoelectric generator equipped with customized 
thermoelectric modules. Energy Convers Manag 2019;197:111902. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2019.111902. 

[183] Gou X, Xiao H, Yang S. Modeling, experimental study and optimization on low- 
temperature waste heat thermoelectric generator system. Appl Energy 2010;87: 
3131–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2010.02.013. 

[184] Hsu CT, Yao DJ, Ye KJ, Yu B. Renewable energy of waste heat recovery system for 

automobiles. J Renew Sustain Energy 2010;2:13105. https://doi.org/10.1063/ 
1.3289832. 

[185] Huang GY, Hsu CT, Fang CJ, Yao DJ. Optimization of a waste heat recovery 

system with thermoelectric generators by three-dimensional thermal resistance 
analysis. Energy Convers Manag 2016;126:581–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ENCONMAN.2016.08.038. 

[186] deok In B, ik Kim H, wook Son J, Hyung Lee K. The study of a thermoelectric 

generator with various thermal conditions of exhaust gas from a diesel engine. Int 
J Heat Mass Transf 2015;86:667–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2015.03.052. 

[187] Karri MA, Thacher EF, Helenbrook BT. Exhaust energy conversion by 

thermoelectric generator: two case studies. Energy Convers Manag 2011;52: 
1596–611. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2010.10.013. 

[188] Kim TY, Kwak J, Kim B. Energy harvesting performance of hexagonal shaped 
thermoelectric generator for passenger vehicle applications: an experimental 
approach. Energy Convers Manag 2018;160:14–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2018.01.032. 

[189] Kim TY, Negash AA, Cho G. Waste heat recovery of a diesel engine using a 

[164] Baranowski LL, Jeffrey Snyder G, Toberer ES. The misconception of maximum 

power and power factor in thermoelectrics. J Appl Phys 2014;115:126102. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4869140. 

thermoelectric generator equipped with customized thermoelectric modules. 
Energy Convers Manag 2016;124:280–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ENCONMAN.2016.07.013. 

[165] Chen M, Rosendahl LA, Condra TJ, Pedersen JK. Numerical modeling of 

[190] Kim TY, Negash A, Cho G. Experimental and numerical study of waste heat 

thermoelectric generators with varing material properties in a circuit simulator. 
IEEE Trans Energy Convers 2009;24:112–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TEC.2008.2005310. 

recovery characteristics of direct contact thermoelectric generator. Energy 
Convers Manag 2017;140:273–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ENCONMAN.2017.03.014. 

[166] Vadstrup C, Schaltz E, Chen M. Individual module maximum power point 

tracking for thermoelectric generator systems. J Electron Mater 2013;42:2203–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-013-2571-6. 

[167] Hertzke P, Müller N, Schenk S. The global electric-vehicle market is amped up and 

on the rise. McKinsey&Company; 2020. p. 1–8. 

[191] Lan S, Yang Z, Stobart R. Winward E. The Influence of Thermoelectric Materials 
and Operation Conditions on the Performance of Thermoelectric Generators for 
Automotive. SAE Tech. Pap., SAE International 2016. https://doi.org/10.4271/ 
2016-01-0219. https://www.sae.org/publications/technical-papers/content 
/2016-01-0219/. 

[168] IEA. Global EV outlook 2019. Paris: IEA; 2019. https://www.iea.org/reports/glo 

[192] Li Z, Tan G, Cai J, Yang Z, et al. Thermoelectric Module Temperature Stability 

bal-ev-outlook-2019. n.d. 

[169] Dabadie JC, Le Berr F, Salzgeber K, Prenninger P. Evaluation of TEG potential in 
hybrid electric vehicle by simulation. Veh Therm Manag Syst Conf Exhib 2011: 
261–71. https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857095053.4.261. 

[170] Oetringer K, Kober M, Altstedde MK. Upgrading hybrid-vehicles with a 

thermoelectric generator. In: Proceedings of the 9th international conference on 
ecological vehicles and renewable energies (EVER); 2014. p. 1–5. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/EVER.2014.6844021. 

[171] Wang R, Yu W, Meng X. Performance investigation and energy optimization of a 

thermoelectric generator for a mild hybrid vehicle. Energy 2018;162:1016–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2018.08.103. 

[172] Hussain QE, Brigham DR, Maranville CW. Thermoelectric exhaust heat recovery 
for hybrid vehicles. SAE Int J Engines 2009;2:1132–42. https://doi.org/10.4271/ 
2009-01-1327. 

[173] Kim SKSH, Won BC, Rhi SH, Kim SKSH, Yoo JH, Jang JC. Thermoelectric power 

generation system for future hybrid vehicles using hot exhaust gas. J Electron 
Mater 2011;40:778–83. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-011-1569-1. 

[174] Fang W, Quan S, Xie C, Tang X, Ran B, Jiao Y. Energy optimization for a weak 
hybrid power system of an automobile exhaust thermoelectric generator. 
J Electron Mater 2017;46:6617–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-017-5688- 
1. 

[175] Deng YD, Fan W, Ling K, Su CQ. A 42-V electrical and hybrid driving system 

basedon a vehicular waste-heat thermoelectric generator. J Electron Mater 2012; 
41:1698–705. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-012-2068-8. 

[176] Lan S, Rouaud C, Stobart R, Chen R, Yang Z, Zhao D. The potential of 

thermoelectric generator in parallel hybrid vehicle applications. SAE Tech Pap 
2017. https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-0189. 

[177] Muralidhar N, Himabindu M, Ravikrishna RV. Modeling of a hybrid electric heavy 
duty vehicle to assess energy recovery using a thermoelectric generator. Energy 
2018;148:1046–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2018.02.023. 

Control for the Vehicle Engine Exhaust Heat Recovery. SAE Technical Paper 
2015. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-0350. 2015-01-0350. 

[193] Liu X, Deng YD, Li Z, Su CQ. Performance analysis of a waste heat recovery 

thermoelectric generation system for automotive application. Energy Convers 
Manag 2015;90:121–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2014.11.015. 

[194] Magnetto D. HeatReCar: first light commercial vehicle equipped with a TEG. In: 

3rd International Conference Thermal Management for EV/HEV, Darmstadt, 
Germany, 24–26 June 2013; 2021. https://www.iqpc.com/media/8360/10686. 
pdf. 

[195] Massaguer A, Massaguer E, Comamala M, Pujol T, Gonz´alez JR, Cardenas MD, 
et al. A method to assess the fuel economy of automotive thermoelectric 
generators. Appl Energy 2018;222:42–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
APENERGY.2018.03.169. 

[196] Zhang Y, Cleary M, Wang X, Kempf N, Schoensee L, Yang J, et al. High- 

temperature and high-power-density nanostructured thermoelectric generator for 
automotive waste heat recovery. ENERGY Convers Manag 2015;105:946–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.08.051. 

[197] Temizer ˙I, ˙Ilkılıç C. The performance and analysis of the thermoelectric generator 
system used in diesel engines. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;63:141–51. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2016.04.068. 

[198] Nour Eddine A, Sara H, Chalet D, Faure X, Aixala L, Cormerais M. Modeling and 
simulation of a thermoelectric generator using bismuth telluride for waste heat 
recovery in automotive diesel engines. J Electron Mater 2019;48:2036–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-019-06999-w. 

[199] Ezzitouni S, Fern´andez-Y´a˜nez P, S´anchez L, Armas O, Soto F. Effect of the use of a 
thermoelectric generator on the pumping work of a diesel engine. Int J Engine Res 
2021;22:1016–27. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468087419868047. 

[200] Ivanov K, Aleksandrov A. Design and Study of an automotive thermoelectric 

generator. In: Proceedings of the 7th international conference on energy 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100949N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

efficiency and agricultural engineering (EE&AE); 2020. p. 1–4. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/EEAE49144.2020.9279082. 

[201] Kim TY, Kwak J, Kim B. Application of compact thermoelectric generator to 

hybrid electric vehicle engine operating under real vehicle operating conditions. 
Energy Convers Manag 2019;201:112150. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ENCONMAN.2019.112150. 

[202] Kunt MA, Gunes H. Comparing the recovery performance of different 

thermoelectric generator modules in an exhaust system of a diesel engine both 
experimentally and theoretically. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part D J Automob Eng 2020; 
234:183–90. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954407019837786. 

[203] Negash AA, Choi Y, Kim TY. Experimental investigation of optimal location of 
flow straightener from the aspects of power output and pressure drop 
characteristics of a thermoelectric generator. Energy 2021;219:119565. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.119565. 

[204] Ramírez R, Guti´errez AS, Cabello Eras JJ, Hern´andez B, Duarte Forero J. Data 

supporting the evaluation of the energy recovery potential of thermoelectric 
generators in diesel engines. Data Br 2020;28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
dib.2019.105075. 

[205] Temizer I, Yuksel T, Can I, Alnak D. Analysis of an automotive thermoelectric 

generator on a gasoline engine. Therm Sci 2020;24:137–45. https://doi.org/ 
10.2298/tsci180105096t. 

of conventional vehicles with a thermoelectric generator Assessing the f. Energy 
Procedia 2019;158:142–7. 

[225] Luo D, Wang R, Yu W, Zhou W. A novel optimization method for thermoelectric 
module used in waste heat recovery. Energy Convers Manag 2020;209:112645. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2020.112645. 

[226] Luo D, Wang R, Yu W, Zhou W. A numerical study on the performance of a 

converging thermoelectric generator system used for waste heat recovery. Appl 
Energy 2020;270:115181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115181. 
[227] Shishov KA. Selection of the design of a hot heat exchanger of an automotive 

thermoelectric generator for an urban driving cycle. J Phys Conf Ser 2019;1410: 
6–12. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1410/1/012240. 

[228] Sunawar A, Garniwa I, Hudaya C. The characteristics of heat inside a parked car 
as energy source for thermoelectric generators. Int J Energy Environ Eng 2019;10: 
347–56. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40095-019-0311-2. 

[229] Xiao GQ, Zhang Z. Coupled simulation of a thermoelectric generator applied in 
diesel engine exhaust waste heat recovery. Therm Sci 2020;24:281–92. https:// 
doi.org/10.2298/tsci181112322x. 

[230] Yang Y, Wang S, Zhu Y. Evaluation method for assessing heat transfer 

enhancement effect on performance improvement of thermoelectric generator 
systems. Appl Energy 2020;263:114688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2020.114688. 

[206] Zhang R, Zhang H, Wang X. Lateral comparison of the coupling parameters on the 

[231] Zhang F, Cheng L, Wu M, Xu X, Wang P, Liu Z. Performance analysis of two-stage 

novel hexagonal shaped cross flow thermoelectric generator. Energy 2021;215: 
119163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.119163. 

[207] Karana DR, Sahoo RR. Thermal, environmental and economic analysis of a new 
thermoelectric cogeneration system coupled with a diesel electricity generator. 
Sustain Energy Technol Assess 2020;40:100742. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
seta.2020.100742. 

[208] Quan R, Liu G, Wang C, Zhou W, Huang L, Deng Y. Performance investigation of 
an exhaust thermoelectric generator for military SUV application. Coatings 2018; 
8. https://doi.org/10.3390/coatings8010045. 

[209] Aranguren P, Araiz M, Astrain D, Martínez A. Thermoelectric generators for waste 

heat harvesting: a computational and experimental approach. Energy Convers 
Manag 2017;148:680–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2017.06.040. 

[210] Baker C, Vuppuluri P, Shi L, Hall M. Model of heat exchangers for waste heat 

recovery from diesel engine exhaust for thermoelectric power generation. 
J Electron Mater 2012;41:1290–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-012-1915-y. 

[211] Demir ME, Dincer I. Performance assessment of a thermoelectric generator 

applied to exhaust waste heat recovery. Appl Therm Eng 2017;120:694–707. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.03.052. 

[212] Deng YD, Hu T, Su CQ, Yuan XH. Fuel economy improvement by utilizing 

thermoelectric generator in heavy-duty vehicle. J Electron Mater 2017. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s11664-016-4996-1. 

[213] Du Q, Diao H, Niu Z, Zhang G, Shu G, Jiao K. Effect of cooling design on the 
characteristics and performance of thermoelectric generator used for internal 
combustion engine. Energy Convers Manag 2015;101:9–18. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2015.05.036. 

[214] Durand T, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Tang Y, Liao Y, Landmann D. Potential 

of energy recuperation in the exhaust gas of state of the art light duty vehicles 
with thermoelectric elements. Fuel 2018;224:271–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
FUEL.2018.03.078. 

[215] Espinosa N, Lazard M, Aixala L, Scherrer H. Modeling a thermoelectric generator 
applied to diesel automotive heat recovery. J Electron Mater 2010;39:1446–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-010-1305-2. 

[216] He W, Wang S. Thermoelectric performance optimization when considering 

engine power loss caused by back pressure applied to engine exhaust waste heat 
recovery. Energy 2017;133:584–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2017.05.133. 

[217] He W, Wang S, Lu C, Zhang X, Li Y. Influence of different cooling methods on 

thermoelectric performance of an engine exhaust gas waste heat recovery system. 
Appl Energy 2016;162:1251–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2015.03.036. 

[218] Lan S, Yang Z, Stobart R, Chen R. Prediction of the fuel economy potential for a 

skutterudite thermoelectric generator in light-duty vehicle applications. Appl 
Energy 2018;231:68–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2018.09.087. 

[219] Ma X, Shu G, Tian H, Xu W, Chen T. Performance assessment of engine exhaust- 

based segmented thermoelectric generators by length ratio optimization. Appl 
Energy 2019;248:614–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2019.04.103. 
[220] Yu S, Du Q, Diao H, Shu G, Jiao K. Effect of vehicle driving conditions on the 

performance of thermoelectric generator. Energy Convers Manag 2015;96: 
363–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.03.002. 

[221] Yang H, Shu G, Tian H, Ma X, Chen T, Liu P. Optimization of thermoelectric 

generator (TEG) integrated with three-way catalytic converter (TWC) for 
harvesting engine ’ s exhaust waste heat. Appl Therm Eng 2018;144:628–38. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.07.091. 

[222] Zheng S, Fan W. Simulations of TEG-based vehicle power system’s impact on the 
fuel economy of hybrid and conventional vehicles. SAE Tech. Pap. 2016. https:// 
doi.org/10.4271/2016-01-0900. 

[223] Garud KS, Seo JH, Patil MS, Bang YM, Pyo YD, Cho CP, et al. 

Thermal–electrical–structural performances of hot heat exchanger with different 
internal fins of thermoelectric generator for low power generation application, 
143. Springer International Publishing; 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973- 
020-09553-7. Vol. 

[224] Luo D, Wang R, Yu W, Sun Z, Meng X. Heating for and different analysis of energy 
recovery potential types of conventional vehicles with a thermoelectric generator 

thermoelectric generator model based on Latin hypercube sampling. Energy 
Convers Manag 2020;221:113159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2020.113159. 

[232] Dzulkfli MS, Pesyridis A, Gohil D. Thermoelectric generation in hybrid electric 

vehicles. Energies 2020;13. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13143742.  

Nicolae Vlad BURNETE Dr. Nicolae Vlad Burnete is a member 
of the Romanian Society of Automotive Engineers and Inter-
national Society of Automotive Engineers and Lecturer in the 
Automotive  Engineering  and  Transports  Department  at  the 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca (TUCN). He received his 
Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from TUCN (2016), as well as 
an M.S. (2013) and an B.S. in Automotive Engineering (2011). 
He is currently a post-doctoral research fellow at TUCN where 
he is developing his thesis on “Increasing the global efficiency 
of  internal  combustion  engines  through  waste  heat  recovery 
with thermoelectric generators”. Dr. Burnete’s research focus is 
on  renewable  energy  solutions  for  a  sustainable  future. 
Dr. Burnete has been involved in multiple projects and research 
activities  involving  engine-fuel  interactions,  urban  transport,  biofuels,  energy  recovery 
and energy efficiency of vehicles. Dr. Burnete has published over 20 conference and peer 
reviewed articles and received several awards for his work.  

Florin MARIASIU Dr. habil. Florin Mariasiu is full professor at 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca (TUCN), Automotive and 
Transport  Engineering.  He  received  his  PhD  in  Mechanical 
Engineering from TUCN (2003) as well as his habilitation de-
gree in Mechanical Engineering (2015) from TUCN. Domains 
of  research and  interest  are  renewable  and  sustainable  ener-
getic solution for mechanical and thermal systems, electric and 
hybrid vehicles power sources, batteries thermal management 
and batteries in terms of applied and theoretical approaches. 
The results of dr.habil. Florin Mariasiu research activity can be 
resumed as 2 patents, 5 patent applications, 11 books, over 100 
published  scientific  articles,  over  200  citations  and  over  20 
prizes and awards for research and innovation activity in fields 
of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering.  

Christopher DEPCIK Dr. Christopher Depcik is an American 
Society  of Mechanical Engineers  Fellow and  Professor  in the 
Mechanical Engineering Department at the University of Kan-
sas  (KU). In  addition, he  has  a Courtesy  Appointment in  the 
Aerospace  Engineering  Department.  Prior  to  joining  KU,  he 
worked at the University of Michigan (UM) as a post-doctoral 
research  fellow  and  lecturer.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  in  Me-
chanical Engineering  from  UM  (2003), as  well as an M.S.  in 
Aerospace  Engineering  (2002),  and  an  M.S.  in  Mechanical 
Engineering (1999). He received his B.S. in Mechanical Engi-
neering  from  the  University  of  Florida  (1997).  Dr.  Depcik’s 
laboratory  conducts  research  revolving  around  a  sustainable 
approach to energy and the transportation infrastructure. This 
includes analysis of electric vehicles, biofuels, combustion, and energy recovery potential. 
His group has published over 100-refereed articles and Dr. Depcik received the Society of 
Automotive Engineers Ralph R. Teetor Award for his transportation-related research and 
educational activities.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100950N.V. Burnete et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Istvan BARABAS Dr. Istvan Barabas is a Romanian Society of 
Automotive  Engineers  Fellow,  member  of  public  body  of 
Hungarian  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Professor  in  the  Auto-
motive  Engineering  and  Transports  Department  at  the  Tech-
nical University of Cluj-Napoca (TUCN). He received his Ph.D. 
in  Mechanical  Engineering  from  TUCN  (2003).  His  main 
research  interests are biofuel &  bioenergy, properties  of fuel 
blends, and nano-additives for fuels and lubricating oils. He has 
published  more  than  150  conference  and  scientific  journal 
papers.  He  is  also  the  author  of  several  books  concerning 
automotive  fuels.  Dr.  Barabas  serves  as  a  member  of  the 
editorial  board  of  the  Periodica  Polytechnica  Transportation 
Engineering and Technical Review journals and serves on the 
advisory  or  organizing  committees  of  several  international 
conferences.  

Dan  MOLDOVANU  Dr.  Dan  Moldovanu  is  a  member  of 
Romanian Society of Automotive Engineers, International So-
ciety of Automotive Engineers, and International Federation of 
Automotive Experts. He is an Associate Professor in the Auto-
motive  Engineering  and  Transports  Department  at  the  Tech-
nical University of Cluj-Napoca (TUCN). He received his Ph.D. 
in  Mechanical  Engineering  from  TUCN  (2011),  M.S.  in  Me-
chanical Engineering (2009) and B.S. in Mechatronics (2008). 
Dr. Moldovanu is a member/researcher of the Testing, Certi-
fication  and  Research  of  Internal  Combustion  Engines  Labo-
ratory  (TUCN),  with  focus  on  Internal  combustion  engines 
testing,  HIL  testing,  and  MATLAB  simulation  of  automotive 
components.  Dr.  Moldovanu  has  published  over  20  peer 
reviewed  articles  and  received  several  awards  for  his  publications.  Dr.  Moldovanu  has 
been involved in projects and research activities involving engine-fuel interactions, cold 
start testing, biofuels and energy recovery. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience91(2022)10100951