Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Chemical kinetics of cyclic ethers in combustion

Luc-Sy Tran a, *, Olivier Herbinet b, Hans-Heinrich Carstensen c, d, Fr ́ed ́erique Battin-Leclerc b
a CNRS, UMR 8522 - PC2A - Physicochimie des Processus de Combustion et de l’Atmosph`ere, Universit ́e de Lille, Lille F-59000, France
b CNRS, UMR 7274 - LRGP - Laboratoire R ́eactions et G ́enie des Proc ́ed ́es, Universit ́e de Lorraine, Nancy F-54000, France
c Fundaci ́on Agencia Aragonesa para la Investigaci ́on y Desarrollo (ARAID), Zaragoza, Spain
d Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of Zaragoza, Spain

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Cyclic ethers
Gas phase kinetics
Hydrocarbon oxidation
Lignocellulosic biofuels
Furan derivatives

Cyclic Ethers (CEs) belong to a class of compounds of importance to understand the chemistry of both the engine
auto-ignition of hydrocarbon fuels and the combustion of oxygenated biofuels. This article, divided in six parts,
aims at systematically analyzing how up-to-date experimental and theoretical methods were applied to unveil the
gas-phase oxidation chemistry of these compounds. The first part gives a brief overview on the significance of
CEs  as  intermediates  formed  during  alkane  low-temperature  oxidation  summarizing  its  generally  accepted
chemical mechanism. This part also addresses the role of CEs as potential biofuels derived from lignocellulosic
biomass and discusses the production methods of these molecules and their combustion performances in engine.
The  second  part  presents  the  different  theoretical  methods  dedicated  to  calculate  the  electronic  structure,
thermochemical  and  kinetic  data  of  CEs.  The  third  part introduces  the  experimental methods  used  in  studies
related to CEs with a special focus on mass spectrometry and gas chromatography. The fourth part reviews the
experimental  and  modeling  studies  related  to  CE  formation  during  the  low-temperature  oxidation  of  linear,
branched, cyclic alkanes, alkylbenzenes, olefins, and oxygenated fuels. The fifth part analyses the published work
concerning the CE degradation chemistry and highlights the dominant involved reactions. To finish, the sixth
part concludes and proposes future research directions.

1. Introduction

In the last decades, the need to develop new technologies for miti-
gating global warming has placed a double focus on Cyclic Ethers (CEs)
with one or more ring oxygen atoms. On the one hand, the development
of newly proposed types of internal combustion engines, homogeneous
charge compression ignition or low-temperature combustion diesel en-
gines, as it was described by Dec [1], Musculus et al. [2] or Saxena and
Bedoya  [3],  has  made  it  crucial  to  better  understand  the  chemistry
involved during the low-temperature gas-phase oxidation of fuel com-
ponents. This chemistry occurs from 500 to about 900 K and CEs have
been known since the 1970’s as important products of it [4]. The main
reactions are comprised of addition of alkyl radicals to oxygen followed
 ̇
by isomerizations and decompositions yielding
OH radicals [5] as shown
in Fig. 1. These reactions are detailed in Part 1.1.

On  the other hand, the  need to  produce chemicals and  fuels from
non-fossil sources has triggered the development of strategies to utilize
biomass, an abundantly available resource [6]. Of particular interest are
new generation biofuels that do not compete with the food chain. One

class of such biofuels is that of CEs, which has gained more and more
interest  during  the  past  10  years.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  growing
number of studies devoted to chemical synthesis of furan derivatives to
be used as potential biofuels [7–9]. Indeed, CEs can be produced from
lignocellulosic  biomass  through  catalytic  reaction  pathways  schema-
tized in Fig. 2, which shows an example of such pathways going through
furfural as described in Part 1.2.

In the context of combustion chemistry, CEs are organic compounds
including  a  ring  composed  of  at  least  one  oxygen  atom  and  several
carbon  atoms.  The  fully  saturated  CEs  with  two,  three,  four  or  five
carbon  atoms  are  named,  respectively,  oxiranes,  oxetanes,  oxolanes
(more commonly tetrahydrofurans), and oxanes (more commonly tet-
rahydropyrans). In CEs, the numbering of the ring starts with the oxygen
atom  and  proceeds  around  the  ring  to  give  substituents  the  lowest
numbered  positions.  Therefore,  in  Fig.  1,  CE1  is  2-methyltetrahydro-
furan  (2-MTHF),  CE2  is  2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane,  CE3  is  propyloxir-
ane, CE4 is 2,4-dimethyloxetane, CE5 is 2-ethyloxetane; finally, the non-
substituted CE6 is simply tetrahydropyran (THP).

Lactones  are  not  ethers  but  esters.  Because  they  are  similar  in
structure  to  cyclic  ethers,  e.g.  they  contain  C–O–C  group  in  the  ring,

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: luc-sy.tran@univ-lille.fr (L.-S. Tran).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101019
Received 1 August 2021; Received in revised form 22 April 2022; Accepted 18 May 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019Availableonline2August20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

L.-S. Tran et al.

Abbreviations

cyclic ether
ethylfurfurylether
γ-valerolactone
hydroperoxy radical
ketohydroperoxide
hydroxyl radical

dihydroperoxy alkyl radical
hydroperoxyalkyl radical
alkyl radical
fuel (alkanes)
alkylperoxy radical
tetrahydrofuran
tetrahydropyran
2-acetylfuran
2-n-butylfuran
2-n-butyltetrahydrofuran
2-Butoxytetrahydropyran
2-ethylfuran
2-ethyltetrahydrofuran

Chemical species names
CE
EFFE
GVL
 ̇
O
HO
KHP
 ̇
OH
 ̇
OOQOOH hydroperoxyalkyl peroxy radical
ṖṖ(OOH)2
Q ̇OOH
ṘṘ
RH
 ̇
RO
O
THF
THP
2-AF
2-BF
2-BTHF
2-BOTHP
2-EF
2-ETHF
2-EOMTHP 2-ethoxymethyltetrahydropyran
2-furfurylalcohol
2-FFOH
2-methylfuran
2-MF
methyl furan-2-carboxylate
2-MOF
2-methyltetrahydrofuran
2-MTHF
2-propyltetrahydrofuran
2-PTHF
2-tetrahydrofurfurylethylether
2-THFFEE
2-tetrahydrofurfurylbutylether
2-THFFBE
2-THFFOH 2-tetrahydrofurfurylalcohol
2-tetrahydrofurfurylpropylether
2-THFFPE
2,3-DHF
2,3-dihydrofuran
2,3-DMTHF 2,3-dimethyltetrahydrofuran
2,5-dihydrofuran
2,5-DHF
2,5-DMF
2,5-dimethylfuran
2,5-DMTHF 2,5-dimethyltetrahydrofuran
3-MTHF
5-HMF

3-methyltetrahydrofuran
5-hydroxymethyl-2-furaldehyde

bond dissociation energy
boiling point
bond additive correction
complete active space

Non-chemical names
BDE
BP
BAC
CAS
CASPT2  complete active space second order perturbation theory
CBS
CC
CCSD(T) coupled cluster method with single, double and

complete basis set
coupled cluster

perturbative triple excitations
configuration interactions
cetane number
constant volume bomb
cooperative fuel research
derived cetane number
density functional theory
effective carbon number
flow reactor
electron-ionization
flame ionization detector
group additivity
group additive value
gas chromatography
gas chromatography mass spectrometry
Hartree Fock
ignition delay time
ionization energy
jet-stirred reactor
rate coefficient
high-pressure limit rate coefficient
reaction path degeneracy
laminar burning velocity
lower heating value
molecular beam
master equation
mass spectrometry
Møller Plesset
pressure

CI
CN
CVB
CFR
DCN
DFT
ECN
FR
EI
FID
GA
GAV
GC
GC-MS
HF
IDT
IE
JSR
k
k∞
L
LBV
LHV
MB
ME
MS
MP
P
PEPICO  photoelectron photoion coincidence
potential energy surface
PES
photo-ionization
PI
photo-ionization mass spectrometry
PIMS
photo-ionization efficiency
PIE
premixed laminar flame
PLF
particulate matter
PM
quadratic configuration interaction
QCI
rapid compression machine
RCM
research octane number
RON
shock tube
ST
synchrotron vacuum ultra-violet
SVUV
transition state
TS
temperature
T
time-of-flight
TOF
YCE
CE yield

Greek symbols
φ
τ

equivalence ratio
residence time

because they can be formed in low-temperature oxidation of fuels/bio-
fuels and because they are also proposed as biofuels, their combustion
chemistry is also discussed in the present paper. Thus, “CE” nomencla-
ture used in this paper includes lactones.

The  two  following  parts  describe  the  importance  of  CEs  in  the
context  of  low-temperature  oxidation  chemistry  and  of  biofuels,
respectively.

1.1. Cyclic ethers in the context of low-temperature oxidation chemistry

The two parts below illustrate how CE production can be significant
during  alkane  low-temperature  oxidation  and  afterwards  summarizes

the chemical mechanism, which is commonly accepted to explain this
formation.

1.1.1. Summary of alkane low-temperature oxidation mechanism

Due to its importance for understanding the phenomena occurring in
internal  combustion  engines,  hydrocarbon  low-temperature  oxidation
has been the subject of many studies described in recent review papers.
Battin-Leclerc [10], Curran [11] and Westbrook et al. [12] were inter-
ested in the main features of this chemistry and its kinetics. The paper by
Z`ador et al. [13] provided more details on the related elementary steps.
Sarathy  et  al.  [14] and  Glaude  et  al.  [15] described  how  combustion
mechanisms  could  be  extended  to  alcohols  and  methyl  esters,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010192

L.-S. Tran et al.

respectively. In 2021, Rotavera and Taatjes [16] pointed out the influ-
ence of oxygenated functional groups (alcohols, esters, ketones, acyclic
and cyclic ethers) on this chemistry.

In  brief,  the low-temperature  oxidation chemistry  of  alkanes (RH)
occurs  through  a  well-accepted  mechanism  and  may  involve  two,  in
some  cases,  three  [17]  additions  to  oxygen  molecules  starting  from
alkylic radicals (Ṙ). Fig. 1 presents the reactions, which are involved in
the propagation cycle involving the addition of an alkyl radical to ox-
 ̇
O) when fuel is n-pentane. The
ygen (forming alkylperoxy radical; RO

 ̇
chain carriers in this propagation cycle are
OH radicals. This cycle goes
through the formation of a hydroperoxyalkyl radical, C5H10OOH, via an
intramolecular  H-abstraction.  This  type  of  radical,  usually  named
Q ̇OOH,  easily  decomposes  to  produce  aldehydes,  ketones  or  CEs  (see
Fig. 1) with the same carbon atom skeleton as the reactant. Experimental
evidence  for  the  Q ̇OOH  radicals  has  recently  been  reported  in  the
literature,  such  as  by  Savee  et  al.  [18]  who  detected  a
resonance-stabilized  Q ̇OOH  radical  formed  during  oxidation  of  1,
3-cycloheptadiene  or  by  Hansen  et  al.  [19]  who  measured  the

Fig. 1. Conceptual model of the formation of cyclic ethers during the low-temperature gas-phase oxidation of n-pentane.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010193

L.-S. Tran et al.

unimolecular  decomposition  of  a  carbon-centered  Q ̇OOH  radical,
namely  2-hydroperoxy-2-methylprop-1-yl.  In  parallel,  the  Q ̇OOH
radical may add to a second molecule of oxygen. The adduct forms after
intramolecular  H-abstraction  the  corresponding  dihydroperoxyalkyl
radical (Ṗ(OOH)2) (Note that Ṗ(OOH)2 radicals with a radical site on a
HOO group carrying carbon are not stable and in such a case, a keto-
 ̇
hydroperoxide and
OH radical are formed instead.). Ṗ(OOH)2 formation
leads to the second propagation cycle including a branching step. While
the occurrence of a third oxygen addition step has recently been proven
by Wang et al. [20], the main fate of the Ṗ(OOH)2  radical is thermal
 ̇
decomposition  yielding  an
OH  radical  and  a  ketohydroperoxide  or
hydroperoxyCE  molecule.  Hydroperoxy  molecules  contain  a  fragile
RO–OH  bond  (the  bond  energy  is  between  42  and  44  kcal/mol  for
alkylhydroperoxides [21]), which easily breaks at low temperatures to
 ̇
produce  two  new  reactive  radicals,  amongst  which  is  a
OH  radical.
Ketohydroperoxides, the formation of which in a propagation step ex-
plains the high reactivity of fuel components even at temperature as low
as 500 K (see for instance diethylether oxidation [22]), have been the
subject of a recent review paper by Wang et al. [23].

The  existence  of  two  competing  propagation  cycles,  the  first  one
leading  to  stable  products,  such  as  CEs,  and  the  second  one  going
through  the  formation  of  the  branching  agents,  ketohydroperoxides,
assigns a particular importance to CE formation. The pathways leading
to CEs have an important impact on fuel ignition and they explain the
particular  behavior  observed  during  fuel  low-temperature  oxidation,
such  as  the  presence  of  a  negative  temperature  coefficient  zone  and
related  cool  flames  as  described  by  Ju  et  al.  [24,25].  The  paper  by
Rotavera  and  Taatjes  [16]  clearly  demonstrated  how  the  presence  of
certain  functional  groups  directs  the  reaction  flow  towards  ketohy-
droperoxides with a significant effect on fuel reactivity.

1.1.2. Significance of cyclic ether production during alkane low-
temperature ignition

Low-temperature oxidation precedes auto-ignition and its chemistry
controls the time when auto-ignition occurs. Fig. 3 displays a simulation
of  the  time dependence  of  species  (CO,  H2O2, aldehydes,  ketones,  al-
kenes, CEs) mole fractions that are representative for the large variety of
products  formed  during  n-heptane  ignition  under  engine-related
conditions.

These species mole fractions have been plotted in order to cover the
period in which the temperature approaches a plateau level at around
1000 K corresponding to a cool flame, as is described hereafter. While

CO, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde and ethylene are the major products
(cid:0) 3, Fig. 3a), this figure clearly
(with plateau mole fractions above 1 × 10
demonstrates that the formation of CEs (the plateau mole fractions of
(cid:0) 4,  Fig.  3c),  occurs  with  the  same  order  of
CEs  sum  up  to  8  × 10
magnitude  as  those  of  several  other  significant  products.  While  low-
temperature  oxidation  alkane  models  can  still  be  questionable  con-
cerning CE predictions, as it is discussed further in the text, the predicted
plateau of cool flame products agrees with experimental quantifications
previously reported in rapid compression machines for several fuels (e.g.
n-propylcyclohexane in Lille [26] or iso-octane/ethanol blends in Ann
Arbor [27]).

In Fig. 3, slow oxidation occurs in the zone between 0 ms and 0.5 ms.
It is followed by the cool flame in the interval between 0.5 ms and 1 ms.
At  0.5  ms,  a  sharp  decline  of  the  ketohydroperoxide  concentration
(Fig. 3c) caused by its thermal decomposition is observed. This marks
the start of chain branching, which leads to a significant reactivity in-
crease indicated by the rise in temperature and in mole fraction of re-
action products, aldehydes (Fig. 3a), alkenes (Fig. 3b), and CEs (Fig. 3c).
Even  though  the  ketohydroperoxide  concentration  is  declining,  their
rate of production remains important as long as the temperature is still
lower than 930 K (i.e. at the end of the first temperature increase shown
in  Fig.  3),  as  indicated  by  the  high  concentration  of  aldehydes,  their
derived products. Ketohydroperoxides could also be precursors of spe-
cies with two carbonyl groups, diones, and carboxylic acids (not shown
in Fig. 3) as reported in previous studies [28–30]. Tentative mechanisms
responsible  for  their  formation  have  been  proposed  (e.g.  [31,32]  for
carboxylic acids and [29,33,34] for diones.

 ̇
O  radical  (from  Ṙ)  or  the  CE  formation  (from

With  increasing  temperature,  ketohydroperoxide  production  is
reduced because of the enhanced reversibility of the additions of Ṙ and
 ̇QOOH radicals to O2 together with the increased competition with other
channels,  such  as  the  formation  of  conjugated  alkenes  and  relatively
 ̇QOOH).
unreactive  HO
Consequently,  the  reactivity  is  severely  reduced.  At  0.6  ms,  the  tem-
perature,  fuel  consumption,  and  product  concentration  profiles  reach
plateau values and the temperature reaches around 1000 K. Fig. 3 in-
dicates  that,  according  to  the  kinetic  model,  the  CE  concentrations
remain  stable  from  0.6  to  1  ms,  while  those  of  aldehydes,  which  are
products  of  ketohydroperoxide  decomposition,  slowly  decrease.  The
 ̇QOOH radical consumption turns in
reason for that the competition for
favor  of  CE  formation  instead  of  2nd  O2  addition  when  increasing
temperature.

Despite  the  low  reactivity,  the  high  exothermicity  of  the  slow

Fig. 2. Schematic presentation of chemical processes producing biofuel from lignocellulosic biomass.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010194

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig.  3. Simulated  formation  of  cool  flame
products during n-heptane ignition in an adia-
batic  closed  homogenous  batch  reactor  under
engine-related  conditions  (initial  temperature
of 787 K, equivalence ratio of 1.0, pressure of 5
bar,  initial  composition:  1.15%  n-heptane  /
12.7%  O2  /  86.15%  N2)  using  the  model  of
Zhang et al. [33]. The time dependence of the
temperature  and  of  the  mole  fractions  of  the
fuel  n-heptane,  the  sum  of  C7  ketohydroper-
oxides (KHP sum) and the sum of CEs (CE sum)
are also displayed.

oxidation chemistry causes the temperature to steadily increase. At the
 ̇
same  time,  the  concentration  of  HO
O  radicals  formed along  with  the
production  of  conjugated  alkenes  increases,  which  leads  to  an  accu-
 ̇
mulation of H2O2 mainly yielded by self-reaction of HO
O radicals. The
end of the plateau is reached when the temperature is high enough to
allow the occurrence of a new branching step: thermal decomposition of
 ̇
H2O2 produces two
OH radicals. This is the point of auto-ignition. The
fuel  is  completely  oxidized  and  the  temperature  quickly  increases  to
values up to 2000 K.

The  first  objective  of  this  paper  is  to  review  the  experimental,
theoretical and modelling foundations, which support the current un-
derstanding of CE formation during fuel or biofuel oxidation.

1.2. Cyclic ethers in the context of renewable energy

The high energy density of liquid  fuels is  an important advantage
compared  to  the  electrical  storage  of  energy  and  in  the  foreseeable
future engines of heavy-duty vehicles, ships and planes will continue to
run  on  liquid  fuels  [35,36].  Amongst  liquid  fuels,  biofuels  produced
from the vast and renewable resources of biomass represent a growing

fraction compared to hydrocarbons produced from depleting petroleum
reserves. Oxygenated chemicals with a variety of molecular structures
have been proposed as biofuels: alcohols, methyl esters, acyclic ethers,
and CEs [37–39]. It has been reported that the presence of oxygen has a
positive impact on pollutant emissions, especially by reducing the for-
mation of Particulate Matter (PM) [40].

We  describe  hereafter  why  CEs  have  been  considered  as  biofuels,
how  they  are  produced  from  lignocellulosic  biomass  using  catalytic
strategies, and finally how they are expected to perform when used in
internal combustion engines.

1.2.1. The interest of cyclic ethers as biofuels

As mentioned by Grad [41], the first practical internal combustion
engine - patented by Nikolaus Otto in 1877 - ran on alcohols (gasoline
was not even known yet). Alcoholic biofuels, mostly ethanol, and with a
lower importance butanol [42], can easily be produced by fermentation
from  starches  and  sugary  plant  parts.  They  can  be  used  in  internal
combustion engines either as pure component or blended with gasolines
[43]  and  their  addition  in  petroleum  fuel  was  shown  to  reduce  the
emissions of pollutants. For instance, 10 and 15% of ethanol in Diesel

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010195

L.-S. Tran et al.

blends  potentially  reduce  soot  particulate  emission  by  20-27%  and
30-41%,  respectively  [44].  Studies  on  alcohol  combustion  chemistry
were exhaustively reviewed by Sarathy et al. [14] in 2014.

As reviewed by Knothe and Razon [45], the second type of biofuels
used nowadays in transportation is obtained from vegetable oils, animal
fats or other materials consisting mainly of triglycerides. It is known as
biodiesel and its composition depends on the type of fatty acid source
(mainly rapeseed, palm and soybean oils, and increasingly yellow grease
coming  from  filtered  cooking  oil  wastes  [46])  used  in  biodiesel  pro-
duction. Biodiesel is composed of a blend of mostly unsaturated C16-C18
methyl  esters  produced  by  catalytic  transesterification  of  fatty  acids
with monohydric alcohols, most commonly methanol, yielding glycerol
as by-product [47].

The possible competition for the production of these 1st  generation
biofuels with that of edible resources has made it crucial to find ways to
use other biomass types to produce biofuels. From this point of view,
lignocellulosic  biomass  is  of  particular  interest  because  of  its  high-
volume availability and of its non-competitiveness with food.

As  described  by  Tran  et  al.  [39],  after  adequate  biomass  pre-
treatments [48], lignocellulosic biomass can be transformed in several
ways to produce biofuels. The molecular composition of the components
of lignocellulosic biomass, mainly cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, is
characterized  by  a  high  content  in  oxygen  atoms.  As  exemplified  in
Fig. 4, biofuel synthesis from lignocellulosic biomass comprises oxygen
removal steps to obtain fuels with boiling points in the range of the al-
kanes present in current transportation fuels. The reduction to form a
variety of platform chemicals can be done via high-temperature ther-
mochemical  conversion  processes,  such  as  gasification,  hydrothermal

liquefaction, or pyrolysis, or via mild temperature liquid-phase catalytic
processes, such as hydrolysis followed by dehydration.

Fixed-bed or fluidized bed gasifiers can be used to produce syngas, a
mixture of mainly H2  and CO, from biomass partial oxidation at tem-
peratures around 1200 K [37,54]. After careful cleaning, syngas can be
transformed via the catalytic Fischer-Tropsch synthesis to hydrocarbons
of excellent transportation fuel quality [55]. This is of particular interest
when the presence of oxygen atoms in fuel molecules has to be avoided,
such as for aviation purpose due to weight limitation [56]. In addition to
hydrocarbons, syngas can be used to produce other compounds of in-
terest as other fuels for internal combustion engines, e.g. methanol [57],
ethanol and heavier alcohols [58], or dimethylether [59].

Liquid bio-oils can be directly obtained from lignocellulosic biomass
by the two following processes [60]: hydrothermal liquefaction, in the
presence of a solvent (often water) from moderate to high temperature
(520-820 K) and pressure (50-250 bar) [61,62], and fast pyrolysis under
atmospheric pressure [63]. The fast or flash pyrolysis process involves
reaching  high-temperatures  (from  750  to  1400  K)  with  a  high
heating-rate and a short residence time (heating rate up to 104 K/s for a
residence time below 1 s for flash pyrolysis) in the absence of oxygen
[64].  The  higher  the  heating  rate,  the  higher  the  bio-oil  yield.  Flash
pyrolysis typically requires small feed particle sizes (<200 mm) and the
highest temperatures, but may produce bio-oil yields of up to 75 wt%,
together  with  gas  and  char  formation.  Beside  the  high  water  content
(15–40 wt%), bio-oils are complex mixtures of hundreds of oxygenated
species,  including  furan  derivatives  [37],  with  a  lower  amount  of
nitrogen-containing compounds. The bio-oil composition is not easy to
characterize [65,66]. The corrosivity caused by its high acidity, its high

Fig. 4. Example of pathways from carbohydrates to cyclic ether candidates to be used as biofuels via furfural as platform chemical according to [49,50]. CE1 is furan,
CE2 2-methylfuran, CE3 tetrahydrofuran, CE4 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, CE5 2-furfurylalcohol and CE6 2-tetrahydrofurfurylalcohol. The temperature next to each
cyclic structure is its boiling point; those of n-pentane, n-heptane and n-decane are shown for comparison. RON is the Research Octane Number and the values are
taken from [51–53].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010196

L.-S. Tran et al.

water content, and its poor thermal stability provide severe challenges
for  their  use  as  fuel  components  in  transportation  without  further
upgrading [67].

In addition to the thermal production of syngas, which is a highly
energy  consuming  process,  and  of  complex  bio-oils,  which  are  not
directly usable in fuel blends, suitable fuel candidates, e.g. cyclic ethers,
can be produced from lignocellulosic biomass via catalytic processes.

1.2.2. Cyclic ether production from lignocellulosic biomass through
catalytic processes

Fig.  5  displays  the  principle  of  current  catalytic  concepts  used  to
produce furan derivatives, the group of cyclic ethers that are regarded to
be  the  most  promising  biofuel  candidates,  as  it  was  described  by
Luterbacher et al. [9]. These strategies start with the depolymerization
of the constituents of lignocellulosic biomass (usually at temperatures
between 298 to 400 K in water in the presence of acid (HCl)) to produce
sugars and further dehydration products, such as furfural, levulinic acid
and  5-hydroxymethyl-2-furaldehyde  (5-HMF),  the  main  platform
chemicals for the synthesis of furan derivatives; for more details about
lignin valorization see [68]. Only cellulose and hemicellulose, which are
a source of sugars, can be converted into furan derivatives. The catalytic
transformation of lignin yields various oxygenated compounds, however
no CEs [69].

Leitner  et  al.  [8]  recently  reviewed  several  platform  chemicals,
which  have  been  proposed  for  cyclic  ether  synthesis  and  which  are
shown  in  Fig. 6.  These  authors  have  detailed  the  industrial  processes
leading to these molecules and how furan derivatives can be obtained
from them.

In  the  following,  the  major  reaction  pathways  towards  furan  de-
rivatives starting from the three main platform chemicals, furfural, 5-
HMF, and levulinic acid are summarized.

Furfural  is  one  of  the  few  chemicals  that  has  been  produced
commercially for a long time from lignocellulosic biomass [8]. It is ob-
tained from C5 sugars (pentoses), xylose or arabinose, which arise from
the  degradation  of  the  hemicellulosic  fraction  of  agricultural  wastes
(corncobs or bagasse). Fig. 4 shows how furan derivatives can be pro-
duced  from  C5  sugars  derived  from  hemicellulose  using  furfural  as
platform chemical. Sugar dehydration leading to furfural takes place in
water at around 550 K and is favored by the presence of strong acids, e.g.

Fig. 6. Platform chemicals proposed for cyclic ether synthesis [8].

sulfuric acid [7,9]. Furfural can be converted into furan derivatives in a
few catalytic steps [7]. Its decarbonylation yields furan, which can be
hydrogenated  to  tetrahydrofuran  (THF).  A  second  pathway  involves
furfural hydrogenation to produce 2-furfurylalcohol (2-FFOH) and 2-tet-
rahydrofurfurylalcohol (2-THFFOH). The hydrogenolysis of 2-FFOH is
the  common  source  of  2-methylfuran  (2-MF),  whose  hydrogenation
yields 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MTHF) [49,50]. Amongst the species
drawn  in  Fig.  4,  Research  Octane  Number  (RON)  values  can  only  be
found for CE2 (2-MF), CE3 (THF), and CE4 (2-MTHF). The formation of
further  potential  biofuel  candidates  derived  from  furfural  was  also
considered  [8,70,71],  such  as  2-n-butylfuran  (2-BF)  and  2-n-butylte-
trahydrofuran (2-BTHF) via a reaction of furfural with acetone followed
by
selective  hydrogenations/dehydration,  2-ethyltetrahydrofuran
(2-ETHF)  via  furan  Friedel–Crafts  acylation  as  proposed  by  Leitner
et  al.  [8],  ethylfurfurylether  (EFFE)  by  etherification  of  2-FFOH  with
ethanol as proposed by Tian et al. [70] or additives for biodiesel from
acetalization of furfural with glycerol [71]. Dahmen and Marquardt [72]
have  also  proposed  the  formation  of  dioxygenated  molecules  such  as
2-tetrahydrofurfurylethylether (2-THFFEE), 2-tetrahydrofurfurylpropy-
lether  (2-THFFPE),  2-tetrahydrofurfurylbutylether  (2-THFFBE),  and
2-ethoxymethyltetrahydropyran  (2-EOMTHP),  by  etherification  of
furfural derivatives with alcohols.

5-hydroxymethyl-2-furaldehyde is obtained from the dehydration of
C6 sugars (hexoses), such as fructose and glucose, derived from cellulose,
the  most  abundant  component  of  lignocellulosic  biomass.  5-HMF  can
easily  be  converted  to  C6  furan  derivatives.  This  platform  chemical,

Fig. 5. Lignocellulosic biomass upgrading according to the strategy described by [9]. Full line arrows correspond to a single-step catalytic reaction, the dotted one to
a two-step process.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010197

L.-S. Tran et al.

which  contains  three  oxygen atoms,  has  a  high boiling  point  (564  K,
solid at room temperature) that prevents it from being considered as a
potential biofuel. As described by Rom ́an-Leshkov et al. [73], 5-HMF can
be converted catalytically to 2,5-dimethylfuran (2,5-DMF) via a hydro-
genation (to form 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran) and a subsequent hydro-
genolysis  (to  yield  2-hydroxymethyl,5-methylfuran).  De  Jong  and
Gruter from Avantium [74] proposed liquid 5-HMF ethers (5-(methox-
ymethyl)furfural,  5-(ethoxymethyl)furfural  or  5-(tert-butoxymethyl)
furfural) as biofuel candidates, but without providing information about
the possible performances of these molecules in engines. 5-HMF can also
be converted to 2,5-dimethyltetrahydrofuran (2,5-DMTHF) [71,75].

Levulinic  acid  is  produced  by  dehydration  of  5-HMF.  Luterbacher
et al. have noted that co-production of furfural and levulinic acid is a
target  when  working  with  lignocellulosic  biomass  and  producing
dehydration products [9]. A pathway from furfural to levulinic acid via
2-FFOH  has  also  been  proposed  [71].  The  catalytic  hydrogenation  of
levulinic acid is the most efficient way to produce 2-MTHF, with better
yields  than  from  furfural.  Levulinic  acid  can  also  be  converted  into
γ-valerolactone (GVL), a proposed biofuel and a polar aprotic molecule
proposed  as  solvent  in  sugar  dehydration  processes  [76].  GVL  is  an
additional source of 2-MF [71].

Succinic and itaconic acids were also mentioned as potential plat-
form chemicals by Leitner et al. [8]. The first acid offers an additional
way to produce THF and itaconic acid could be an efficient source of
3-methyltetrahydrofuran (3-MTHF) [77].

More references about the possible routes to formation of furan de-
rivatives can be found in [16]. Below are a few other CEs considered as
potential  biofuels:  2-ethylfuran  (2-EF)  obtained  from  glucose  hydro-
genolysis  [78],  2,3-dimethyltetrahydrofuran  (2,3-DMTHF)  and  2-pro-
pyltetrahydrofuran  (2-PTHF)  considered  by  Dahmen  and  Marquardt
[72],  2,3-dihydrofuran  (2,3-DHF)  and  2,5-dihydrofuran  (2,5-DHF)
derived  from  alcohols  produced  from  biomass  fermentation  [79,80],
and tetrahydropyran (THP), the core structure of glucose [81], whose
combustion properties have been investigated since 1991 [82]. Recently
light has also been shed on the possibility to use the diethers, 1,3-diox-
olane  (5-membered  ring)  and  1,3-dioxane  (6-membered  ring)  as  bio-
fuels. Both contain two oxygen atoms in their ring. 1,3-Dioxolane and 1,
3-dioxane  can  both  be  produced  catalytically  from  glycerol,  a
by-product of biodiesel production [71]. 1,3-Dioxane can also be syn-
thesized  from  ethylene  glycol  produced  from  cellulose  [83,84].  1,
4-Dioxane, a solvent widely used in chemical synthesis [85], has been
proposed as a potential biodiesel fuel additive [86].

1.2.3. Cyclic ethers considered as fuels in internal combustion engines

To decide if CEs are realistic candidates to be used in internal com-
bustion engines, it is important to examine data about their combustion

performances and their potential to create toxic pollutants during the
combustion process.

1.2.3.1. Combustion performances of cyclic ethers as internal combustion
engine fuels. Two numbers have been proposed to characterize the fuel
auto-ignition performances: the octane number (often Research Octane
Number (RON)), which rates the fuel resistance to auto-ignition [51],
and  the  Cetane  Number  (CN),  which  in  contrast  rates  the  fuel  igniti-
bility; the lower RON and the higher CN, the more ignitable the fuel.
Fig.  7,  taken  from  Sudholt  et  al.  [87],  presents  the  cetane  rating  of
several furan derivatives proposed as potential biofuel according to the
above-described catalytic chemical processes. As described in [87], the
plotted Derived Cetane Numbers (DCN) were calculated from ignition
delay times experimentally measured under engine relevant conditions
in an ignition quality tester. Biofuels were purchased when possible, or
synthetized following pathways proposed in [88]. Fig. 7 shows that all
these furan derivatives, except for 2-ETHF and 2-BTHF, have DCN below
that of RON 90 fuel indicating that these fuels have a good resistance to
auto-ignition and might be used in gasoline engines.

More  generally,  Table  1  gathers  the  available  values  of  density,
Boiling Point (BP) and performance indicators related to combustion in
engines  (heating  values,  RON  and  DCN)  of  all  CEs  here-before
mentioned as potential biofuels according to literature. For the sake of
comparison, the corresponding data is also provided for gasolines, Diesel
fuels, and two well-studied alcohols, ethanol and n-butanol.

Concerning physico-chemical properties, the density of all the CEs
listed in Table 1 (liquid under standard conditions) are above those of
conventional fuels and alcohols, except that of 2,5-DMTHF. The BPs of
all CEs listed in Table 1 except for GVL (491 K), which strictly speaking
is a cyclic ester, are in the same range as the values of the compounds
included in gasoline. Despite its high resistance to auto-ignition (RON =
100), GVL’s low volatility strongly limits its use as gasoline blend. Ac-
cording to Table 1, the presence of an alcohol function or of a C3-C4 alkyl
or ether chain significantly lowers the CE volatility (BP above 400 K).
Concerning combustion performance indicators, the Lower Heating
Values (LHV) by volume, which is of interest for ground transportation,
and on mass basis (important for aviation) are given in Table 1. The LHV
per  mass  of  all  the  CEs  listed  in  Table  1  are  above  that  of  n-butanol
except that of GVL. Amongst all these CEs, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF have a BP
below 370 K, a mass LHV above that of n-butanol (26.8), and a RON
above  100,  which  makes  these  two  CE  particularly  interesting  as  po-
tential  octane boosting additives  in  gasoline  blends.  The RON  of  2,5-
DMF  (119)  is  very  close  to  that  of  ethanol  (120)  indicating  similar
resistance to auto-ignition. In addition, it was recently shown that 2-MF
exhibits an exceptional synergetic anti-knock blending effect in mixture
with alkanes [89].

Fig. 7. Derived Cetane Number (DCN) for furan derivatives proposed as potential biofuels. For comparison, this figure plots also the n-heptane CN (n-C16H34 CN is
100), the minimum CN values required in Diesel fuels in Europe and United states and the CN value of a fuel with RON equal to 90, which is the maximum CN value
for a fuel to be used in Spark-Ignited engines. Reproduced from Ref. [87] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010198

L.-S. Tran et al.

1.2.3.2. Potential  of  cyclic  ether  combustion  processes  to  yield  toxic
products. To access the potential sources of toxic products amongst the
species  present  in  the  exhaust  gas  of  automobile  engines,  one  should
examine the emission of unburned fuel, NOx, carbonyl compounds and
hydrocarbons, especially those identified as potential soot precursors.

Concerning the impact of possible emission of unburned fuels, furan
derivatives are not considered as particularly toxic compounds, except
for  furan  and  1,4-dioxane,  for  which  possible  carcinogenic  effects  on
humans were reported [8,98]. However, the impacts of CEs on human
health  and  atmosphere  should  be  better  characterized.  Because  furan
 ̇
derivatives  contain double bonds  which allow
OH addition reactions,
they  can  degrade  rapidly  in  the  atmosphere  and  be  a  source  of
by-products, such as butanedial [99].

Following  regulated  gaseous  pollutants  in  a  spark-ignited  engine,
Wang  et  al.  [100]  demonstrated  that  fueling  with  2-MF  or  2,5-DMF
instead  of  gasoline  leads  to  lower  emissions  of  unburned  hydrocar-
bons,  but to  higher  ones of  CO  and  NOx.  Due  to the  high in-cylinder
temperature  2-MF  and  2,5-DMF  generate  up  to  82%  and  33%  more
NOx emissions than gasoline, respectively.

Carbonyl compounds present in the exhaust gas of a spark-ignited
engine fueled either with gasoline or with different potential biofuels,
including  2,5-DMF,  were  quantified  by  Daniel  et  al.  [101]  using  Gas
Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS). The conclusion drawn by
the  authors  was  that  2,5-DMF  produced  the  lowest  overall  carbonyl
emissions compared to gasolines and C1-C4 alcohols. More specifically,
as shown in Fig. 8, 2,5-DMF led to the lowest formaldehyde emission
amongst  the  tested  fuels.  A  possible  reason  for  the  low  emission  of
carbonyl  products  is  its  aromatic  structure,  which  leads  to  specific
decomposition reactions discussed in Part 5. On the other hand, alcohols
and  regular  ethers  are  known  to  produce  aldehydes  as  intermediate
during their combustion (Part 4). A similar study carried out by Wang
et al. [100] indicates that formaldehyde emissions are even lower, with
similar acetaldehyde emissions, when using 2-MF instead of 2,5-DMF.
Monitoring  pollutant  emissions  from  a  diesel  engine  fueled  with
biodiesel and its blend with 2-MF, Xiao et al. [102] reported a decrease
of the emissions of CO, 1,3-butadiene, benzene and acetaldehyde with
increasing CE mass fraction, but in contrast NOx emissions increased.

Concerning soot production in SI engines, Wang et al. [100] noted

Table 1
Physico-chemical properties (standard conditions) and combustion performances of CEs proposed as biofuel candidates, conventional fuels, and two alcohols [39,51,
70,72,73,86,87,90–97].

Namea

Formula

Structure

Density(kg/L)

BPb(K)

LHVb
MJ/L(MJ/kg)

RONb

DCNb

Cyclic ethers

GVL

THF

2-BTHF

2-ETHF

2-MTHF

2-PTHF

2-THFFOH

2-THFFEE

2-THFFBE

2,3-DMTHF

C5H8O2

C4H8O

C8H16O

C6H12O

C5H10O

C7H14O

C5H10O2

C7H16O2

C8H16O2

C6H12O

2,5-DMTHF

C6H12O

3-MTHF

C5H10O

EFFE

Furan

2-BF

2-EF

2-FFOH

2-MF

2,3-DHF

2,5-DHF

C7H10O2

C4H4O

C8H12O

C6H8O

C5H6O2

C5H6O

C4H6O

C4H6O

Tetrahydrofuran derivatives

1.05

0.89

0.85

0.86

0.85

0.87

1.05

0.91

0.92

0.87

0.83

0.86

Furan derivatives
0.99d

0.94

0.90

0.91

1.13

0.91

0.93

0.93

491

339

432

382

353

406

451

429

451

378

364

362

423

305

413

366

443

336

328

340

26.2 (25.0)

29.1 (32.7)

31.5 (37.0)

–

28.5 (33.5)

31.3 (36.2)

27.5 (26.2)

28.0 (30.4)

29.6 (32.0)

30.4 (34.9)

29.5 (35.5)

29.1 (33.6)

30.5 (28.8)

–

31.3 (34.8)

–

–

100

73

–

–

86

–

–

–

–

–

82

–

–

–

–

–

–

27.7 (30.4)

102

–

–

–

–

–

21.9

45.5

28.1

22.0

42.9

17.9

78.9

63.8

24.5

24.5

24.9

18.4

7.0

13.1

10.2

10.8

8.9

20.0

15.6

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)1010199

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 1 (continued )

Namea

Formula

Structure

Density(kg/L)

BPb(K)

2,5-DMF

C6H8O

0.90

THP

C5H10O

2-BOTHP

C9H18O2

2-EOMTHP

C8H16O2

1,3-dioxolane

C3H6O2

1,3-dioxane

C4H8O2

1,4-dioxane

C4H8O2

Conventional fuels
Gasolinesc
Dieselc
Alcoholic fuels
Ethanol

n-Butanol

C4-C14 HC
C8-C25 HC

C2H5OH

C4H9OH

Tetrahydropyran derivatives

0.88

0.91

0.94

367

361

473

452

Cyclic ethers containing two ring oxygen atoms

1.06

1.03

1.03

0.74
0.84

0.80

0.81

351

376

374

303-473
443-633

352

356

LHVb
MJ/L(MJ/kg)

RONb

DCNb

30.0 (33.7)

119

10.9

–

29.9 (32.9)

30.4 (32.2)

37.1 (35)

–

–

31.6 (42.7)
36.1 (43.0)

21.3 (26.8)

26.8 (33.1)

–

–

–

–

–

–

95
–

120

96

–

76

63.8

30

–

58

~23
40-55

8

15.9

a See full name in Table 4.
b BP: Boiling Point; LHV: Lower Heating Value; RON: Research Octane Number; DCN: Derived Cetane Number.
c Fuel standard.
◦
d at 15

C. “–”: unavailable.

that  2-MF  produced  significantly  less  PM  in  number  and  in  mass
compared to gasoline. Daniel et al. [101] identified a notable presence of
1,3-cyclopentadiene and aromatics in the emission of a SI engine fueled
with  2,5-DMF,  which  is  in  agreement  with  detailed  kinetic  modeling
performed by Tran et al. [103]. From their measurements of emissions in
a practical diesel engine, Song et al. [96] concluded that, when added to
a base Diesel fuel, 1,3-dioxolane was by far less efficient in soot reduc-
tion than linear C4H10O2 and C6H14O3 ethers.

Fig. 9 presents simulated mole fractions of compounds, commonly
considered  as  soot  precursors  (naphthalene,  indene  and  pyrene),
computed  for  laminar  premixed  flames  fed  with  2,5-DMF,  2-MF,
toluene,  n-heptane,  iso-octane,  and  a  ternary  gasoline  mixture  made
using the three previous molecules (13.7% (vol.) n-heptane, 42.9% iso-
octane, 43.4% toluene).

The  model  of  Tran  et  al.  [101]  predicts  that  the  2,5-DMF  flame
produces significantly higher quantities of the three soot precursors than
gasoline  surrogate  (“ternary  mixture”  shown  in  Fig.  9),  although  less
than toluene, a common octane boosting additive. In contrast, the 2-MF
flame produces very low levels of soot precursors, close to those of the
alkanes.  Experimental studies  would  be  helpful  to  verify  these  model
predictions.

Fig. 8. Emissions of formaldehyde and acetaldehyde from a spark-ignited en-
gine  fueled  with  methanol,  ethanol,  n-butanol,  2,5-DMF  (noted  DMF  in  the
figure), and gasoline.  Given concentrations are in  C1-equivalent, i.e. quantifi-
cation  is  performed  by  comparing  the  areas  between  the  standard  and  the
sample  on  a  C1  (formaldehyde)  basis.  Reproduced  from  Ref.  [101]  with
permission of ACS.

Fig. 9. Fuel influence on the normalized maximum flame mole fraction of soot
precursors  (normalization  is  done  using  the  value  in  the  toluene  flame)  ac-
cording to the detailed kinetic modelling of Tran et al. [103].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101910

L.-S. Tran et al.

In  line  with  these  results  on  soot  precursor  formation  from  furan
derivatives, the second objective of this review is to show how experi-
mental  and  modeling  kinetic  studies  have  helped  to  improve  the  un-
derstanding  of  the  combustion  and  oxidation  chemistry  of  CEs  as
potential biofuels.

1.3. Scope and structure of the paper

This  paper  aims  at  describing  the  current  understanding  of  the
chemistry  and  kinetics  related  to  gas-phase  CE  oxidation  and  the
experimental, theoretical and modelling studies, which have been per-
formed to achieve it. This paper includes an analysis of the pathways by
which CEs are formed during the low-temperature oxidation of organic
compounds, including alkanes, but also unsaturated hydrocarbons and
oxygenated molecules. This paper also reviews studies in which CEs act
as fuel. These investigations deal with the consumption pathways of CEs
in  combustion  (including  pyrolysis  and  low-/high-temperature  oxida-
tion) and are thus complementary to the CE formation chemistry studies.
Besides Part 1 explaining why studies of the CE gas-phase kinetics are

needed, the core of the present paper consists of the following parts:

• Part 2 discusses the theoretical methods, which have been used to
investigate  CE  chemistry,  and  presents  the  naming,  structure  and
thermochemical properties of the CEs mentioned in this paper.
• Part 3 introduces the experimental tools in terms of equipment and
analytical techniques used in the studies reviewed in Parts 4 and 5.
• Part  4  summarizes  the  previous  experimental,  theoretical  and
modeling  work  related  to  the  CE  formation  during  combustion
chemistry of hydrocarbons and oxygenated compounds.

• Part  5  has  the  same  objective  as  Part  4,  but  deals  with  the  con-

sumption of CEs.

• In Part 6, the main conclusions are presented and perspectives for

future work are provided.

It is well known that notable amounts of dioxins and benzofurans are
produced during combustion processes [104,105]. However, these CEs
including an aromatic ring are not considered in this paper because the
involved chemistry is significantly different from what is attempted to
be described here.

The combination of Parts 4 and 5 is of interest in understanding how
CE detailed kinetic models can help to improve the combustion in ICE
engines. Part 4 concerns CE formation from hydrocarbons and biofuels,
which is of interest for improving engine efficiency due to the compe-
tition  of  this  pathway  with  KHP  formation  during  low-temperature
oxidation.  Part  5  reviews  the  current  understanding  of  CE  consump-
tion  reactions  with  an  eye  on  the  formation  of  pollutants  from  furan
derivatives. Such an understanding is needed to evaluate their potential
as  biofuels  to  replace  fossil  fuels  with  the  goal  to  contribute  to  the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.

2. Names, structures, thermochemical properties, and
theoretical methods

Before reviewing the combustion kinetic studies related to the for-
mation and consumption of CEs in Parts 4 and 5, this part aims at pre-
senting the names, structures and the thermochemical data of all CEs
mentioned in this paper. Before that, a description of the methods used
to theoretically calculate the related kinetic and thermochemical data is
given.

2.1. Overview of the theoretical methods used to calculate the cyclic ether
related thermochemical data

Theoretical  investigations  contribute  significantly  towards  the  un-
derstanding  of  CE  chemistry.  They  provide  Potential  Energy  Surfaces
(PESs)  that  allow  identification  of  energetically  possible  pathways,

thermodynamic  data  for  equilibrium  considerations,  reaction  barriers
and structural details of transitions states for the calculation of thermal
rate  coefficients  and  the  description  of  pressure  effects  for  non-
thermalized  reactions.  This  review  is  concerned  with  two  aspects  of
CE  chemistry:  first,  their  formation  as  products  in  low-temperature
oxidation of other fuels (Part 4) and second, the combustion chemistry
of  CEs  themselves  (Part  5).  Given  this  focus,  the  theoretical  methods
used to describe CE chemistry are essentially the same as those used for
low-temperature oxidation in general. In 2009, Pilling [106] presented
an  overview  of  the  state  of  the  art  of  mechanism  development  for
low-temperature  oxidation  based  on  elementary  reactions,  and  Z ́ador
et al. [107] provided an excellent discussion on a strategy to develop
rate  expressions  involving  close  interaction  between  theory  and
experiment.

The calculation of rate coefficients may be considered as a stepwise
process  starting  from  first  principles  to  determine  electronic  energies
and  structural  parameters  of  reactants,  Transition  States  (TSs)  and
products. This leads to PESs, on which reactants, addition products, their
isomers, and bi- (or tri-) molecular product channels are connected with
each other through TSs. The molecular information is used to calculate
thermodynamic  properties  of  individual  species  based  on  statistical
mechanics and to calculate their high-pressure limit rate coefficient (k∞)
using statistical rate theory. In non-thermal processes, the population of
the energy states in species changes with time due to collisional energy
transfer and chemical transformation. The solution of the representative
Master  Equation  (ME)  describes  the  fluxes  between  these  states  and
those can be converted to rate expressions to be used in kinetic mech-
anisms. Comparison of predictions with reliable experimental data al-
lows,  if  necessary,  an  adjustment  of  critical  parameters  within  their
uncertainty range to improve the mechanism until satisfactory results
are  achieved.  Fig.  10  illustrates  such  a  stepwise  approach  for  kinetic
calculations and some details are discussed in the following paragraphs.

2.1.1. Electronic structure calculations

The electronic Schroedinger equation for chemical species is nowa-
days routinely solved with user-friendly first principles software pack-
ages  to  establish  their  optimized  geometries,  (an)harmonic  frequency
spectra and absolute electronic energies. The results of these electronic
structure  calculations  strongly  depend  on  the  method  and  basis  set
chosen. The method essentially describes the accuracy with which the
interactions between electrons are treated while the size and structure of
the  basis  set  determines  the  flexibility  to  optimize  the  wavefunction
when solving the eigenvalue (electronic energy) –  eigenvector (wave-
function) problem.

At  the Hartree  Fock (HF) level, a  given electron interacts with all
other electrons only through an average field (mean field assumption)
meaning without individual electron-electron correlations. Any post-HF
method adds electron correlation either through Møller Plesset pertur-
bation theory (MP), Complete Active Space (CAS) configuration inter-
action,  various Quadratic Configuration  Interaction  (QCI)  and  similar
Coupled  Cluster  (CC)  theories  or  by  Full  Configuration  Interactions
(Full-CI). The horizontal axis of Fig. 10 lists exemplarily some methods:
MP2 ([108]), CASPT2 (Complete Active Space second order Perturba-
tion Theory [109]), CCSD(T) (CC with Single, Double and Perturbative
Triple  excitations  [110])  and  Full-CI  [111].  They  are  ordered  with
respect  to  increasing  accuracy,  which  correlates  with  the  demand  in
computational power. Full-CI completely recovers the electron correla-
tion and is exact in this sense.

Density Functional Theory (DFT) also addresses electron correlation
through  empirical  so-called  exchange  and  correlation  functionals.  A
large number of DFT methods exist which are often parametrized for
special purposes. Since DFT methods are not post-HF methods, they are
shown separated in Fig. 10. DFT methods are generally faster than most
post-HF methods but they are often not as accurate as some affordable
post-HF methods. Nevertheless, they play an important role in quantum
chemical studies as they are dominantly used in geometry and frequency

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101911

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 10. Toolbox for the calculation of rate expressions.

calculations.

The vertical axis shows examples of basis sets starting from the STO-
3G (Slater Type Orbitals approximated by 3 Gaussian functions) basis
set, followed by examples of Pople’s Gaussian-type basis sets [112], a
Dunning correlation consistent polarized valence basis set and ends with
the Complete Basis Set (CBS) limit. The Pople split-valence zeta Gaussian
basis sets [112] are named X-YZ...+G(d,...) with X,Y,Z, ... being integer
numbers indicating how many Gaussian functions are used to describe
core shell (X) and valence (Y,Z,...) electron orbitals. “6-311+G(d)” for
example  means  that  the  core  orbitals  are  described  by  a  set  of  six
Gaussian functions and the valence orbital functions are built from three
sets of basis functions, the first set comprises of three Gaussian functions
and the other two consist each of one Gaussian function. The radial sizes
of the three sets are different, hence by optimizing the contributions of
these three sets, the location of the valence orbitals can be varied. “+”
indicates the addition of an extra diffuse basis function describing a large
s-orbital for non-hydrogen atoms and (d) indicates that extra polarized
d-orbital is added for non-hydrogen atoms which as the name suggests
allows  for  charge  separation.  The  basis  set  6-311++G(d,p)  contains
more  functions  than  the  6-31G(d)  basis  set  (3  split  valence  functions
versus  two;  ++:  diffuse  functions  also  for  hydrogen  and  not  just  for
non-hydrogen atoms; d,p: a polarizing p-orbital for hydrogen atoms next
to  the  polarized  d  function  for  non-hydrogens),  which  leads  to  more
parameters for the wavefunctions to be optimized and thus more accu-
rate but also more time-consuming calculations. Another popular type of
basis sets is that developed by Dunning et al. [113]: the Dunning cor-
relation consistent polarized valence basis sets (aug-cc-pVNZ, with ‘Z`
saying that the basis set is built from several basis functions of increasing

shell size, and N=D, T, Q, 5 indicates the largest shell included (double,
triple, ...)). The ‘aug’ prefix means that extra ‘diffuse’ orbitals are added.
The Dunning basis sets are specially suitable to allow extrapolation to
the complete basis set.

The  perfect  solution  of  the  electronic  Schroedinger  equation  is
‘theoretically’ achieved with a Full-CI / CBS calculation, but this is not
achievable.  In  reality,  the  methodology  and  basis  set  size  are  chosen
such that the calculations provide sufficiently accurate results with the
available computational resources. Studies of the CE chemistry of small
molecules can be performed at higher levels than those involving large
molecules, which leads to the strategy to study small model systems in
great detail with the highest levels of theory and transfer the results to
larger systems. This leads to the rate rules and Group Additivity (GA)
concepts used to build kinetic models for CE chemistry.

Post-HF  levels  are  only  reliable  for  single-reference  problems
meaning that the lowest energy electron configuration is well described
by  a  single  determinant  (Hartree  Fock)  wavefunction.  If  the  lowest

Table 2
T1 values calculated at CCSD(T1Diag)/CBSB7 for important stationary points on
the C2H5 + O2  PES. Transition states are named TS(reactant→product) and the
transition state for CE formation is highlighted in italic.

Species

 ̇
C2H5O
O
 ̇
CCOOH
TS(C2H5O
TS(C2H5O

 ̇
O → C2H4 + HO
O →   ̇
 ̇

CCOOH)

T1
value

0.025
0.012
0.034
0.025

 ̇
O)

Species

CCOOH → oxirane +  ̇
 ̇

OH)

TS(

TS(
TS(

 ̇
 ̇
CCOOH → C2H4 + HO
O)
CCOOH → CH3CHO +  ̇
 ̇
OH)

T1
value

0.041

0.032
0.052

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101912

L.-S. Tran et al.

energy state is (nearly) degenerate, then a multi-reference treatment is
needed.  The  methods  CASPT2  and  Full-CI  shown  in  Fig.  10  contain
multi-reference  contributions  and  are  used  for  such  cases.  The  T1
diagnostic by Lee [114] introduces a criterion to identify multi-reference
behavior: If the dimensionless T1 value is larger than 0.02, then treating
the species with single-reference methods might lead to severe errors, but
often values up to 0.03 or 0.04 are considered to be safely treatable by
single reference methods. As can be seen from Table 2, which presents
T1 values for important species on the C2H5+O2  PES, the T1 values of
most species exceeds this crucial threshold. The T1 value for the TS for
CE formation is the second highest reported value suggesting that results
obtained with single reference methods without additional corrections
might  be  highly  inaccurate.  Nevertheless,  many  if  not  almost  all  re-
ported  theoretical  results  for  low-temperature  oxidation  reactions  are
based on single-reference methods.

for

ten

including

test  reactions,

Harding et al. [115] explored the accuracy of CCSD(T) and CASPT2
among  other  methods
four
radical-radical reactions, three abstraction reactions, one H-addition to
a triple bond and two molecular elimination reactions. The main con-
clusions for these small systems were that CCSD(T) is very reliable for
single-reference problems, e.g. CH4 elimination from CH3CHO through a
tight  high  energy  transition  state,  and  CASPT2  is  a  good  choice  for
multi-reference  problems,  such  as  radical-radical  reactions.  They  also
recommend the use of CASPT2 for geometry and frequency calculations
in a priori studies.

As will be discussed in part 4, reported rate expressions for CE for-
mation show significant variations, both in barriers and pre-exponential
factors. Those are largely calculated with single-reference techniques or
DFT. The relatively high T1 value in Table 2 for the CE channel together
with the conclusion by Harding et al. [115] suggest that CASPT2 theory
could  be applied to  improve  the kinetics.  In  this context, however,  it
should be noted that the choice of the active space, e.g. the identification
of the electrons and orbitals to be included, can be a challenging task
[115–118], while single-reference calculations do not require the user to
make  such  choices,  even  though  the  stability  of  the  guessed  initial
wavefunction should be checked with the ab initio software.

Determination of the lowest energy geometry (structure) of a species
is a prerequisite of a high-level electronic energy calculation, since the
final energy result depends on this geometry. These optimizations and
the corresponding (harmonic oscillator) frequencies are generally done
at  a  lower  level  of  theory,  often  invoking  DFT  methods,  because  ge-
ometry optimization is an iterative procedure that requires many energy
calculations. Furthermore, the frequency calculation has to be done with

Table 3
Calculated  0  K  energy  (kcal/mol)  differences  between  the  gauche  and  trans
conformers  of  ethanol.  Results  in  italic  suggest  that  the  gauche  conformer  is
more stable.

Method

HF

MP2

B3LYP

M06-2X

CCSD(T)

CBS-QB3
G4

Basis set

6-31+G(d)
6-311G(d,p)
6-311++G(d,p)
6-31+G(d)
6-311G(d,p)
6-311++G(d,p)
6-31G(d)
6-31+G(d)
6-311G(d,p)
6-311++G(d,p)
6-31G(d)
6-31+G(d)
6-311G(d,p)
6-311++G(d,p)
cc-VTZ
aug-cc-VTZ
cc-VQZ

E(gauche) – E(trans)

0.31
0.14
0.33
0.26
-0.10
0.31
-0.24
0.10
-0.17
0.17
-0.20
0.12
-0.20
0.05
-0.02
0.12
0.10
0.22
0.24

the same method as that used to optimize the geometry. The most widely
used method is B3LYP [119]. It is an integral part of several composite
methods to be discussed below. Besides B3LYP, the highly parameter-
ized Minnesota functional M06-2x [120] combined with a large basis set
has gained popularity as method for geometry and frequency calcula-
tions.  It  is  nowadays  common  to  combine  these  methods  with  rather
large split valence basis sets that include diffuse and polarized functions.
The  importance  of  diffuse  functions  is  illustrated  in  Table  3,  which
contains the energy differences between the two conformers of ethanol
calculated at various levels of theory and with different basis sets. Since
the  trans  conformer  is  known  to  be  more  stable,  negative  entries  in
Table 3 indicate a wrong energy order of the conformers. This problem
has been reported by Sun and Bozzelli [121] at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)
level. As can be seen from Table 3, even CC methods lead to incorrect
predictions when used with unsuitable basis sets. On the other hand, all
calculations done with diffuse functions containing basis sets lead to the
correct  answer.  Note  that  the  CBS-QB3  and  G4  composite  methods
contain energy calculation steps that employ diffuse functions.

Accurate electronic energies for low-temperature oxidation chemis-
try  that  includes  CE  forming  and  consuming  reactions  are  generally
obtained with either composite methods or CBS extrapolated coupled
cluster calculations. Composite methods are multi-step calculations that
include  geometry  optimization  and  frequency  calculations  as  well  as
several energy calculation steps at different levels of theory. The results
combined with additional empirical corrections are used to estimate the
energy at a high level. The step-wise well-defined procedures provide
estimates  of  accurate  energies  at  reduced  computational  cost  by
combining high-level electron correlation methods with small basis sets
with  lower  level  calculations  but  large  basis  sets.  The  final  energy  is
calculated  from  a  well-chosen  series  of  energy  calculations  taking
advantage of the assumption that increases of the basis set and level of
theory lead to additive improvements of the energy. The most prominent
families of composite methods are the Gaussian-x methods developed by
Curtiss et al., of which Gaussian-3 or G3 [122] and Gaussian-4 or G4
[123] are widely used, the complete basis set methods developed by the
group  of  Petersson  (e.g.  the  highly  successful  CBS-QB3  method  [124,
125]  and  CBS-APNO  [126]),  the  series  of  Weizman  methods  Wn  by
Martin and de Oliveira of which the less computational intensive W1
and W2 theories are more suitable for low-temperature oxidation sys-
tems [127] and the correlation consistent composite approach (ccCA) by
DeYonker et al. [128]. More highly accurate composite methods such as
HEAT [129] or the ANL0 and ANL1 [130] procedures are known but
their applicability is currently restricted to small species. In particular,
the CBS-QB3 and G4 methods have been and are still popular choices for
the development of combustion models. Their average accuracy is on the
order  of  1  kcal/mol  based  on  comparison  with  test  sets  [123–125],
however,  as  pointed  out  by  Ruscic,  the  uncertainty  based  on  a  95%
confidence interval is 2.5-3.5 times higher [131]. Higher uncertainties
of  the  CBS-QB3  method  based  on  2  sigma  errors  rather  than average
accuracies have also been reported, e.g., by Simmie and Somers [132]. In
Klippenstein et al. [130], substantial differences between the CBS-QB3
results and the Active Thermochemical Tables (ATcT [133]) are noted.
The main advantage of composite methods is that they provide generally
a  good  compromise  between  accuracy  and  demand  of  computational
resources, but in light of abovementioned uncertainties, the results need
to be handled with caution.

Due to enormous advances in computer power and improvements in
ab  initio  software  packages,  coupled  cluster  calculations  with  single,
double  and  perturbative  triple  excitations  (CCSD(T))  and  sufficiently
large basis sets are nowadays feasible for medium sized species (10 or
more  heavy  atoms,  see  e.g.  [134]).  This  allows  their  use  for
low-temperature oxidation models of small fuel molecules. Using Dun-
ning’s correlation consistent basis sets discussed above, Elmax , which is
the  electronic  energy  from  a  CCSD(T)//cc-pVNZ  calculation  with
N=lmax can be extrapolated to the complete basis set (E∞), e.g. using the
scheme suggested by Martin [135] and Feller and Dixon [136],

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101913

L.-S. Tran et al.

E∞ = Elmax (cid:0) B

/
(lmax + 1)4

(1)

where B is a constant and lmax  is the maximum component of angular
momentum in the cc-pVNZ basis set. For example, if the cc-pVQZ basis
set is used, lmax=4. Feller and Franz [137], who study the heats of for-
mation of furan, THF and THF radicals, nicely demonstrate how well the
CCSD(T) results converge with increasing basis set.

In  contrast  to  many  composite  methods,  the  CBS  extrapolation  of
coupled  cluster  calculations  does  not  require  empirical  corrections.
Therefore, CCSD(T)/CBS calculations are considered to be reliable for all
species as long as the electronic ground state is not degenerated of mixed
with higher electronic states. Species, for which this is the case, should
be  treated  with  multi-reference  methods  (e.g.  CASPT2)  as  discussed
above.

2.1.2. Thermodynamic data and thermal rate coefficients

Besides  rate  expressions,  kinetic  models  require  thermodynamic
properties such as the Gibbs free energy for all species considered. They
are needed, e.g., to solve the energy balance of adiabatic reactors or to
calculate  rate  coefficients  of  reverse  reactions.  Thermodynamic  prop-
erties  can be calculated  from the  fundamental  results  from electronic
structure  calculations,  which  are  the  electronic  energy,  the  geometry
and  internal  modes  of  a  species  through  well-established  standard
methods of statistical mechanics [138]. At this stage, only a few selected
aspects of the procedure are briefly discussed, which are (a) the con-
version  of  electronic  energies  into  enthalpies  of  formation  (b)  the
handling of internal rotations and (c) the role of symmetry and optical
isomers. Finally, the calculation of the rate coefficients of thermalized
reactions are described. It should be noted that a recent paper discussed
in detail an automated strategy for thermochemistry calculations [139]
including ways to handle the aspects mentioned above.

2.1.2.1. Enthalpies of formation. Two strategies are employed to calcu-
late  the  enthalpies  of  formation  from  the  ab  initio  results:  the  use  of
isodesmic  (or  similar)  reactions  and  the  atomization  method.  In  iso-
desmic  reactions  [140],  the  reactants  and  products  contain  the  same
number of bonds of a given type. If in addition the groups (substructures
consisting of a multivalent atom and its ligands) are also conserved, the
reaction is called homodesmotic. According to the assumption of addi-
tivity  of  thermochemical  properties  (Benson’s  GA  method  [141])
homodesmotic reactions should be thermoneutral. The ab initio calcu-
lated  enthalpy  of  reaction  should  be  very  accurate  because  any  sys-
tematic weaknesses of the calculation method would cancel out. If the
enthalpies of formation for all but one species of an isodesmic reaction
are  known  with  high  accuracy,  the  missing  value  can  be  calculated.
Chen and Bozzelli have extensively used isodesmic reactions for species
related to low-temperature oxidation [142–144] and showed that even
DFT level calculations yield very accurate results [145]. This indicates
that the  errors in low  level calculations are  dominantly of  systematic
nature that cancel out. The accuracy of isodesmic reactions depends on
the  availability  of  well-known  experimental  enthalpies  of  formation.
This  presents  a  drawback,  which  has  been  partly  overcome  by  using
highly accurate theoretical data instead for the reference species. The
need  to  choose  the  representative  reactions  introduces  some  subjec-
tivity, which has been a point of criticism [146]. Furthermore, confusion
about the correct definition of such reactions have led to inconsistent
results [147].

species besides the atoms. Unlike isodesmic reactions, atomization en-
ergies  are  in  principle  independent  of  user  input,  hence  unbiased.
However,  in  practice  this is  not necessarily  the  case  because ab  initio
methods  optimized  for  small  species  often  contain  systematic  errors,
which become more severe with increasing molecule size. This leads to
the  need  to  improve  results  by  applying  corrections,  e.g.  specific  to
chemical  bonds  (BAC  or  bond  additive  correction)  [149,150].  The
correction  parameters  are  obtained  from  comparisons  to  selected
experimental  data,  which  introduces  subjectivity.  Paraskevas  et  al.
successfully  applied  bond  additive  corrections  to  CBS-QB3  results  of
oxygenated hydrocarbons [151].

2.1.2.2. Internal rotations. It is nowadays common practice to treat in-
ternal modes that resemble rotations of moieties within the species as
hindered  rotors  and  not  as  harmonic  oscillators  to  improve  the  pre-
dictions of entropy, heat capacity and thermal energy contributions. If
those internal rotations are independent from other modes, they can be
described by 1-D rotors. The hindrance potentials are calculated ab initio
and represented as Fourier series and the effective moment of inertia is
calculated based on work by Pitzer and Gwinn [152–154] or East and
Radom [155]. The solutions of the corresponding Schroedinger equation
obtained  with  free  rotor  basis  functions  are  the  energy  levels  of  the
rotation, which are numerically included in the partition functions used
to calculate thermal energy, entropy and heat capacities via statistical
mechanics  [138].  Coupled  internal  rotors  are  generally  also  approxi-
mated  as  1-D  rotors  and  only  few  publications  explicitly  address  the
coupling [156]. The explicit treatment of internal modes improves the
results in particular of the entropies, but even for small molecules sub-
stantial deviations between calculated and experimental entropies may
exist [155]. There is no real consensus established for the choice of the
level  of  theory  for  the  hindrance  potential  calculations.  In  addition,
different research teams apply different thresholds (barrier heights) for
the identification of internal modes as rotors. Another source of uncer-
tainty arises from conformers. Commonly the lowest energy conformer
is used but if only 1-D internal rotors are considered, it is not clear if the
lowest energy geometry is always found (see also the previous discus-
sion on the basis set dependence of relative conformer energies). The
work by Simmie and Somers [132] provides an example, in which the
contributions of different conformers are accounted for, and the work by
Sharma et al. [156] also puts an emphasis on properly treating coupled
internal rotations. Furthermore, Zheng et al. describe a computer pro-
gram that automatically addresses torsional anharmonicity [157].

2.1.2.3. Symmetry factors and optical isomers. Entropies also depend on
the correct assignment of symmetry factors and a consistent handling of
optical isomers (or more general entropy of mixing). The correction for
the  existence  of  optical  isomers  depends  partly  on  the  internal  rotor
treatment  discussed  above.  Taking  ROOH  as  example,  the  rotation
around the RO–OH bond has a significant barrier of about 6-7 kcal/mol
for methylhydroperoxide. If such a barrier is considered too high for a
hindered rotation, and the harmonic oscillator assumption is applied,
then two optical isomers exist, as is shown in Fig. 11. The optical isomers
cause the entropy of the racemic mixture to increase by R×ln(2). On the
other hand, if the barrier is considered low enough to treat the mode as
internal rotation then these optical isomers are no longer distinguish-
able.  This  is  a  judgement  call  as  no  established  guidelines  for  the

dissociation

The atomization method [148] is the more widely used approach to
convert electronic energies into enthalpies of formation. The energy for
e.g.
complete
CxHyOz → xC + yH + zO,  is  calculated  ab  initio  at  0  K.  Using  experi-
mentally known energies to convert the atoms from 0 K to the standard
states of the elements at 298 K and the ab initio calculated thermal en-
ergy  of  the  species,  the  enthalpy  of  formation  can be  calculated. The
calculation  of  atomization  energies  does  not  require  any  reference

species

atoms,

its

to

of

a

Fig.  11. Optical  isomers  of  methylhydroperoxide  if  the  harmonic  oscillator
assumption is applied.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101914

L.-S. Tran et al.

classification exist (in the particular example of ROOH, the best option
would  be  to  treat  the  double-well  potential  as  anharmonic  oscillator,
since  both  optical  isomers  are  separated  by  just  a  small  barrier,  but
routine applications do not provide such an option).

In  2001,  Sumathi  et  al.  [158]  compared  for  n-butane  the  entropy
calculated either with internal rotation of the CC–CC bond or without
internal rotation but instead accounting for mixing of all conformers.
They obtained very similar results for 298K entropies and thermal en-
ergy contributions. Of course, this is not true for the heat capacity. For
instance, at high temperature fully activated rotors contribute only R/2
to  the  heat  capacity  while  harmonic  oscillators  contribute  R  (R = gas
constant). The lack of a general accepted protocol creates uncertainty in
ab initio derived thermodynamic data, which might explain why studies
using reportedly the same method of theory obtain different results for
thermodynamic  properties,  but  also  for  rate  expressions  (see  next
paragraph).

2.1.2.4. Calculation  of  rate  expressions  for  thermalized  reactions. Ca-
nonical high-pressure limit rate coefficients (k∞) can be calculated with
transition state theory (TST) [159,160].

k(T) = L⋅χ(T)⋅

kBT
h

q‡
TS∏
⋅
iqi

⋅e(cid:0) E/(RT)

or

k(T) = L⋅χ(T)⋅

kBT
h

⋅(Vmol)m(cid:0) 1⋅e(cid:0) ΔG‡ /RT

(2)

(3)

Both equations are equivalent. χ(T) is the tunneling correction factor,
‡
q
TS  and  qi  are  the  partition  functions  for  the  transition  state  and  re-
actants, respectively, E is the zero-point corrected barrier height, Vmol
the  molar volume  at standard condition,  m is  the  molecularity of the
reaction and ΔG‡ the Gibbs free energy difference between transition
state and reactants. The ‡ mark indicates that the transitional mode is
omitted.  L  is  the  reaction  path  degeneracy,  which  only  needs  to  be
applied if the partition functions or ΔG‡ do not yet account for symmetry
and  optical  isomer  contributions.  All  other  symbols  have  their  usual
meaning. L is given by

L =

OITS⋅σreactants
OIreactants⋅σTS

(4)

with OI specifying the correction for the presence of optical isomers and
σ presents the total symmetry contribution due to (external) molecular
symmetry and the symmetry of internal rotors [161,162]. χ(T) is usually
estimated  using  asymmetric  Eckart  barriers  [163,164]  or  the
small-curvature approximation [165]. All input data is available from ab
initio calculations after evaluation with statistical mechanics.

The ab initio results also allow calculation of the microcanonical rate
coefficient  k(E) with (Rice–Ramsperger–Kassel–Marcus) RRKM theory
[166].

k(E) =

W ‡(E)
h⋅ρ(E)

with

∫E(cid:0) Eo

W ‡(E) =

ρ‡(E‡)dE‡.

0

(5)

(6)

Here,  W‡(E)  symbolizes  the  sum  of  states  of  the  active  complex
(transition state) with energies up to E, Eo is the barrier height meaning
that  E (cid:0) Eo  is  the  energy  in  the  transition  state  (E  ≥ E0).  ρ(E)  is  the
density of states of the reacting molecule and ρ‡(E‡) that of the activated
complex. If symmetry and optical isomer effects play a role, k(E) has to
be multiplied with the reaction path degeneracy L given above.

For thermalized reactions, k(T) can be calculated from k(E) through

integration over all E

∫

k(T) =

k(E)ρ(E)dE

all E

(7)

because the energy distribution function ρ(E)
is the Boltzmann distri-
bution. The importance of the microcanonical rate coefficient is that it is
required in the analysis of non-thermalized reactions, for which ρ(E)
needs to be replaced by the non-thermal energy distribution function f
(E). The sum and density of states can easily be calculated from the ab
initio results with the Beyer-Swinehart algorithm [167,168].

Rate coefficients for reactions proceeding through transition states
without distinct barrier are calculated with variational transition state
theory (vTST). In canonical vTST the location of the transition state is
systematically varied for a given temperature to find the smallest rate
coefficient for that temperature. A more accurate procedure is to vari-
ationally calculate the microcanonical rate coefficients k(E,J). The most
important method used in the combustion community is that developed
by  Klippenstein [169,170],  in  which  not  only  the  relative  position  of
reacting groups is optimized but also the pivot positions in these groups.
Prerequisite for reliable results is a proper description of the potential
energy  surface  for  barrierless  reactions,  which  requires  the  use  of
methods that can handle multi-reference states. Therefore, CASPT2 is
generally used for these studies.

2.1.3. Pressure-dependent reactions

The rate coefficients of the reactions of species, which are not ther-
malized (the energy states are not populated according to the Boltzmann
distribution), depend on pressure because non-reactive collisions with
the bath gas will change the energy state populations and therefore the
overall  reactivity.  Miller  and  Klippenstein  [171]  and  Robertson  et  al.
[172] provide detailed descriptions of how the related ME are solved
and how the results need to be interpreted. An update of the state of the
art is discussed by Jasper et al. [173]. Here only a very brief overview is
given.  Fig.  12  shows  a  two-well  system  as  an  example,  in  which  the
reaction is initiated by the reactants A and B. The initial population of
isomer one (I-1) is determined by the energy distributions of these re-
actants and the barrier height; subsequent non-reactive collisions alter
this  distribution  by  transferring  energy  to  or  from  the  states  of  I-1.
Isomerization populates I-2 and dissociation reproduces the reactants.
I-2  may  react  to  yield  the  products,  isomerize  to  I-1  or  change  the
population  of  states  through  energy  transferring  collisions.  The  com-
plete  set  of  all  possible  processes  leads  to  the  ME,  which  is  an
eigenvalue-eigenvector problem. Its solution yields the populations of
all  states  as  a  function  of  time  (eigenvector)  as  well  as  the  flux

Fig.  12. Schematic  illustration  of  a  pressure-dependent  two-well  systems
(adapted from Glowacki et al. [174]).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101915

L.-S. Tran et al.

coefficients  (eigenvalues).  One  may  distinguish  between  two  types  of
eigenvalues:  those  describing  the  energy  flux  among  different  energy
states  (internal energy relaxation eigenvalues  (IEREs)) and  those that
lead to chemical changes (chemically significant eigenvalues (CSEs)). If
energy  transfer  among  the  states  is  fast  compared  to  all  chemical
transformations,  then these  eigenvalues  are  clearly separated  and the
CSE can be converted to rate expressions. On the other hand, if energy
relaxations and chemical transformations occur on similar time scales,
then the rate expressions are time dependent and typical constant rate
expression can only be approximated.

Given that realistic reaction systems contain many isomers and that
they require large arrays of energy grains to properly describe the en-
ergy distribution on vastly different timescales, solving the ME poses a
severe numerical problem. Codes like MESMER [174] or MESS [175] use
quadruple precision variables to obtain converged numerical solutions.
MultiWell  [176]  is  another  ME  package,  which  uses  a  stochastic
formulation of the ME problem. The accuracy of any solution – taking
numerical problems aside – depends on the accuracy of the features of
the PES as well as on a proper description of the chemistry and energy
transfer during collisions. Fig. 10 symbolizes this in the right-hand box:
the historic Lindeman theory [177], which assumes each collision to be
completely  activating  or  deactivating,  can  be  improved  by  Troe’s
modified strong collision (MSC) approach [178], which assumes that a
fraction  of  the  collisions  transfers  the  full  amount  of  excess  energy.
Significantly  more  accurate  and  physically  sound  state-resolved  colli-
sion models are used in modern ME solving programs with the expo-
nential  down  model  being  the  most  popular  one.  Collision  models
describing energy and angular momentum transfer would yield the most
accurate ME solutions but the 2-D ME can currently only be solved for
special  cases.  Microcanonical  k(E)  expressions  are  nowadays  almost
exclusively  calculated  with  RRKM  theory  because  the  required  input
parameters  are  readily  available  from  ab  initio  calculations.  Newer
implementations of QRRK [179], which preceded the RRKM theory, are
interesting  for  automated  mechanism  generation  because  QRRK  does
not require detailed species information (frequencies and geometries)

but works with input parameters that are available from GA. Further-
more, software is being developed to simplify the translation of ME re-
sults to lumped phenomenological rate expressions for implementation
into kinetic models [180].

2.1.4. Optimization of the reaction network

Many input values for kinetic models contain uncertainties that may
jeopardize the agreement with accurate experiments. By adjusting the
input data within the limits of uncertainty the performance of kinetic
models can be improved [107]. Refinements can be made to energies of
the underlying potential energy surface, treatments of internal modes or
energy  transfer  of  pressure-dependent  reactions,  depending  on  which
parameters  are  the  most  uncertain  ones  and  have  an  impact  on  the
predictions. As an example, in DeSain et al. [181] minor adjustments to
energies of stationary points of the PES are made to improve the pre-
 ̇
dictions  of
O  profiles  measured  in  the  photochemically
initiated reaction of ethyl and propyl radicals with molecular oxygen.
 ̇
O time profiles
These adjustments lead to accurate predictions of the HO
and supported the interpretation that this radical is partially produced
by a direct formation channel. Burke et al. [182,183] term this optimi-
zation approach “Multiscale informatics” and Welz et al. have applied
this approach recently to further deepen the understanding of propane
oxidation at low temperatures [184]. In Fig. 10, the iterative adjustment
process  is  shown  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  feedback  between
theory and experiment.

 ̇
OH  and  HO

Besides the adjustment of parameters, uncertainties can also origi-
nate from an incomplete description of the chemistry. A ME analysis can
only provide accurate rate expressions for a reaction system if all rele-
vant  reaction  pathways  are  included  in  the  analysis.  Recent  work
demonstrated  that  important  reaction  pathways  can  easily  be  missed
[185].  PES  exploring  algorithms  such  as  KINBOT  [186]  have  been
developed to address this problem by automatically scanning a PES. As
an  example,  Fig.  13  shows  a  PES  for  γ-valerolactone  decomposition.
Compared to the previously published PES, KINBOT finds substantially
more  reaction  pathways,  some  of  which  are  of  low  energy  and  thus

Fig. 13. PES for the decomposition of γ-valerolactone, automatically generated by KINBOT. Only the pathways in dotted blue lines were previously reported in the
literature, all others are reported for the first time. The green lines represent reactions with barriers below the lowest bond dissociation energy, those in gray have
higher energies. Reproduced from Ref. [186] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101916

L.-S. Tran et al.

potentially kinetically relevant.

Automated thermochemical data [139] and mechanism generators
such as RMG [187,188] and Genesys [189] contain tools for ‘on-the-fly’
calculation of rate coefficients for reaction pathways that can be iden-
tified  but  for  which  accurate  kinetic  parameters  are  not  available  in
databases.  It  is  foreseeable  that  in  the  future,  theoretical  studies  of
low-temperature  chemistry  including  those  involving  CEs  will  take
advantage  of  automated  procedures  that  ensure  completeness  of  the
chemical  network  [11].  There  are  also  other  mechanism  generators
available,  such  as  REACTION  [190,191],  MAMOX  ++ [192],  and
EXGAS [193,194]. REACTION uses the concept of pathways instead of
an exhaustive application of reaction classes. MAMOX ++ distinguishes
itself  by  generating  a  hierarchy  of  lumped  mechanisms.  The  main
specificity  of  EXGAS  is  the  use  of  the  most  complete  reaction  class
database and the wide choice offered to the user for the customization of
the mechanism. This latter system was applied for combustion of some
CEs, such as THF [195] and THP [196], but with complement of theo-
retical  calculations  for  taking  into  account  the  specificity  of  CE  reac-
tivity.  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  corresponding  references  for  the
details  of  each  generator.  In  addition,  the  mechanisms  generators
mentioned were summarized in a chapter of a book by Blurock et al.
[197] and in a review by Van de Vijver et al. [198].

2.2. Names, structures, and thermodynamic data

Table 4 presents IUPAC names (full and abbreviated), formula, 2-D
structure,  enthalpy  of  formation  and  entropy  under  standard  condi-
tions for all the CE molecules mentioned in this review. Since this paper
is related to combustion, only gas phase values are given. The IUPAC
names reflect IUPAC rules applicable for CE, such as the alphabetic order
of detachable prefixes (e.g. ethyl appear before methyl), the priority of
functional groups (e.g. the ether group has lower priority than an alcohol
which is lower in priority than an ester group) and that the numbers
should be as small as possible.  These names have automatically been
generated  with  ChemSketch  software  from  Advanced  Chemistry
Development, Inc. (ACD/Labs) [199].

The  heterocyclic  nature  of  CEs  leads  to  characteristic  thermody-
namic  properties,  in  particular  for  furanic  species.  In  Table  4,  the
enthalpy and entropy entries are divided into three groups: those based

on experiments, those calculated with theoretical methods and finally
those obtained using GA (Group Additivity). A quick glance at Table 4
shows that experimental and calculated data are very limited, but the
GA method as implemented in the RMG program [187] is able to provide
thermodynamic  data  for  all  species  of  interest.  In  the  GA  method,  a
molecule is divided into functional groups and the contribution of each
functional group to the overall thermochemistry, the Group Additivity
Value (GAVs), are added. These GAVs as well as any additional correc-
tions  for  non-nearest  neighbor  interactions  such  as  ring  strains  are
developed from theoretical calculations and experimental data found in
the  literature.  For  example,  thermodynamic  properties  for  THF  are
group(C(cid:0) O(cid:0) C) + 2 × group
calculated
follow  with  GA:
(O(cid:0) CH2(cid:0) C) + 2 × group(C(cid:0) CH2(cid:0) C) + ring(Tetrahydrofuran).
The
nomenclature is taken from RMG [187]. The thermodynamic properties
for  the  group(C(cid:0) O(cid:0) C)  and  the  group(O(cid:0) CH2(cid:0) C)  were  calculated  by
Paraskevas et al. [151] at the CBS-QB3 level, while those for the group
(C(cid:0) CH2(cid:0) C) and ring (THF) were taken from [200]. For thermodynamic
properties  of  radicals,  the  hydrogen  bond  increment  method  is  used
[187,201]. A brief discussion on the performance of GA is given at the
end of this part.

as

2-tetrahydrofurfurylalcohol,

In  the  following,  some  thermodynamic  properties  of  species  are
discussed in general terms. Experimental thermodynamic data are only
available for a limited number of CEs, e.g. oxirane, methyloxirane, 1,2-
epoxycyclohexane, oxetane, furan, several substituted furans, tetrahy-
drofuran,
2-methyl-1,3-dioxolane,
γ-butyrolactone,  γ-valerolactone,  and  tetrahydropyran.  In  addition,
Table 4 lists experimentally based entropies for 1,5-dihydrofuran and
1,4-dioxene.  With  the  exception  of  oxirane,  for  which  the  oldest
enthalpy  value  by  Moureu  and  Dode  [205]  differs  by  more  than  4
kcal/mol from later results, the experimental data are in good agreement
with  each  other.  This  can  in  part  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  some
entries are just re-evaluations of previous data hence the data are not
independent  from  each  other.  Most  enthalpy  results  are  from  calori-
metric measurements of the heat of formation of the liquid, which after
correcting  for  the  enthalpy  of  vaporization  yield  the  gas  phase  en-
thalpies of formation. Most entropies are calculated from spectroscopic
data.

Only a few research teams have specifically studied the thermody-
namic properties of CEs theoretically, although many more studies are

Table 4
Full (and abbreviated) name, formula/structure and gas-phase thermochemistry data (ΔfH
) of CEs considered in the review, together with a few representative
radicals.  Names  in  blue  are  those  used  in  this  review.  When  several  names  are  given,  the  first  name  is  the  IUPAC  one;  names  are  separated  by  “;”.  Bold  font:
experimental data including reviews of those (often found in the NIST WebBook [202]), regular font: theoretical calculations, italic font: group additivity (from RMG
[187], unless otherwise noted). Some original data that are reported in kJ/mol have been converted to kcal/mol. Data precision is restricted to one decimal (rounded).
The entries are ordered with respect to (i) cyclic ether ring size/type, (ii) type of molecule (e.g. aromatic, unsaturated, saturated) and (iii) formula. Radicals, for which
experimental or calculated thermodynamic data are available, are listed together with the parent molecules (ΔfH

). (These references are cited in table).

, S

, S

◦

◦

◦

◦

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101917

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101918

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101919

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101920

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101921

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101922

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101923

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101924

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101925

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101926

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101927

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101928

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 4 (continued )

a68.6 kcal/mol according to the original paper
bFor cis/trans respectively.
cB3LYP/6-311G(d,p) level
dG3MP2B3/B3LYP6-31G(d,p) level
eThe GAV for Cds-CdsOsH (2.03 kcal/mol) differs significantly from that proposed by Benson 8.6 kcal/mol
fValue is based on an assumed BDE, which is likely overestimated by 11 kcal/mol
gAs cited in Ref. [224]
hBond dissociation energy of 93.2 kcal/mol is converted to ΔfH using 44.0 kcal/mol for THF and 52.1 kcal/mol for hydrogen.
iBond dissociation energy of 92.1 kcal/mol is converted to ΔfH using 44.0 kcal/mol for THF and 52.1 kcal/mol for hydrogen.
jThe higher entropy value compared to 2-propyl-5-methylpropanoateTHF is surprising.
kDescribes a family of CEs discussed in Part 4 of this review, R and R’ being alkyl groups.
lCH3[CH2]10-n and [CH2]nCH3 correspond to R and R’ in the molecule name, respectively.
mCH3[CH2]n corresponds to R in the molecule name.

available  in  which  thermodynamic  data  have  been  created  as  a  side-
product  of  kinetic  calculations.  The  latter  data  are  not  necessarily
included in Table 4. Goldsmith et al. [206] employed B3LYP/6-311++G
(d,p)  for  geometry  calculations  to  the  lowest  energy  conformer  of  a
species identified with CBS-QB3. The QCISD(T) method extrapolated to
the CBS limit was used to calculate the electronic energy and BAC cor-
rections  were  applied  for  further  improvements.  As  part  of  a  larger
study, Goldsmith et al. calculated thermodynamic properties for oxir-
ane, methyloxirane and oxetane and the radicals of these CEs. All results
agree very well with the available experimental data. Simmie [90,132,
227,231,238] made substantial contributions to the thermochemistry of
CEs. In a systematic study Simmie and Curran [231] used the composite
methods  G3,  CBS-QB3  and  CBS-APNO  in  connection  with  isodesmic
reactions  to  calculate  the  enthalpies  of  formation  of  alkylfurans  and
their  radicals.  They  reported  bond  strengths,  resonance  stabilization
effects  and  showed  that  the  experimental  data  of  2,5-dimethyl-,
2-tert-butyl-, and 2,5-di-tert-butylfurans appeared to be self-consistent.
More  substituent  effects  of  furans  were  reported  in  [238]  using  the
same  levels  of  theory.  Simmie  and  Somers  calculated  as  part  of  a
benchmark  study  the  enthalpy  of  formation  of  oxirane  using  five
different composite methods. All results agree within 1.1 kcal/mol with
each other and also with experimental data and the value recommended
by the ATcT [133]. Feller and Simmie [227] calculated the enthalpies of
formation  of  furan,  2-methylfuran  and  2,5-dimethylfuran  using  the
CCSD(T)-F12 method with Dunning basis sets and extrapolation to the
CBS limit. Very good agreement with experimental data is achieved.

Tian  et  al.  [226]  provide  enthalpies  and  entropies  calculated  at
CBS-QB3 level of theory for furan, methyl furan, dihydrofurans and THF
as well as for derived radicals of those. Most reported data, however,
were  obtained  with  THERGAS  software  [264]  and  for  those  that  are
calculated with the CBS-QB3 method via isodesmic reactions, details of
the calculations are missing. In some cases, substantial differences can
be seen between the values reported by Tian and others listed in Table 4.
For  example,  the  entropy  for  furan-2-yl  of  66.5  cal/mol-K  is  6.8
cal/mol-K  lower  than  that  calculated  with  the  RMG  GA  tool.  For  2,
3-dihydrofuran, the enthalpy value of -21.8 kcal/mol reported by Tian
et al. is 5.6 kcal/mol higher than the GA value. The entropy for the same
species is 67.0 cal/mol-K compared to 61.3 cal/mol-K obtained with GA.
For  the  radical  2,3-dihydro-furan-3-yl,  the  differences  are  also  severe
(enthalpy: 8.5 kcal/mol [226] versus 0.7 kcal/mol calculated with GA,
entropy (cal/mol-K): 68.1 versus 56.6). Since Tian and GA are the only
data available for these species more studies are needed to resolve these
discrepancies.

Feller and Franz [137] studied the heats of formation of furan, THF
and the two THF radicals. They used the couple cluster method CCSD(T)
with several Dunning aug-cc-pVxZ basis sets which allowed extrapola-
tion to the CBS limit. The results for furan and THF are in very good
agreement with experimental data, while the enthalpies of the radicals
are  somewhat  higher  than  those  reported  by  other  studies.  They  are,
however, in good agreement with the GA data.

Hudzik and Bozzelli [144] use isodesmic reactions to calculate the
enthalpies  of  formation  for  furan,  2-methylfuran  and  3-methylfuran.
The  electronic  energies  were  calculated  with  the  B3LYP  and  M06-2x
DFT methods and CBS-QB3 and CBS-APNO composite methods. Other
studies  from  the  Bozzelli  group  [208,213]  provide  thermochemical
properties  (enthalpies  and  entropies)  of  methyl-substituted  CE  (oxir-
anes, oxetanes and oxolanes) using the same methodology as above. The
CBS-QB3 values are generally recommended. All results agree well with
other studies if available.

Using  high  level  coupled  cluster  calculations  Mai  et  al.  [228]
confirmed the lowest enthalpy of formation values reported for furan.
Isodesmic reactions were used by Sebbar et al. [232] with G3MP2B3
and  B3LYP/6-311g(d,p)  calculations  to  determine  the  enthalpies  of
formation of the two furan radicals. As it can be seen from the entries in
Table  4,  the  results  compare  well  to  those  by  Tian  et  al.  [226]  and
Simmie and Curran [231] and casts doubts that the GA calculated values
for these species are correct.

As part of a chemical kinetics study of the thermal decomposition of
2,5-DMF, Sirjean  and  Fournet [244]  reported enthalpies  of  formation
and  entropy  values  for  various  methyl  substituted  furans  and  their
corresponding radicals. The calculations were done with CBS-QB3 and
three  to  four  not  further  specified  isodesmic  reactions  were  used  to
derive the final enthalpies. The authors pointed out that the C–H bond
strength of the methyl group depends on its ring position and it is higher
if the methyl group is in the β-position to the ring oxygen.

CBS-QB3 was also used by Tran et al. [195] to calculate enthalpy,
entropy and heat capacity data for dihydrofurans and tetrahydrofurans.
The THERMO module of the master equation software MultiWell was
used for the conversion of the quantum calculation results. As can be
seen from Table 4, the results are in line with other studies, e.g. that of
Feller and Franz [137] discussed earlier and the work of Wijaya et al.
[207]. The latter work also utilized the CBS-QB3 method, although with
an  earlier  and  less  reliable  implementation  in  the  Gaussian  program
package.  One  outcome  of  this  study,  which  besides  oxolanes  also
calculated thermodynamic properties for oxetanes and oxiranes, was the
definition to ring strain corrections to be used in GA applications.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101929

L.-S. Tran et al.

Morais [263] studied the enthalpy of formation of α- and γ-pyrone
using  various  isodesmic  and  homodesmotic  reaction  schemes  and
several  composite  methods  (G3  and  its  G3(MP2)  variation,  G4,
CBS-QB3, CBS-APNO). The required reference data are either from ex-
periments or from accurate calculations. For α-pyrone, which is included
in Table 4, the heats of formation averaged for each method separately
agree very well (clearly within less than 1.0 kcal/mol) and a value of
-48.4 kcal/mol is obtained by averaging the results from all methods.
The  authors  performed  further  consistency  tests  to  demonstrate  the
reliability of this result. γ-pyrone was found to be less stable by about 9
kcal/mol.  Interestingly,  the  GA  result  of  -35.3  kcal/mol  deviates
significantly from Morais result. For γ-pyrone (not reported in Table 4)
the difference is smaller, -39.0 kcal/mol (Morais) versus -32.3 kcal/mol
(GA), but still quite large. A possible explanation is that the reported GA
value is calculated without contributions from a missing group.

In summary, in most cases theoretically determined thermodynamic
properties obtained with various methodologies agree well with avail-
able experimental values. However, for many CE species, such calcula-
tions are not available or hidden within kinetic studies. Group additivity
as implemented in the RMG website is able to fill all gaps. In many cases,
these GA data are very close to either experimental or calculated values,
which  allows  CE  thermochemistry  to  be  calculated  reliably  by  auto-
mated mechanism generating software. However, some exceptions exist
for enthalpies and entropies. For example, GA predicts the enthalpy of
2,3-DHF  to  be  about  10  kcal/mol  more  stable  than  experimentally
found, while GA performs well for 2,5-DHF. As indicated in Table 4, a
wrongly assigned GA value might be causing this issue. For α-pyrone, the
difference  between  the  theoretically  calculated  and  GA  predicted  en-
thalpies is about 13 kcal/mol (in this case the GA value is less exotherm),
which is presumably caused by ignoring the contributions of a missing
group. Clear enthalpy and entropy deviations also exist for CE radicals,
e.g. 2,3-dihydro-furan-3-yl. In this specific case, the applied Hydrogen
Bond Increment correction term might be a poor choice, because it likely
does not include the stabilizing effect of the CE oxygen.

While the above mentioned examples seem special cases, systematic
problems are visible for furanic radicals. In these cases, the GA imple-
mentation does not reflect the extraordinarily strong C–H bonds in furan
and its derivatives as well as the degree of resonance stabilization the
furan  ring  provides  to  furanylalkyl  radicals.  Revised  Hydrogen  Bond
Increment for these radicals should fix this problem.

3. Experimental methods used in cyclic ether kinetic studies

Before  discussing  the  current  understanding  of  CE  chemistry  in
detail, this part describes in more general terms the experimental de-
vices and analytical techniques used in these studies.

3.1. Main experimental devices used to investigate the gas-phase reactions
involving cyclic ethers

The  experimental  devices  used  to  study  gas-phase  reactions
involving CEs as products or as reactants can be classified according to
the methods used to initiate the reactions. In the context of CE chem-
istry,  three  main  initiation  methods  are  in  use,  which  are  photolysis,
flame propagation and thermal activation of a reactive mixture.

3.1.1.

Initiation through photolysis

The main characteristic of this method is that radicals are created by
laser  photolysis,  which  starts  the  low-temperature  oxidation  process.
This method has only been used in a few studies concerning CEs. It is
often  employed  in  measurements  of  rate  constants  of  elementary  re-
actions. The review of Rotavera and Taatjes [16] recently described the
 ̇
kinetics studies of the reactions of CEs with radicals (
O). The
experimental setups consist of quartz reactors operating at temperatures
between 400 and 700 K, at pressures from 9 Torr to 2 atm and slow gas
flows [265,266]. The oxidation reactions are initiated through reactions

 ̇
OH, HO

of the radicals or atoms with fuel molecules in the presence of O2  and
oxidation products are sampled via a pinhole in the reactor wall made in
order to create a molecular beam.

3.1.2.

Initiation through flame propagation

The method, in which reactions are initiated by the propagation of an
ignited laminar premixed flame, is the most widely used for CE studies.
Only very few CE studies involve diffusion flames, mainly for soot for-
mation investigation (e.g. [267]). While not specifically focusing on CEs,
two  review  papers  well  describe  the  experimental  devices  commonly
used for flame studies. The review paper by Konnov et al. [268] focuses
on  the  experimental  devices  that  are  used  for  measuring  Laminar
Burning  Velocities  (LBVs).  LBV  is  a  global  parameter  of  interest  for
representing  combustion  properties,  which  is  also  widely  used  as  a
target  for  testing  detailed  kinetic  models.  The  work  by  Egolfopoulos
et al. [269] pays more attention to the experimental devices used for
chemical speciation in flames.

Concerning CEs, two types of studies of Premixed Laminar Flames
(PLFs)  are  performed.  The  first  one  consists  of  the  measurement  of
adiabatic  LBVs  at  pressures  at  or  above  atmospheric  pressure  using
either a Constant Volume Bomb (CVB), in which a flame is spark-ignited
and LBVs are obtained after data processing to correct for stretch [270],
or a flat flame burner based on the heat-flux method [271]. The second
type aims at measuring the profiles of temperature and product mole
fractions as a function of height above burner in a flat PLF stabilized at a
pressure below atmospheric pressure [272]. Fig. 14 displays the burner
used in Nancy for this kind of studies for furan derivatives.

In the speciation studies of low-pressure flat flames, the temperature
profiles  are  either  deduced  from  pressure  measurements  in  the  first
pumping stage of the used mass spectrometer [273] or measured with a
coated thermocouple taking into account radiative heat loss corrections
[276].  Products  are  sampled  with  a  quartz  probe  located  inside  the
flame.  The  shapes  of  the  quartz  probes  differ  according  to  the  used
detection method: a quartz cone is  used for mass spectrometry and a
sonic probe for gas chromatography. Fig. 14 shows the PtRh (6%)-PtRh
(30%)  type  B  thermocouple  (diameter  100  μm)  and  the  sonic  quartz
probe used for sampling for gas chromatography analysis in the Nancy
device. Tran et al. [103] discussed the effect of probes on temperature
measurement for the case of 2,5-DMF flames.

3.1.3.

Initiation by heating a reactive mixture

In  most  studies  that  investigate  CE  production  during  low-
temperature oxidation, the reactions are initiated thermally by heating
the reactive mixture using mechanical compression in a motored engine,
a rapid compression machine or a shock tube, or by heat transfer from
the external wall of static (closed), flow or jet-stirred reactors. While in
the 70s adiabatic static reactors were largely used to demonstrate CE
formation during fuel slow oxidation (reaction occurring with no tem-
perature rise) and cool-flames (reaction occurring with a temperature
rise  by  at  most  a  few tens  of  K)  [4,277],  static  reactors  and  motored
engines are less frequently used for combustion studies related to CEs
since  the  90s.  As  is shown  in Fig. 15,  the  four other types  of  devices
involving reactive mixture heating cover a large part of engine relevant
conditions.

3.1.3.1. Heating  by  mechanical  compression. In a  Shock Tube  (ST) the
reactive mixture is heated by compressing it by a pressure (or shock)
wave that propagates along a usually few meters long closed tube. This
wave is created by the sudden expansion of a high-pressure gas into the
reactive  gas  mixture  maintained  at  low  pressure.  To  investigate  CE
combustion, STs have been operated in single pulse (the incident shock
wave is used for the measurements with reflections being avoided) or in
reflected mode. This latter mode uses the wave front after it is reflected
from  the  end  plate.  The  reflection  leads  to  further  compression  and
higher temperatures. In the case of CE studies, single pulse STs are used

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101930

L.-S. Tran et al.

to produce speciation concentration data at the end of the shock heating
in order to study pyrolysis reactions [279]. STs operating in reflected
mode are used to measure ignition delay times [280]. The ST used to
investigate THF auto-ignition in Nancy is shown as insert in Fig. 15.

As comprehensively reviewed by [278], the heating process of a gas
mixture by mechanical compression in a Rapid Compression Machine
(RCM) is similar to that occurring during a single cycle of an internal
combustion  engine.  Temperatures  can  be  varied  by  changing  the
composition of the inert gas mixture and can reach from 550 to about
1300  K.  Together  with  STs,  RCMs  are  commonly  used  to  study  the
Ignition Delay Time (IDT) of reactive mixtures as shown in Fig. 16 for
the case of THF. The RCM installation in Lille used in this study is shown
as an insert in Fig. 15. Both figures illustrate that the operating condi-
tions  reachable  in  STs  and  RCMs  are  complementary.  However,  in  a
RCM, as it can be seen in Fig. 16, the delay time of the cool flame that
precedes ignition can also be accessed.

3.1.3.2. Heating through contact with hot walls. Continuous reactors are
characterized by a steady gas stream that flows through a heated zone.
Since they allow for easy gas sample collection and analysis, these re-
actors are frequently used in speciation experiments. Furnaces or elec-
trical  resistance  wires  or  tapes  are  used  for  heating  and  temperature
measurement is achieved with thermocouples.

A flow reactor (FR) is simply a tube through which the reactive gas is
flowing [284]. As an example, the FR used in Colorado School of Mines
is shown as an insert of Fig. 15. For CE studies, FRs have been used below
or at atmospheric pressure.

The main type of Jet-Stirred Reactors (JSRs), which has been used for
CE studies, consists of a sphere, in which four turbulent jets created from
a cross-shaped inlet located at its center ensure the stirring [285]. The
JSR used in Nancy for investigating THF low-temperature oxidation is
displayed  as  an  insert  in  Fig.  15.  JSR  are  generally  operated  at
isothermal conditions achieved by highly diluting the reactive mixture
with an inert gas (He or N2) to avoid temperature increases caused by
the  chemical  reactions.  Using  such  reactors,  the  research  groups  at
Orl ́eans and Nancy were able to identify a large number of CEs in the
low-temperature  oxidation  of  hydrocarbons  at  conditions  similar  to
those observed during cool flames. JSRs for CE related studies have been
used at pressures from 1 to 40 bar.

More recently, the group of Ju at Princeton developed a supercritical
JSR  that  can  be  utilized  to  investigate  oxidation  chemistry  at  super-
critical  conditions  100-200  bar  [286].  In addition,  a  system  of  an  at-
mospheric  pressure  JSR  coupled  simultaneously  with  GC  and
SVUV-PIMS  of  high  mass resolution  (~5000)  was  developed  in  Hefei
group [287]. Fig. 17 displays an example of temperature dependent CE
mole fractions measured in a JSR study in the low-temperature oxida-
tion of n-heptane. It can be observed that CEs start to be produced at
temperatures as low as 550 K. In agreement with the predictions shown
in Fig. 3 in Part 1, furan and oxetane derivatives are produced in higher
amounts than other CEs. Note also the peak broadening in lean mixtures.
The methods used for the identification and the quantification of the

CE isomers in Fig. 17 are described in the following part.

3.2. Main analytical techniques used to measure cyclic ethers during their
gas-phase reactions

The two major techniques used for the CE analysis are mass spec-
trometry  (MS)  and  gas  chromatography  (GC).  Note  that  the  methods
used to measure CEs also allow the detection of most of the products
formed  during  their  decomposition  (unsaturated  and  oxygenated  hy-
drocarbons).  A  third  promising  technique  is  molecular  absorption
spectroscopy,  which  allows  probing  a  large  variety  of  species  during
combustion experiments [23]. Although to the best of knowledge of the
authors, this technique has not yet been used to detect CE in oxidation
processes.  Doner  et  al.  [289]  recently  published  measurements  of

absorption  cross-sections  in  the  vacuum  ultraviolet  (5.17  -  9.92  eV)
using  differential  absorption spectroscopy  for five-  and  six-membered
cyclic species including CEs.

3.2.1. Mass spectrometry

Mass Spectrometry (MS) consists in the transformation of all com-
ponents in a sample into ions, their acceleration by an electric field, and
the  separation  of  ions  with  different  mass  to  charge  (m/z)  ratios  by
means  of  a  magnetic  or  electric  field  [290].  Since  Thomson’s  experi-
ments, which led to the award of the Nobel prize in 1906, a large number
of systems have been developed for ion separation, e.g. Time-Of-Flight
(TOF),  quadrupole,  ion  trap  [291].  Single  component  samples  are
preferentially ionized at high-energy (e.g. electron impact at 70 eV). The
high energy impact leads to compound fragmentation and the features of
the resulting mass spectrum are a kind of fingerprint of the molecule to
be  analyzed.  This  spectrum  can  be  deciphered  either  using  known
molecule fragmentation rules [291] or by comparison to spectra taken at
the same conditions stored in databases.

If gas mixtures need to be analyzed, the use of low Ionization Energy
(IE) is preferred to minimize the fragmentation and to avoid getting an
indecipherable mass spectrum [292]. Low energy MS is most frequently
used together with TOF ion separation. In MS studies at low energy with
strongly reduced fragmentation the observed m/z ratios in most cases
equal the molecular weight of the molecules present in the gas mixture.
Mass spectrometers with sufficient resolution allow one to distinguish
between hydrocarbon and oxygenate ions with similar but not equal m/z
ratio,  which  reduces  the  uncertainty  in  species  identification  (as  an
example one can cite the unambiguous separation of ketene, 12C2
1H2
16O, at mass 42.0106 from propene, 12C3
1H6, at mass 42.0470 [293]).
Note also that the natural occurrence of isotopes and the use of isotope
labeled reactants can be used to identify products and reaction mecha-
nisms  because these  isotope distributions  are  directly  reflected in  the
mass spectra.

The text hereafter describes how CEs can be identified and quantified
by MS operated at lower IEs, detailing the sampling strategies and ion-
izations sources, CE isomer ionization energy determination, CE isomer
identification during fuel oxidation induced in thermally heated reactors
or  by  photolysis,  and  CE  isomer  quantification  during  flame  and  JSR
experiments.

to

is  used

investigate

in  Bielefeld,  EI

3.2.1.1. Sampling  strategy  and  ionization  sources. Mass  spectrometry
uses  Electron-Ionization  (EI)  or  Photo-Ionization  (PI).  When  using
sampling  by  Molecular  Beam  (MB)  supersonic  expansion  [294],  MS
enables the detection of both stable and reactive species. In the group of
Kohse-H ̈oinghaus
the
high-temperature reactions of CEs in PLF [273] using a quartz cone to
create  the  MB.  Samples  are  extracted  from  flames  fueled  with  furan
derivatives using a quartz cone with a 320 μm diameter orifice at the tip
◦
and an angle of 25
. These are ionized using five different nominal IEs
(10.5,  11.25,  12,  16.5,  and  17  eV)  [273].  In  the  CE  decomposition
studies in a 1 mm SiC FR, the group of Ellison in Boulder directly ex-
pands the effluent gases from the reactor into vacuum and uses PIMS or
Resonance-Enhanced MultiPhoton Ionization (REMPI)/MS for analysis.
During  low-temperature  fuel  oxidation  experiments  in  a  JSR,  gas
samples are extracted with a cone to create a MB or through a capillary
tube [23]. The obtained PI mass spectra commonly include a large signal
at the m/z ratio corresponding to CEs with the same carbon number as
the reactant. This is illustrated by Fig. 18 taken from the work of Wang
et al. [28] concerning the JSR low-temperature oxidation of n-heptane,
who  detected  a  significant  signal  for  m/z  114  attributed  to  C7H14O
species.  Note  that  the  relative  importance  of  this  signal  compared  to
those  of  other  low-temperature  oxidation  products  (e.g.  C7H14O3
(KHPs))  increases  with  temperature  as  expected  according  to  the  re-
actions described in Part 1. Taking advantage of previous literature on
n-heptane oxidation studies [32,33,295], Wang et al. attributed the m/z

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101931

L.-S. Tran et al.

114 signal mainly to trans- and cis-2-ethyl-5-methylTHF.

In recent years, MS has also been used with devices involving heating
by compression during CE related studies. In the RCM of Orl ́eans [296] a
sampling  orifice  located  at  the  end  wall  is  opened,  in  each  run,  at  a
preset  time and  the gas  of the  combustion chamber  is evacuated and
stored inside a pre-vacuumed sampling tank, which is then kept inside a
freezer  at  a  temperature  of  243  K  before  it  is  solved  in  a  solvent
(acetonitrile) and analyzed. This type of MS analysis allowed the iden-
tification of hydroperoxidic species. The gas in the ST of Karlsruhe [297]
is sampled continuously and analyzed at intervals of 50 or 100 μs [298]
by a TOF-MS allowing after calibration with pure substances, the mea-
surement of the time evolution of species concentrations.

For PIMS experiments, different light sources for low IE in the 8-20
eV range can be used, e.g. lamps, lasers or synchrotron radiation. The
advantage of synchrotron vacuum ultra-violet (SVUV) radiation is the
availability of a wide range of well-defined narrow linewidth tunable
wavelengths. In SVUV-PIMS analyses, species are usually identified by
comparing their Photo-Ionization Efficiency (PIE) spectrum recorded at
a  specific  m/z  ratio  with  threshold  ionization  energies  of  potential
candidates. A confirmation can be obtained by comparing the PIE curve
obtained  for  a  given  m/z  ratio  to  that  of  a  standard.  A  helpful  PIE
spectrum database [299] is established by NSRL in Hefei. As an example,
Fig. 19 displays the PIE curve for m/z 54 recorded during the oxidation
of n-butane [300]. The IE of 1,3-butadiene (9.072 eV [202]) matches the
PIE onset in the spectrum. This comparison works well for single species
but it is less straightforward if the recorded PIE spectrum at a given m/z
involves contributions of several isomers.

3.2.1.2. Determination of the ionization energies of cyclic ether isomers.
The identification of CE isomers during PIMS experiments relies on an
accurate knowledge of their IE. However, only a few experimental IEs
for  CEs  are  available  in  the  literature.  For  small  species,  IE  data  is
available  as  can  be  seen  in  Table  5,  which  lists  the  experimentally
measured IEs for cyclic ethers found in the literature.

The difficulty in the experimental determination of the IEs of CEs can
be partially overcome by the means of theoretical calculations. As an
example, in the n-butane oxidation study by Herbinet et al. [300], the
ionization  energy  of  2-methyl-oxetane  was  calculated  with  the  com-
posite  CBS-QB3  method  [124]  using  the  Gaussian  software  package
[381] with a typical uncertainty of 0.1 eV. These calculations require
finding the lower energy conformer, which can be a complex task for
large species. Rayne and Forest [382] tested data computed at the G4
and W1BD levels of theory for 17 small organic compounds (belonging
to  a  wide  range  of  chemical  families)  having  well-constrained  NIST
evaluated  experimental  adiabatic  IEs.  They  obtained  an  excellent
agreement  between  theoretical  and  experimental  values  with  mean
absolute deviation of 0.03 and 0.04 eV at the G4 and W1BD levels of
theory, respectively. El-Nahas et al. [383] calculated ionization poten-
tials of selected C1–C5 oxygenates and showed that long-range corrected
(LC-ωPBE,  LC-BOP,  LCgau-BOP,  LC-BOP12,  LCgau-B97)  density  func-
tionals gave good results compared with other density functional theory
methods (BHandHLYP, B3LYP, MPW3LYP, MPW1B95, BMK, MPW1K,
MPWB1K, BB1K) with a maximum deviation of 0.4 eV. The accuracy
might be poorer for larger species.

9.5 eV and could correspond to two species with close IEs: butanone and
2-methyloxetane (IEs of 9.52 and 9.57 eV, respectively). THF has an IE
of 9.40 eV. Other candidates (butanal, ethyloxirane and 2,3-dimethylox-
irane) have higher IEs (9.82, 10.15 and 9.98 eV, respectively) but no
obvious change  in the  PIE  curve  was  observed at  these energies.  The
comparison of the PIE spectrum with the literature cross section of THF
[386] demonstrated that the contribution of this species was minor and
that the large signal increase around 9.5 eV is likely due to contributions
of butanone and 2-methyloxetane.

Complementary  GC  analyses  highlighted  the  presence  of  seven
C4H8O  isomers:  butanone,  butanal,  ethyloxirane,  2,3-dimethyloxirane
(cis  and  trans  isomers  were  separated),  2-methyloxetane,  THF,  and
butenol. Butenol and oxiranes were present in smaller amounts than the
other species. This study, which combined two diagnostics, shows that
the identification of isomers using solely time-of-flight mass spectrom-
etry  with photo-ionization  is  extremely  difficult,  even for  a small  hy-
drocarbon, such as n-butane and that GC performs better for this type of
species.

To overcome this CE isomer identification problem, an attempt to use
PhotoElectron PhotoIon COincidence (PEPICO) spectroscopy has been
made. MS with PEPICO spectroscopy is a technique in which PIMS and
photoelectron  spectra  are  simultaneously  measured  (double  imaging)
[387–389]. In line with previous gas phase kinetic studies [390,391],
Bourgalais  et  al.  [392]  recently  studied  the  JSR  low-temperature
oxidation of n-pentane using this advanced diagnostic at the synchro-
tron Soleil, France. The goal of this study was to investigate how the
identification of reaction products can be improved by the analysis of
the  coincident  mass-tagged  threshold  photoelectron  spectra  in  com-
parison to the sole analysis of the PIE spectra obtained by SVUV-PIMS.
Experimental threshold photoelectron spectra were compared with the
combination  of  spectra  of  potential  candidates  obtained  from  first
principle  computations  of  the  adiabatic  ionization  energies.  Such  a
spectrum  offers  a  better  sensitivity  and  selectivity  because  each  elec-
tronic/vibronic state of the ion appears as a distinct peak rather than a
change of the slope in a PIE spectrum (the PIE curve of a species is the
result of the integration of its PhotoElectron Spectra).

However, for mixtures including a large number of isomers, as it is
the case for low-temperature oxidation products, even with the PEPICO
technique the isomer identification is not straightforward. Fig. 21 pre-
sents a tentative identification of the CE isomers corresponding to m/z
ratio 86 during JSR n-pentane oxidation [392]. The sum in Fig. 21 was
obtained by summing the weighted (best-fit procedure) photoelectron
spectra  calculated  for  the  seven  major  C5H10O  species,  which  were
detected  in  previous  GC  studies.  Fig.  21  confirms  the  significant  for-
mations of 2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane and 2-MTHF as was shown by GC.
However,  according  to  the  authors,  the  relative  contribution  of  the

induced

thermally

identification  during

fuel
3.2.1.3. Cyclic  ether
oxidation. Mass  spectrometry  with  photo-ionization  has  been  used  to
detect CEs formed during the JSR low-temperature oxidation of many
fuels (e.g., [28,300,384,385]). However, the MS identification of the CEs
produced during thermally induced low-temperature fuel oxidation can
rapidly become a complex problem even for small reactants, as shown by
Herbinet et al. [300] during the low-temperature oxidation of n-butane.
The authors coupled a JSR to SVUV-PIMS. They detected a signal at m/z
72  that  corresponded  to  the  expected  C4H8O  isomers.  As  shown  in
Fig. 20, the threshold in the PIE spectrum recorded for m/z 72 is around

Fig. 14. Photography of the McKenna flat flame burner with its thermocouple
and sampling probe used at Nancy during speciation studies in flames of furan
derivatives [103,273–275].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101932

L.-S. Tran et al.

different isomers needed to be interpreted with care because of the noise
level and because the photoelectron spectra of the isomers overlap in a
narrow  energy  region.  By  GC  analysis,  the  2-MTHF  mole  fraction  is
about four times that of 2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane.

3.2.1.4. Cyclic ether isomer identification during photolytically induced fuel
oxidation. One  of  the  main  advantages  of  PI-TOF-MS  is  its  ability  to
follow  fast  changes  in  species  concentration  on  a  short  time.  This  is
particularly valuable for reactions induced by photolysis, because this
allows the monitoring of temporal species profiles on short time scales,
e.g. just after a laser pulse [265]. In order to circumvent the poor ability
of PIMS to identify CE isomers during their photolysis studies, Eskola
et al. [390] proposed the use of partially deuterated reactants. To illus-
trate  how  this  method  helps  in  the  identification  of  C4H8O  isomers
during  the  laser-initiated  low-temperature  (575(cid:0) 700  K)  oxidation  of
n-butane,  Fig.  22  presents  the  PIE  spectra  obtained  when  1,1,1,4,4,
4-hexadeuterobutane  (CD3CH2CH3CD3)  was  used  as  reactant  instead
of the non-deuterated n-butane. Based on the assumed mechanism, the
only  expected  product  with  m/z  76  in  Fig.  22a  is  THF,  with  another
possible C4H8O product, butanal, starting to appear at IEs above 9.8 eV.
In Fig. 22b, the signal at the lowest photon energies, m/z 77 corresponds
to 2-methyloxetane, and ethyloxirane starts to appear above 10 eV. The
only  CE  expected  to  be  produced  from  CD3CH2CH3CD3  and  corre-
sponding to m/z 78 in Fig. 22c is 2,3-dimethyloxirane, which appears at
a photon energy about 1 eV higher than butanone. Note that because of
the  close  similarity  of  the  cis-  and  trans-2,3-dimethyloxirane  spectra,
these two isomers were not separated. Overall, in Fig. 22d, the sum of
the m/z 76, 77 and 78 fits well with the PI spectrum recorded at m/z 72
for n-butane.

3.2.1.5. Cyclic  ether  quantification. The  quantification  of  the  species
detected by MS does not necessarily require an external calibration with
a standard as this can be performed using a reference species (an internal
standard)  if  the  EI  or  PI  ionization  cross  sections  of  both  species  are
known [23]. In this case, xi(T), the mole fraction of the targeted species i
at a given temperature, is related to that of a reference species xref(T), by
the following equation [393]:

xi(T)
xref(T)

=

Si(T, E)
MDFref
⋅
Sref(T, E)
MDFi

∫
σref (E)⋅f (E (cid:0) τ)dτ
∫
σi(E)⋅f (E (cid:0) τ)dτ

⋅

(8)

where, Si(T,E) and Sref(T,E) are, respectively, the integrated ion signal of
species i and reference species at the energy E and the temperature T;
σi(E) and σref(E) are the EI or PI cross sections of species i and that of
species ref, respectively; MDFi and MDFref are their mass discrimination
factors; f(E-τ) is the energy distribution of the ionizing particles with τ
being the mathematical integration variable (i.e. the convolution of two
functions of electron energy distribution and cross section). Note that for
the photo-ionization approach, due to a narrow energy distribution, the
integral simplifies to σref(E)/σi(E) [394].

Unfortunately, the recent literature is scarce when it comes to the PI
cross sections of CEs (Table 6). Data are available for some cyclic ethers
deriving from the low-temperature oxidation of alkanes, such as THF,
THP and 2-MTHF, and for cyclic ethers, which can be found in bio-oils
processed  from  ligno-cellulosic  biomass.  Some  data  include  the  indi-
vidual  contribution  of  the  main  fragment  ions  to  the  total  ion  cross
section,  which  is  a  useful  information  for  confirming  species  identifi-
cation and the origin of fragments detected during the analysis.

The Ar signal is usually used as internal calibration standard in flame
and JSR experiments (IE = 15.8 eV). In the experiments at Bielefeld with
MB-EIMS  [273,400,401],  the  species-related  terms  can  be  condensed
into a calibration factor ki/Ar. The Eq. (8) becomes:

/

/

/

xi(T)

xAr(T) = Si(T, E)

SAr(T, E) × 1

ki/Ar(E)

(9)

The  data  evaluation  proceeds  in  two  steps.  The  first  step  is  to
determine the mole fractions of the major species, namely the fuels, O2,
H2, H2O, CO, CO2, and the inert diluent gas (usually Ar). The calibration
factors  for  these  species,  referenced  to  argon  as  internal  calibration
standard, are determined based on the elemental C, H, and O balances
derived from the exhaust gas and the inlet conditions. The second step
consists in determining the mole fractions of intermediate species. In the
MB-EIMS  experiments,  the  broad  energy  distribution  of  the  ionizing
electrons allows the detection of argon even at very low nominal ioni-
zation energies, for example at 10-13 eV [401]. Calibration factors for
intermediate species were obtained, with argon still as the reference, by
cold-gas calibration measurements of known gas compositions (direct),
by estimation using the relative ionization cross section method (RICS)
[402], or by convolution of the known ionization cross section with the
measured  energy  distribution  of  the  ionizing  electrons  as  detailed  in
[400].

In MB-PIMS flame experiments, particularly in the system in Hefei

Fig. 15. Temperature-pressure diagram of typical operating conditions for the
experimental  devices  based  on  reaction  initiation  by  heating  (adapted  from
[278]).  The  inserted  photographs  provide  examples  of  the  types  of  the  most
currently used devices: a flow reactor at Colorado School of Mines (not actually
used  for  CE  studies),  USA  (by  courtesy  of  A.  Dean),  a  jet-stirred  reactor  at
CNRS-Nancy, France, the rapid compression machine of CNRS-Lille, France (by
courtesy of G. Vanhove), the shock tube installation of CNRS-Nancy, France.

Fig. 16. Experimental IDTs for THF measured in a ST [281] (red) and in a RCM
[282] (blue). Symbols represent the experimental data (φ = 1, values derived
using  the experimentally determined  correlation in  ST) and lines show  simu-
lation  results  using  the  model  of  [283].  Reproduced  from  Ref.  [283]  with
permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101933

L.-S. Tran et al.

[292,403,404], the mole fraction determination for major species relies
upon a similar procedure as for MB-EIMS described above. However, for
intermediate  species  a  different  approach  is  used  for  quantification
because  of  differences  in  the  characteristics  of  the  two  ionization
methods. SVUV-PI provides a very narrow and accurate ionization en-
ergy distribution, and scans for intermediates are performed at energies
lower than that of argon (15.8 eV). Therefore, the Ar signal is not present
in these spectra. Mole fractions at a given flame sampling position (i.e. a
given  temperature)  are  still  calculated  from  Eq.  (8),  however,  using
reference species other than Ar. Using the same methodology during JSR
low-temperature oxidation studies, reference species having a low IE are
also used to quantify CEs from PIMS measurements. For example, pro-
pene, which can reliably be quantified by GC (see Part 3.2), is often used
as a reference [300].

No study was specifically performed to investigate the uncertainties
in the quantification of CEs. But in general, as declared by the teams
where  MB-EI/PIMS  are  used,  the  estimated  error  is  below  50%  for
directly  calibrated  species  or  for  species  with  known  ionization  cross
sections  [400,404,405].  If  the  EI/PI  cross  section  is  estimated,  mole
fraction uncertainties of a factor of 2-4 can be expected [400,404,405].
Note  that  when  the  isomeric  composition  is  complex,  such  as  for
fuel-specific  CEs  produced  from  C>5  fuels,  the  identification  of  these
species  is  ambiguous,  which  increases  further  the  uncertainties in  CE
quantification.

3.2.2. Gas chromatography

In  Gas  Chromatography  (GC)  analytics  [406],  a  gas  mixture  is
injected into a column coated or filled with an adsorbent. A carrier gas
carries the species along this stationary phase toward a detector, e.g. MS,
Flame Ionization Detector (FID), Thermal Conductivity Detector (TCD).
(The TCD is not actually used for CE detection.) The compounds to be
analyzed are separated according to the time needed to reach the de-
tector (retention time), which depends on their affinity to the stationary
column  material.  At  a  given  GC  condition,  the  retention  time  of  a
molecule is constant and can be used as one criterion for its identifica-
tion using a standard. Concerning CE analysis, the main GC advantage is
the  straightforward  non-destructive  separation  of  their  numerous
isomers.

Reviewing early experimental results, Griffiths [277] demonstrated
how  the  development  of  GC  methods  from  the  late  1950s  to  1995
allowed  the  first  qualitative  and  quantitative  understanding  of  the
chemistry involved during the low-temperature oxidation of hydrocar-
bons, with significant progress especially with respect to understanding
of the CE formation channels. Since then, GCs equipped with FID or MS
detection have been used in numerous oxidation studies for the identi-
fication and the quantification of CEs, as will be discussed in Parts 4 and
5. The following discussion describes sampling strategies and analytical
procedures used, as well the methods available for CE identification and
quantification.

3.2.2.1. Sampling strategies and analytical procedures. Back in the 90’s,
the teams of Minetti in Lille [407–411] and Cathonnet in Orl ́eans [295,
412–414] focused on the GC identification and the quantification of CEs
formed during the low-temperature combustion of alkanes.

In  Lille,  experiments  were  performed  in  a  RCM  [407–411].  The
gaseous mixtures were sampled just before auto-ignition and quenched
by  rapid  adiabatic  expansion  into  a  vacuum chamber  [408].  Samples
were then injected into a gas chromatograph equipped with a Poraplot Q
capillary column and coupled to a mass spectrometer (GC-MS) for the
identification of the species. The quantification was performed using gas
chromatograph fitted with a Porapak Q column and a FID. Fig. 23 shows
the results of successive experiments with sampling at different times
after compression [410]. This allowed to study the time dependence of
the product formation occurring during cool flame in the RCM. The data
compare well to the plateau shape exhibited in Fig. 3.

In Orl ́eans, experiments were conducted in a JSR operated at a high
pressure [295,412–414]. Sampling was performed using a sonic probe
and  the  obtained  sample  was  stored  in  a  bulb  at  low  pressure  (≤ 30
Torr). Gas samples were then pressurized in a temperature-controlled
piston and injected into several gas chromatographs. Oxygenated spe-
cies were analyzed on a Poraplot U column connected to a FID preceded
by a methanizer, or on a CPSii 5B column with FID detection [412].

From  2009  onwards,  CEs  were  observed  in  JSR  studies  in  Nancy.
These investigations were dedicated to the low-temperature oxidation of
different fuel families (n-alkanes, cyclo-alkanes, olefins, methyl esters,
aldehydes and ethers) [15,32,33,293,415–424]. Sampling was usually
performed  online  using  a  heated  transfer  line  connecting  the  reactor
outlet to a sampling loop mounted on the six-port sampling valve con-
nected to a gas chromatograph. Detection was carried out with a FID.
Depending on the species size, separation was achieved on PLOT-Q, HP1
or HP5 capillary columns. In the case of heavy fuels such as the long
chain alkanes present in diesel fuels or methyl esters [415] present in
biodiesel fuels, condensation in the transfer line may occur. In this case,
an offline sampling strategy was applied: 1) trapping at liquid nitrogen
temperature in a glass trap connected to the reactor outlet, 2) progres-
sive  warming  up  to  ambient  temperature,  3)  addition  of  solvent  and
internal standard, 4) injection of the obtained liquid sample into a gas
chromatograph.

The GC ability to separate the large number of CE isomers (some of
them being present as cis and trans isomers) produced during heavy fuel
oxidation  was  found  to  be  sufficient  for  species  containing  up  to  10
carbon atoms. For heavier species, limitations were encountered. Even
for  n-decane,  the  chromatogram  reported  by  Hakka  et  al.  [415]  (see
Fig. 24) shows that several molecules corresponding to C10H20O isomers
(cyclic  ethers,  ketones  and  the  aldehyde)  could  be  distinguished  but
were nevertheless co-eluted. Due  to the  low volatility  of these CEs,  a
HP-1 column was used for separation.

GC was also used in Nancy to investigate the species profiles in low-
pressure PLFs fueled with some CEs that are potential biofuel candidates
[103,273–275].  Sampling  was  facilitated  with  a  quartz  probe  located

Fig. 17. Temperature dependence of the cyclic ethers produced in the low-temperature oxidation of n-heptane (pressure of 800 Torr, residence time of 2 s, initial fuel
mole fraction of 0.005 with He dilution, green triangles: φ = 0.25, blue squares: φ = 1, black empty circles: φ = 2, stars: φ = 4 [288].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101934

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig.  18. SVUV-PIMS  mass  spectra  (IE = 9.6  eV)  of  intermediates  with  C7H14Ox  (x = 0-5)  molecular  formula  obtained  during  n-heptane  JSR  low-temperature
oxidation carried out at the Advanced Light Source at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Reproduced from [28] with Elsevier permission.

inside  the  flame  and  connected  through  a  heated  (at  423  K)  online
connection  to  a  chromatograph  fitted  with  a  HP-Plot  Q  column.  The
probe was a 6 mm tube tipped by a small cone with a 100 μm diameter
◦
orifice and a tip angle to the vertical of 20

[273].

3.2.2.2. Identification by electron-impact mass spectrometry coupled to gas
chromatography. Species
formed  during  gas-phase  reactions  are
commonly identified through GC-MS, in which the GC enables species
separation  and  the  coupled  MS  operating  at  70eV  EI  provides  their
characteristic mass spectra. The comparison with mass spectra found in
databases  [425]  enables  the  identification  of  species.  Reference  mass
spectra  are  available  for  many  oxiranes,  but  the  databases  are  less
complete as far as 4-, 5- and 6-membered cyclic ethers are concerned.
Authentic  samples  of  the  expected  species  can  also  be  used  to  verify
species assignments.

Past  research  on  fuel  low-temperature  oxidation  contributed  sub-
stantially  to  enlarge  aforementioned  databases  by  reporting  mass
spectra of cyclic ethers. Dagaut et al. [426] reported for the first time
mass spectra for some CEs formed during the low-temperature oxidation
of  n-heptane  (2-methyl-4-propyloxetane,  2,4-diethyloxetane),  iso-oc-
tane  (2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF,  2-tertbutyl-3-methyloxetane,  2-isopro-
pyl-3,3-dimethyloxetane),  and  n-decane  (2-methyl-5-pentylTHF,  and
2-butyl-5-ethylTHF).

Herbinet et al. [427] also analyzed cyclic ethers in the exit gas stream
of a JSR, in which the low-temperature oxidation of a series of n-alkanes
(from  n-pentane  (see  Fig.  25)  to  n-octane,  n-decane,  n-dodecane  and
n-hexadecane) was carried out. Analyzes were performed by GC-MS and

Fig. 19. Comparison of the PIE curve for m/z 54 [300] and PIE spectrum of 1,
3-butadiene [301]. 9.072 eV is the ionization energy of 1,3-butadiene [202].

mass spectra for 17 CEs were reported. Herbinet et al. [427] also pro-
posed rules for the fragmentation of CEs in electron impact mass spec-
trometry to allow their identification when their mass spectra are not
available. More recently, Koritzke et al. [428] performed a similar work
and  reported  mass  spectra  for  10  CEs.  The  authors  considered  four
conventional mechanisms to analyze fragmentation patterns in the mass
spectra:  α-cleavage,  inductive  effect,  hydrogen  rearrangement  and
transannular cleavage. Rules were proposed to explain the main frag-
ments observed in the CE mass spectra [427,428]. The analysis of mass
spectra  for  a  series  of  5-  and  6-membered  ring  cyclic  ethers  that  are
formed in n-alkane oxidation (with one alkyl group in position 2 or two
alkyl groups in positions 2 and 5) showed that the molecular ions are
quite unstable and likely decompose through the loss of one of the alkyl
chains. For species with two alkyl groups in positions 2 and 5, water
elimination  is  possible  from  the  ion  fragment  obtained  from  the  mo-
lecular ion after losing one of the two alkyl chains. 4-Membered ring CEs
(oxetane  derivatives)  with  a  single  alkyl  chain  seem  to  lose  the  alkyl
chain similar to 5- and 6-membered CEs. The peak at m/z 57 in the mass
spectrum  of  2-ethyloxetane  likely  results  from  the  loose  of  the  ethyl
group. The mass spectra obtained by Koritze et al. [428] showed that the
fragmentation of oxirane type cyclic ethers is even more complex.

To conclude this discussion, the analysis of mass spectra shows that
simple fragmentation rules can be derived for 5- and 6- membered rings,
whereas  the  fragmentation  rules  of  CEs  with  a  smaller  ring,  such  as
oxetane and oxirane derivatives, are more complex.

3.2.2.3. Quantification using flame ionization detectors. Because its cali-
bration  might  be  obtained  without  available  standards,  FID  has  been
proven to be a particularly efficient tool for the quantification of carbon
containing species, especially CEs [407,412,415]. This detector relies on
the formation of CHx ions from the solute in a hydrogen-air flame [430]
and measurement of the resulting current. For CEs, the FID detection
threshold is about 1 ppm.

When  available,  the  calibration  is  usually  performed  by  injecting
known  amounts  of  standards.  However,  as  most  cyclic  ethers  formed
during  the  low-temperature  oxidation  of  fuels  are  not  commercially
available,  the  Effective  Carbon  Number  (ECN)  method  [431,432]  is
often used to estimate the response of a particular cyclic ether. The ECN
method is based on the FID response of the carbon atoms present in the
molecule  to  analyze.  Each  carbon  atom  contributes  additively  to  the
response, which may be affected by the atomic composition and struc-
ture of the molecule. This is the case for cyclic ethers. As an example, for
cyclic ethers (CnH2nO) formed during the low-temperature oxidation of
n-alkanes, it was observed that the response was similar to that of a Cn (cid:0) 1

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101935

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 5
Experimentally measured IEs for CEs available in the literature.

Formula  MW

Species

IEs (eV)

References

C2H4O
C3H6O

44
58

C4H4O

68

Oxirane
Methyloxirane
Oxetane
Furan

C4H6O

70

2,3-DHF
2,5-DHF

Ethenyloxirane

C4H8O

72

C5H6O

82

THF
Ethyloxirane
trans-2,3-Dimethyloxirane
2,2-Dimethyloxirane
2-MF

3-MF

4H-Pyran

C5H8O
C4H6O2

84
86

3,4-Dihydro-2H-pyran
γ-Butyrolactone

C5H10O

86

C4H8O2

88

C3H6O3
C5H4O2

90
96

1,4-Dioxene
THP
2-MTHF
1,4-Dioxane
1,3-Dioxane
1,2-Dioxane
2-(Methoxymethyl)oxirane
3-Hydroxytetrahydrofuran
1,3,5-Trioxane
Furfural

C6H8O

96

4H-Pyran-4-one
3-Oxatricyclo[3.1.0.02,6]hexan-4-one
2,5-DMF

2,4-Dimethylfuran
2,3-Dimethylfuran

2-EF

C5H6O2

98

4-Methyl-4H-pyran
1,4-Epoxycyclohex-2-ene
α-Angelicalactone

γ-Methylene-γ-butyrolactone
1,3-Dioxepin
1,3-Dioxolane,4,5-bis(methylene)-
5-Methylfuran-2(5H)-one
GVL
4,7-Dihydro-1,3-dioxepin
2-Acetylfuran

C5H8O2

100

C6H6O2

110

C8H16O

128

2,2,5,5-TetramethylTHF

10.56  ± 0.01
10.22  ± 0.02
9.65  ± 0.01
8.88  ± 0.01
8.86  ± 0.03
8.86  ± 0.05
8.38
9.16
9.16
9.14  ± 0.02
9.16
9.52
9.7  ± 0.3
9.94
9.40  ± 0.02
10.15
9.98
10.00
8.38  ± 0.01
8.38  ± 0.03
8.38  ± 0.05
8.64
8.58
8.70
8.40
8.38  ± 0.02
8.35  ± 0.01
10.06  ± 0.03
10.10  ± 0.05
8.07  ± 0.02
9.25  ± 0.01
9.22  ± 0.05
9.19  ± 0.01
10.33, 10.12, 10.12, 10.1
10.0
9.5, 10.08
9.77
10.3, 10.59  ± 0.05, ~10.8
9.22  ± 0.01
9.22  ± 0.05
9.35  ± 0.05
10.05
7.8
8.25  ± 0.10
8.03
7.95  ± 0.03
7.95  ± 0.05
8.39  ± 0.10
8.25  ± 0.10
8.0
8.45  ± 0.05
8.43  ± 0.05
8.51
9.44  ± 0.02
9.62  ± 0.05
8.97  ± 0.05
9.05  ± 0.05
8.0, 8.3
8.62
10.12  ± 0.05
9.98  ± 0.05
9.0, 9.54
9.02
9.27  ± 0.05
9.01  ± 0.05
8.8

Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 15 literature data [302–315]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 4 literature data [304,310,314,316]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 6 literature data [302,304,315,317–319]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 23 literature data [313,314,320–340]
[341]
[342]
[301]
[343]
[344]
[345]
[301]
[346] in [202]
[347]
[316]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 10 literature data [344,345,348–350]
Only one data point in NIST [202] from [316]
Only one data point in NIST [202] from [316]
[316]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 9 literature data [310,321,337,339,351–355]
[341]
[342]
[351]
[329]
[354]
[351]
[356]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 4 literature data [310,356–358]
[359]
[342]
[356]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 8 literature data [302,310,314,319,357,360–362]
Only one data point in NIST [202] from [302]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 7 literature data [310,313,314,361–364]
Four data in NIST [202] from [361,362,365,366]
Only one data point in NIST [202] from [367]
[368]
[369]
Three data in NIST [202] from [362,370]
Data evaluated by NIST [202] from 5 literature data [310,320,331,371]
[372]
[373]
[374]
[321]
[375]
[321]
[341]
[342]
[375]
[375]
[353]
[331]
[372]
[351]
[345]
[376]
[342]
[342]
[377]
[378]
[376]
[342]
[379]
[320]
[331]
[372]
[380]

alkane  (for  example  methyloxirane  has  a  response  similar  to  that  of
ethane)  [431,432].  This  means  that  the  presence  of  the  oxygen  atom
reduces  the  response  by  that  equivalent  of  one  carbon  atom  in  the
molecule, probably because of the formation of CO instead of a CHx ion.
The ECN method is not straightforward for CEs including more than one

oxygen atom. Therefore, the calibration of those species may require the
injection of a standard. Table 7 contains ECN values for some CEs found
in the literature. As shown in Table 7, the ECN experimental value of 1,3,
5-trioxane [432], which includes three atoms of oxygen separated by
three methylene groups, is 0.45 and not 0.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101936

L.-S. Tran et al.

Hydroperoxide CEs may be formed as products of the third addition to
O2  pathway  [436]  as  it  will  be  discussed  in  Part  4.1.2.  Because  the
nominal mass of hydroperoxide CEs is the same as that of KHP, both
types of species cannot be easily differentiated in usual SVUV-PIMS. For
example,  n-pentane  oxidation  would  produce  C5H10O3  that  could
correspond to KHPs, e.g. 4-hydroperoxypentan-2-one, or hydroperoxide
CEs,  e.g.  1-(oxiran-2-yl)propane-2-peroxol.  The  PEPICO  technique
[437–440] might be able to help with this identification task.

4. Experimental and modeling work related to the gas-phase
formation chemistry of cyclic ethers

As comprehensively reviewed by Pollard [4] and Griffiths [277], CEs
were frequently detected products in the experimental studies using GC
analysis of the slow oxidation or cool flames of O2/alkane mixtures in
static or flow reactors, rapid compression machines or engines. At this
time, it was already understood that CEs were formed following Q ̇OOH
radical formation. The fact that small alkanes initially produce signifi-
cant amounts of alkenes led first to the hypothesis that CEs are formed
from their “conjugated alkenes”. This idea stated that alkenes react with
 ̇
O radicals to produce Q ̇OOH radicals, which further react to alde-
HO
 ̇
OH radical that is needed for chain
hydes or oxiranes together with one
propagation  [441].  Since  this  mechanism  did  not  predict  the  large
amounts  of  3,3-dimethyloxetane
formed  during  neo-pentane
low-temperature  oxidation  [442], this  explanation  was  challenged  by
Fish  by  proposing  an  alkylperoxy  radical  isomerization  mechanism
[443]. Numerous studies demonstrated that low-temperature oxidation
of  any large  alkanes yields CEs  of various ring sizes  belonging to the
oxirane,  oxetane,  tetrahydrofuran  and  tetrahydropyran  families.  This
led Pollard [4] to conclude that the formation of derivatives of oxetane,
furan  and  pyran  was  diagnostic  of  alkylperoxy  radical  isomerizations
and subsequent decompositions.

Even  though  the  basic  mechanistic  understanding  of

low-
temperature  oxidation  was  largely  developed  some  50  years  ago,
detailed  kinetic  modeling  reproducing  CE  formation  with  acceptable
rate parameters had to wait until the team of Pilling in Leeds developed
a  more  detailed  understanding  of  Q ̇OOH  radical  formation  in  1992
[444].  This  followed  the  experimental  determination  of  the  rate  pa-
rameters for the isomerization of peroxy radicals 10 years earlier by the
team of Walker in Hull [445]. The rate parameters proposed by Hughes
et al. [444] allowed models to be proposed by research groups in Liv-
ermore  [446],  Milano  [447],  and  Nancy  [448],  which  were  able  to
reproduce both, the NTC behavior and the formation of THF derivatives
that were measured by the group of Cathonnet in Orl ́eans [412] in 1993
during JSR n-heptane oxidation.

Following  this  pioneering  work,  oxirane,  oxetane  and  THP  de-
rivatives have been quantified next to THF derivatives in many alkane
oxidation  studies  performed  in  continuous  reactors  and  in  RCMs.
Focusing on the low-temperature oxidation of linear and branched al-
kanes,  experimental  results  obtained  after 1994  are  described  in  Part
4.1.1,  while  Part  4.1.2  considers  also  the  possibility  of  producing
hydroperoxidic CEs. The results presented in Part 4.1.1 combined with
theoretical  calculations  have  greatly  improved  CE  detailed  kinetic
modelling capabilities. Currently in many cases, satisfactory although
not always perfect agreement of model predictions with experiments is
achieved. The progress made in theoretical understanding of CE chem-
istry is the topic of Part 4.1.3. To give a full view on CE formation, Part
4.2  focuses  on  the  oxidation  of cyclic  alkanes,  alkylbenzenes, olefins,
and Part 4.3 on that of oxygenated hydrocarbons; CE formation from
these fuels are discussed, both from experimental and theoretical points
of view.

4.1. Cyclic ether formation from the low-temperature oxidation of linear
and branched alkanes

The following part is interested in how CEs are formed during the

Fig. 20. PIE curves for m/z 72 [300] (left axis), PI cross section for m/z 72 for
neat THF [386] and for neat butanal [301] (right axis). IEs of 9.40, 9.52, 9.57,
9.82, 9.98 and 10.15 eV are for THF, butanone, 2-methyloxetane, butanal, 2,
3-dimethyloxirane and ethyloxirane, respectively.

Data obtained using GC-FID have uncertainties of ~5% when species
are calibrated using a standard, while those by the ECN method have
uncertainties of ~10%. The latter method shows reliable results even in
the case of CEs containing two or three ether-O atoms as demonstrated
for poly(oxymethylene) dimethyl ethers [432]. However, uncertainties
for  multi-functional  oxygenated  species  (i.e.  containing  additional
functions other than ether) are not well known and need to be better
characterized. The use of a methanizer (nickel catalyst for hydrogena-
tion) preceding a flame ionization detector [434] improves CE quanti-
fication  because  CE  belong  to  the  types  of  molecules  which  can  be
completely  catalytically  reduced  by  hydrogen  to  the  corresponding
alkane. Thus, considering methyloxirane again as example, its response
after passing through a methanizer is that of propane instead of that of
ethane [435].

Despite  its  high  ability  to  separate  many  types  of  molecules,  GC
cannot  be  used  to  analyze  all  species  produced  during  fuel  low-
temperature oxidation. For example, GC analysis fails for species with
a hydroperoxide function due to the instability of this functional group.

Fig. 21. Comparison of the measured threshold photoelectron spectra (TPES)
obtained by scanning the photon energy and detecting only so-called threshold
photoelectrons at m/z 86 (symbols) obtained during JSR oxidation of n-pentane
at 585 K (φ = 0.5) to the weighted sum of the envelopes from convolution of the
calculated  Franck–Condon  factors  for  potential  candidates.  Figure  redrawn
from the data of [392].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101937

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 22. Experimental time-integrated photoion signal vs. photon energy (symbols), measured PI cross-section spectra of the pure compounds (broken or dotted
lines) and applicable fits obtained (full lines) during the Cl-initiated oxidation of partially deuterated n-butane (CD3CH2CH2CD3) at 650 K (a-c). Plot (d) displays the
non-deuterated results with the spectrum constructed from the fittings at m/z 76, 77 and 78. Reproduced from Ref. [390] with permission of ACS.

low-temperature oxidation of linear and branched alkanes. In the low-
temperature  oxidation  of  alkanes  (except  methane  and  ethane),  NTC
behavior  and  CE  formation  may  always  be  observed,  which  demon-
strates  well  that  NTC  behavior,  CE  formation  and  Q ̇OOH  radical
chemistry are tightly linked together.

4.1.1. Experimental quantification of cyclic ethers from linear and
branched alkanes

Tables 8 and 9 list the studies published since 1994, in which CEs
formed during the thermally activated (as opposed to photolytic initi-
ated) low-temperature oxidation of linear and branched alkanes were
quantified,  including  mole  fraction  profiles  (time  or  temperature  de-
pendences).  As  it  was  already  mentioned  in  Part  1  and  will  be  more
detailed in Part 4.1.3, the formation of the CEs listed in Tables 8 and 9
from linear and branched alkanes occurs through a series of reactions
involving H-abstraction from the fuel, the addition of alkyl radicals to
 ̇
oxygen, isomerization and
OH radical elimination. All the studies listed
in Tables 8 and 9 report pronounced NTC behaviors. To provide an idea
of the amounts of CEs produced, we mention in this part the peak CE
mole fractions (XCE) or, for comparison purpose, CE yields (YCE), which
is XCE divided by the initial fuel mole fraction (X
fuel) used in the related
study.

◦

Table 8 shows that the first CE quantifications reported since 1994
were carried out in continuous reactors operated by the groups of Cer-
nansky in Drexel [449] and Cathonnet in Orl ́eans [295,413], as well as
by the team of Minetti in Lille using a RCM [407].

In Drexel a peak YCE of methyloxirane ~0.2% was quantified during
propane oxidation in a flow reactor close to 730 K at 15 bar [449]. To the

authors’ best knowledge, the only other CE quantification published by
the group of Cernansky is that describing the low-temperature oxidation
of neo-pentane (Wang et al. [450]). In this flow reactor study, the tem-
perature dependence of the mole fraction of 3,3-dimethyloxetane was
measured  and  a  maximum  YCE  of  ~6%  close  to  780  K  was  found.
Recently, Bourgalais et al. [451] again measured this CE (with peak Yce
~10  ± 1%  at  730K)  during  the  low-temperature  oxidation  of  neo--
pentane in a JSR using GC and PEPICO-PIMS.

While not explicitly mentioned in Table 8 and Table 9 for C4  and
larger  fuel  molecules,  oxirane  and  methyloxirane  have  been  detected
and  quantified  in  almost  all  listed  studies.  This  is  because,  as  stated
 ̇
before, these light CEs are easily formed by the addition of HO
O radicals
to ethylene and propene (see Part 4.2.3), which are common primary
products of alkane low-temperature oxidation.

Progress  made  on  CE  identification  by  GC-MS  [426]  allowed  the
Orl ́eans team of Cathonnet to report in 1994-1995 several quantitative
JSR oxidation studies: n-heptane [295,412], iso-octane [412], n-decane
[414]  and  mixture  of  the  two  reference  fuels  [413];  the  latter  two
molecules serve as primary reference fuels for RON rating. The largest
number of CE isomers was identified for the fuel mixture of n-heptane
and  iso-octane.  Instead  of  temperature  dependent  absolute  mole  frac-
tions,  only  relative  CE  isomer  yields  were  reported.  In  the  n-heptane
oxidation experiment at 10 bar, the peak concentration of 2-ethyl-5-me-
thylTHF  was  measured  to  be  YCE  ~7.5%  at  700  K  [295],  while  for
iso-octane oxidation at 10 bar, a YCE value below 0.1% was reported for
2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF. Both studies do not provide information on CEs
other than THF derivatives.

From 2011 to 2015, the Orl ́eans group reported CE quantifications

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101938

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 6
Literature PI cross sections of CEs

Formula

MW

CE

Photon energy range (eV)

Recorded m/z

C2H4O
C3H6O
C4H4O

C4H6O

C4H8O

C5H6O

C5H8O

C4H6O2

C5H10O

C6H8O

C5H4O2
C5H6O2

C5H8O2
C6H6O2
C8H16O

44
58
68

70

72

82

84

86

86

96

96
98

100
110
128

Oxirane
Methyloxirane
Furan

Ethenyloxirane
2,3-DHF
2,5-DHF
THF

2-MF

3,4-Dihydro-2H-pyran
3,6-Dihydro-2H-pyran
γ-Butyrolactone
Bioxirane
THP

2-MTHF
2,5-DMF

2-EF
3,4-Epoxycyclohex-1-ene
4,5-Epoxycyclohex-1-ene
Furfural
α-Angelicalactone
γ-Methylene-γ-butyrolactone
GVL
2-Acetylfuran
2,2,5,5-TetramethylTHF

20
11-12
8.7-11.7
8.73-11.48
7.988-11.188
9.0402-11.0402
8.23-11.78
8.98-11.78
9.36-11.71
10.5
8.30-11.51
7.988-11.188
7.988-10.188
9.01-11.01
9.613-11.013
9.040-11.040
9.20-11.75
9.015-11.015
9.25-11.70
7.83-11.51
7.988-11.188
8.1-11.0
8.502-11.002
9.002-11.002
9.0-11.0
8.841-11.041
8.841-11.041
9.613-11.013
8.9-11.0
8.5-11.0

44
58
68
68
68
70
42, 69 & 70
42, 69 & 70
72, 71 & 42
72
81 & 82
81 & 82
84
84
42 & 86
86
86, 85, 71, 56 & 45
86
86, 85, 71, 56, 45, 43 & 42
81, 95 & 96
81, 95 & 96
81, 95 & 96
96
96
95 & 96
98
70 & 98
56, 85 & 100
95 & 110
128

References

Estimated [299]
Estimated [299]
[301]
[341]
[342]
[395]
[301]
[301]
[299]
[396]
[341]
[342]
[397,398]
[397,398]
[342]
[395]
[301]
[397,398]
[301]
[341]
[342]
[372]
[399]
[399]
[372]
[342]
[342]
[342]
[372]
[380]

for  n-hexane  [454],  2-methylheptane  [457]  and  2,5-dimethylhexane
[458]  oxidation  at  three  equivalence  ratios  (φ = 0.5,  1  and  2),
showing that the maximum obtained YCE sum is rather equivalence ratio
(φ)  independent  (~8  ± 1.2%  for  n-hexane  and  for  2-methylheptane,
~10  ± 1.5%  for  2,5-dimethylhexane).  However,  in  agreement  with
n-pentane results, a decrease of φ significantly enlarges the NTC zone,
which is found between 700 and 900 K. In the NTC zone, the measured
concentrations  of  products  including  CEs  are  very  low  well  demon-
strating the reactivity decrease, as is described in Part 1. In the three
studies,  the  model  developed  by  the  authors  nicely  reproduces  this
behavior. In the n-hexane oxidation study only three CE isomers were
quantified while eight CEs could be expected, and for 2,5-dimethylhex-
ane  only  2,2,5,5-tetramethylTHF  was  reported.  The  only  other  CE
quantification  made  in  Orl ́eans  for  alkane  JSR  oxidation  dates  from
2017 and concerns n-pentane at 10 bar [429] as described later.

While not reporting CE mole fractions, Rotavera et al. [380] inves-
tigated CE formation during the oxidation of 2,5-dimethylhexane initi-
ated  by  Cl-atom  in  a  FR  and  followed  by  SVUV-PIMS.  Based  on
calculated adiabatic IEs for all possible CE isomers (the IEs are in the
range 8.45-9.88 eV), the authors indicated that the largest contribution
to the MS signal at m/z 128 (which corresponds to C8-CEs) arises from 2,
2,5,5-tetramethylTHF (CE-4 in Fig. 26 with an IE = 8.82 eV). Later, as is
shown in Fig. 26, Wang et al. [20] also reported 2,2,5,5-tetramethylTHF
formation  during  their  JSR  study  using  SVUV-PIMS.  These  measure-
ments  are  in  good  agreement  with  those  of  Rotavera  et  al.  [380].  At
photon energies above 9.0 eV, the difference between the experimental
signal  for  the  reactive  mixture  and  that  with  only  2,2,5,5-tetrame-
thylTHF  indicates  that  other  CE  isomers  (e.g.  CE-2,  CE-3  or  CE-1  in
Fig. 26) may be present as well.

Building on the methods developed in Orl ́eans, in 2011, the group of
Battin-Leclerc in Nancy began with quantitative studies of CE formation
using  JSR  experiments  (mostly  at  1  bar,  except  in  [33,453]).  The
low-temperature oxidation of propane [384], n-butane [300], n-pentane

[429,453],  neo-pentane  [451],  the  five  isomers  of  hexane  [419],
n-heptane [32,33,455,456], iso-octane [288,461], n-decane [415] and
n-hexadecane [415] were examined, using various equivalence ratios for
n-pentane, n-heptane and iso-octane. For n-hexane, for which the total
yield of the listed CEs reached a maximum of 29% (φ=1), and for lighter
n-alkanes, all expected CE isomers were identified. For branched hex-
anes and C7 alkanes, as they were produced in too low amounts, not all
expected  CEs  could  be  identified,  but  THF  derivatives  were  the  CEs
detected  in  highest  amounts.  While  CEs  with  several  ring  sizes  were
obtained at 5 and 10 bar for n-pentane [453] (in agreement with results
by the group of Dagaut [429]), for n-heptane in JSR at 10 bar only THF
derivatives could be detected [412,456].

As already mentioned in Part 3, the GC separation of CE isomers is
difficult for very heavy reactants, such as n-decane and n-hexadecane.
For those reactants, due to overcrowded chromatograms, often only the
sum  of  THF  derivatives  could  be  quantified.  The  obtained  CE  mole
fraction profiles were reproduced in a reasonable way by detailed ki-
netic models developed either by the Nancy group or by other groups, e.
g.  [462]  for  propane  and  n-butane,  [463]  for  n-pentane,  [449]  for
neo-pentane,  [454]  for  n-hexane,  [34]  for  n-heptane,  and  [461]  for
iso-octane.  The  temperature  dependence  of  the  mole  fraction  of  the
measured CE sums was simulated using a model generated by EXGAS by
[464] for the n-decane and for n-decane/n-hexadecane mixture [465].
Since no suitable model was available at the time of publication, simu-
lation  of  CEs  produced  from  branched  isomer  of  hexanes  cannot  be
reported.

The oxidation of n-pentane was investigated both in Orl ́eans at 10
bar and in Nancy at 1.07 bar under otherwise similar conditions during a
joint study [429] performed in order to provide JSR data for the vali-
dation of kinetic models developed in the group of Curran at the Na-
tional University of Ireland - Galway based on revisited rate rules for
alkane oxidation chemistry [466]. Overall, the predicted CE mole frac-
tions agree reasonably well with the experiments, however the degree of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101939

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 23. Experimental profiles of the products in a two-stage auto-ignition of a stoichiometric mixture of n-heptane (T = 667 K, P = 3.4 bar) or iso-octane (T = 708 K,
P = 13.4 bar) in air (2Et5MeTHF is 2-ethyl-5-methylTHF, (MePr+diEt)Oxetans is the sum of 2-methyl-4-propyloxetane and 2,4-diethyloxetane, 2PrTHF is 2-PTHF,
tButMeOxetan is 2-tert-butyl-3-methyloxetane, diMeiPrOxetan is 2-isopropyl-3,3-dimethyloxetane and tetraMeTHF is 2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF) - extracted from Fig. 4
of Ref. [410].

Further temperature increase leads to the NTC zone, in which the overall
reactivity including the CE formation declines. Although at even higher
temperature,  the  alkyl+O2  reaction  shifts  even  more  towards  the  re-
actants,  new  radical  forming  reactions,  such  as  H2O2  decomposition,
increase  the  alkyl  radical  concentration  drastically  and  therefore
 ̇
accelerate the RO
O chemistry again. This leads to the second CE peak. At
these higher temperatures, according to kinetic analysis, alkyl radical
decomposition to smaller species becomes more and more competitive
and at even higher temperatures these decomposition reactions become
dominant resulting in a decline of the CE yield.

Concerning the effect of equivalence ratio in open flow reactors, as it
was already noted from the Orl ́eans results on n-hexane and 2,5-dime-
thylhexane,  Fig.  27  well  shows  that  φ  has  little  effect  on  the  experi-
mental peak mole fraction obtained below 800 K, except at φ equal 2 and
10 bar. However, an increase of φ while keeping the fuel mole fraction
unchanged enlarges the NTC zone between 700 and 900 K in which very
low CE amounts are observed for stoichiometric and rich mixtures. This
NTC enlargement is well reproduced by the model, but the maximum
mole fractions below 800 K are notably underpredicted.

Full  sets  of  CEs  were  quantified  during  the  RCM  experiments  of
several alkane/air mixtures by the Lille group from 1994 to 1999. YCE
were  quantified  for  n-butane,  n-pentane,  n-heptane  and  iso-octane.
These studies also report ignition and cool flame delay times. Except for
n-butane, only stoichiometric conditions were investigated. Examples of
temporal  profiles  of  CE  mole  fractions  obtained  for  n-heptane
(maximum YCE  of 1.6% for 2-ethyl-5-methylTHF, the major measured
CE (P = 3.3 bar)) and iso-octane (maximum YCE of 8.5% for 2,2,4,4-tet-
ramethylTHF, the major detected CE (P = 13.4 bar)) are given in Fig. 23
in Part 3. For pure iso-octane, at a pressure of 13.3 bar after compression,
five CE isomers (two oxetane, two THF and one THP derivatives) were
quantified. In contrast, the JSR study at 10 bar performed in Orl ́eans
reported  only  the  detection  of  2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF  in  very  low
amounts.  The  CE  identification  for  iso-octane  oxidation  in  RCM  was
confirmed  in  2021  using  the  same  device  with  an  iso-octane/anisole
mixture, in which the pre-ignition temporal profiles of CE mole fractions
were reported [459]. The THF derivative is found to be the CE produced
in highest amounts. These data were simulated using a model based on
the iso-octane sub-mechanism recently developed at Livermore [467].
The group of Heufer et al. in Aachen also reported CE quantification
in  RCM  experiments  in  2020  [452],  together  with  pressure  profiles
indicating  the  occurrence  of  a  cool  flame.  These  experiments  using
propane were performed at pressures, after compression, as high as 50
bar.  Methyloxirane  mole  fractions  were  measured  through  GC-FID

Fig. 24. Chromatogram (HP-1 capillary column, FID) obtained during n-decane
oxidation (650 K) of (A: cis- & trans-2,5-dipropylTHF – B: cis- & trans-2-butyl-5-
ethylTHF – C: cis- & trans-2-methyl-5-pentylTHF – D: 2-ethyl-6-propylTHP – E:
2-hexyl-4-methyloxetane – F: cis- & trans-2-ethyl-4-pentyloxetane – G: 2-butyl-
6-methylTHP – H: cis- & trans-2-butyl-4-propyloxetane – I: 2-heptyloxetane – J:
2-pentylTHP – K: 4-decanone – L: 5-decanone – M: 2-hexylTHF – N: 3-decanone
– O: 2-decanone – P: decanal) redrawn from the data in [415].

agreement varies for the various CEs detected. Fig. 27 shows measured
and predicted 2-MTHF profiles as a function of temperature and both
pressures.  2-MTHF  is  the  dominant  CE  in  n-pentane  oxidation  under
these conditions. Fig. 27 shows that low pressure favors CE formation
because  at  the  lowest  pressure  (1.07  bar)  the  highest  peak  Y2-MTHF,
~4%, is obtained compared to ~2.2% at 10 bar. Such a pressure effect is
less obvious in the Nancy n-heptane oxidation data obtained at 1.07 and
10 bar, where YCE  for 2-ethyl-5-methylTHF is highest at 10 bar while
more 2-propylTHF [33] is produced at 1.07 bar.

The  double-peak  structures  seen  in  Fig.  27  are  caused  by  NTC
behavior. This clearly shows that CEs are already formed at low tem-
peratures when the equilibrium of the alkyl+O2  reaction favors alkyl-
peroxy  radical  formation.  Over  this  temperature  range,  CEs  are
produced in parallel with KHPs and other products from Q ̇OOH radicals.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101940

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 25. GC-MS chromatogram [429] of the CEs obtained during n-pentane oxidation (T = 650 K). The inserts show normalized MS signals as function of the m/z
ratio. For 2,4-dimethyloxetane, the two mass spectra correspond to cis and trans isomers.

analysis  and  temporal  evolution  was  reported  for  times  before
auto-ignition. A peak value of ~185 ppm was determined at 30 bar and
about 90% of IDT.

To  finish  the  discussion  about  CE  formation  during  alkane  low-
temperature  oxidation,  the  recent  detection  of  CEs  during  n-heptane
and  iso-octane  plasma-assisted  oxidation  in  a  flow  reactor  at  room
temperature and low pressure of 40 mbar by EI-MS should be mentioned
[468]. Even though no detailed quantifications were provided, global CE
mole  fractions  around  ~200  ppm  and  ~500  ppm  were  reported  for
n-heptane and iso-octane, respectively, with a high sensitivity to plasma
voltage.

4.1.2. Possible cyclic ether hydroperoxide formation

Table 7
Literature effective carbon number for CEs.

Name

THF

Formula

Structure

C4H8O

ECN

3.000

Reference

[432]

1,4-Dioxane

C4H8O2

2.124

[432]

1,3,5-Trioxane

C3H6O3

0.450,
0.46

[432]
[433]

The demonstration of the occurrence of a third oxygen addition step
by  Wang  et  al.  [20]  during  2,5-dimethylhexane  oxidation  through
high-resolution MS detection of species containing 4 or 5 oxygen atoms

has  given  a  new  importance  to  the  reactions  of  Ṗ(OOH)2  radicals.  Ṗ
(OOH)2  radicals  are  the  products  of  the  second  oxygen  addition,  fol-
lowed by intramolecular H-abstraction. In line with what was proposed

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101941

L.-S. Tran et al.

in 1998 by [469], Wang et al. [20] underlined the possible formation of
hydroperoxide CEs (HOOCEs) from Ṗ(OOH)2, in addition to the previ-
ously  proposed  production  of  KHPs  and  olefinic  hydroperoxides
 ̇
(through HO
O radical elimination). Based on model predictions inten-
ded to demonstrate the feasibility to detect species originating from a
third oxygen addition step during 2-methylhexane auto-ignition at low
temperatures, Wang et al. [436] noted that the most abundant predicted
HOOCEs  were  oxirane  derivatives.  Fig.  28a  summarizes  the  channels
that yield CEs and HOOCEs starting from a Q ̇OOH radical.

Since the work by Wang et al. [436], alkane oxidation models such as
that for n-heptane proposed by the group of Curran [33] include HOOCE
chemistry. Fig. 28b displays the predicted HOOCEs using the model of
Zhang  et  al.  [33].  It  shows  that  according  to  the  kinetic  model  these
species are formed in significant amounts, since the sum of their mole
fractions represents about a quarter of the sum of KHP mole fractions.
Contrary to non-hydroperoxide CEs, which are mainly THF derivatives
for alkanes from C7  (see Table 9 and Fig. 3 in Part 1), the majority of
hydroperoxidic CEs are oxirane derivatives. To understand the favored
formation of oxirane derivatives after the second O2  addition, Fig. 29
presents  a  flow  rate  analysis  (using  2-hydroperoxyheptyl  radical  as
initial  radical),  in  which  the  pathways  leading  to  the  major  hydro-
peroxyoxirane derivatives are highlighted. In the model of Zhang et al.
[33], the rate constants for the peroxyalkyl radical isomerizations and
 ̇
the decompositions of hydroperoxyalkyl radicals to cyclic ethers and
OH
radicals are  those proposed, respectively, by  Sharma et  al. [156] and
Villano et al. [470], which are in agreement with the new theoretical
calculations by Duan et  al. [471]. The same rate coefficients are also
used  for  analogous  isomerization  and  decomposition  reactions  of  Ṗ
(OOH)2 radicals.

As  was  observed  during  the  experiments  listed  in  Table  9  and  is
numerically confirmed in Fig. 29, the isomerization reactions of alkyl-
 ̇
O → Q ̇OOH) proceeding through 6-membered or 7-
peroxy radicals (RO
membered ring TSs are favored. This is caused by the low energy bar-
riers for these reactions [471] and explains the preferential formation of
THF derivatives (through 7-membered ring TS) and oxetane derivatives
(through 6-membered ring TS). The Q ̇OOH radicals from these routes
are  abundant  and  available  for  the  second  O2  addition  forming  the
 ̇
OOQOOH  radicals.  These  latter  radicals  isomerize  also  preferentially
 ̇
OOQOOH = Ṗ
through 6- or one 7-membered ring TSs to form Ṗ(OOH)2 (
(OOH)2), which in turn form hydroperoxyCE by release of OH. As can be
seen  in  Fig.  29,  each  Ṗ(OOH)2  radical  may  produce  two  different
hydroperoxyCEs, but the reactions leading to hydroperoxyoxirane de-
rivatives have rate coefficients more than an order of magnitude larger
than those for the alternative pathways.

Note  that  standalone  MS  analysis  cannot  distinguish  between  hy-
droperoxide CEs and KHPs if their spectra do not contain characteristic
fragmentation patterns as their parent ions have the same m/z ratio. In
their SVUV-PIMS investigation of n-butane JSR oxidation, Battin-Leclerc
et al. [472] calculated the IEs of several species corresponding to m/z
104. The calculated IEs of both C4 KHPs (between 9.36 and 9.39 eV) and
3-hydroperoxyTHF (9.37 eV) were found compatible with the observed
signal rise at m/z 104 (at 9.29 eV). Further investigation based on the
PEPICO technique or using deuterated isotopes might be able to provide
evidence that hydroperoxide CEs are indeed formed.

4.1.3. Progress in modelling cyclic ether formation

The  double  peak  structure  of  the  2-MTHF  profile  in  n-pentane
oxidation nicely demonstrates the close link between CE yields and NTC
behavior or low-temperature oxidation chemistry including the role of
peroxides,  which  due  to  their  weak  O-O  bond  become  an  additional
source of radicals. While the oxidation of short alkanes mainly yields
 ̇
O) radical addition to alkenes – the latter
oxiranes via hydroperoxy (HO
 ̇
are formed via the concerted HO
O elimination from alkylperoxy radicals
 ̇
O)  or  β-scission  of  alkyl  or  hydroperoxyalkyl  radicals  –  larger  al-
(RO
kanes follow the more typical alkane oxidation sequence (Fig. 28). As
presented  in  Fig.  28,  CEs  are  produced  together  with  the  chain

 ̇
propagating
OH radical as one of the bimolecular product channels of
hydroperoxyalkyl radicals (Q ̇OOH). An exact treatment of the compe-
tition between CE formations with alternate reaction channels requires a
full and detailed analysis of the underlying PES and the corresponding
 ̇
Master Equation (ME) because the RO
O radical is formed as a chemically
activated  species,  which  contains  excess  energy  comparable  to  the
barriers on the PES. Similarly, isomerization steps may produce ener-
gized species that continue to further react prior to being thermalized
[473,474].  In  Fig.  30  the  PES  for  n-propyl  radicals  reacting  with  O2
demonstrates this point. Several barriers are below the entrance channel
and the flux through different reaction pathways notably depends on the
energy  distribution  (hence  competition  between  chemical  trans-
formations and energy transfer). Consequently, a number of recent re-
views on low-temperature oxidation strongly emphasize the importance
of solving the underlying ME e.g. [106,475–477].

It is not the focus of this review paper to further discuss ME analyses
because they depend on the details of each PES. Instead, the main focus
is on generalized high pressure rate expressions for the elementary re-
actions leading directly to CEs. Before this, a brief summary on some
selected  theoretical  studies  that  lead  to  the  current  general  under-
standing of low-temperature oxidation is given, since CE formation is a
part of this.

4.1.3.1. General remarks on low-temperature oxidation. As mentioned in
the introduction to Part 4, the importance of radical chemistry involving
 ̇
the reaction of alkyl radicals with O2 and subsequent chemistry of RO
O
was already recognized more than 40 years ago by Pollard [4]. However,
a detailed understanding of the involved individual steps had to wait for
reliable quantum mechanical methods to become available. Pioneering
work on C2H5+O2 by Quelch et al. [478–481] and Miller and Klippen-
 ̇
stein [482] established that direct HO
O concerted elimination from a
 ̇
RCH2O
O  radical  (R  is  an  a  H-atom  or  an  alkyl  group)  is  a  feasible
alternative to the indirect sequential pathway involving prior isomeri-
zation to Q ̇OOH radical:

RCH2-CH2O

 ̇
O → RCH=CH2 + HO
 ̇
CHCH2OOH → RCH=CH2 + HO

 ̇
O (direct concerted elimination)

(sequential

→  R

 ̇
O

elimination).

By  directly  monitoring  HO

 ̇
O  profiles  via  infrared  absorption  spec-
troscopy,  Clifford  et  al.  [483]  demonstrated  experimentally  the  rele-
 ̇
O channel for the ethyl + O2 reaction
vance of the direct (‘prompt’) HO
 ̇
O radicals, and Carstensen et al.
resulting from chemically activated RO
[484]  and  DeSain  et  al.  [181,485]  presented  modeling  studies  con-
 ̇
firming the important role of the chemical activated C2H5O
O radical for
the correct prediction of time-dependent product yields in the C2H5+O2
reaction.  Conclusions  drawn  for  ethyl + O2  also  largely  hold  for
C3H7+O2  (see Fig. 30 “direct reaction pathways”) [473]. More recent
calculations, e.g. by Launder et al. [486] or Klippenstein [476] further
improved  the  accuracy  of  the  C2H5+O2  PES,  but  the  main  features
remained unchanged.

Routinely solving the ME for the oxidation chemistry of large alkanes
is not practical and it would significantly slow down the automated and/
or  systematic  development  process  of  low-temperature  mechanisms.
Fortunately,  the  importance  of  chemically  activated  reactions  di-
minishes  with  increasing  molecule  size,  increasing  pressure  and
decreasing  temperature,  which  justifies  the  use  of  high-pressure  rate
expressions  as  a  good  approximation  of  the  exact  kinetics  [487,488].
This allows kinetic models for the low-temperature oxidation of alkanes
to  be  based  on  reactions  classes  with  assigned  high-pressure  rate  ex-
pressions for each reaction class or family. A review by Battin-Leclerc
[10] emphasizes the systematic way, in which large kinetic models by
the  Ranzi  group  (Milano)  [489,490],  the  Westbrook  and  Pitz  group
(Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory) [491] and the Nancy group
[193,194] were constructed up to 2008, but this is also true for models
from  other  research  groups,  e.g.  that  of  the  group  of  Warnatz  [492].
Since the time of that review (2008), thermochemical data have been

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101942

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 8
Oxidation studies of C3-C6 alkanes performed from 1994, in which CE isomer profiles have been quantified.

◦
X

fuel (%)

φ

Quantified CE isomersa

Year & Ref.

0.4

methyloxirane

Fuel

Propane

T (K)

P (bar)/diluent

FR

600-900

10-15
/N2 of air

JSR

530-730

1.07/He

30, 50
/N2-Ar-CO2

1.07
/He (Ar)
9-11
/N2 of air

1.07/He

RCMb

747, 765

n-Butane

JSR

550-800

RCMb

700-900

n-Pentane

JSR

RCMb

550-
1100
550-
1100
500-
1100
733

1.07,
1.59,
2.15
12

4.03

4

τ(s)

0.2

6

-

6

_

2

3.13

0.8,1.2

1

0.5, 1, 2

10/N2

0.7

0.1

0.3, 0.5, 1, 2

5, 10/He

6.9/N2-Ar-CO2

2

-

0.5

2.56

1

1

neo-Pentane

FR

620-810

8/N2

JSR

500-850

1.07/He-Ar

0.2

3

0.12,
0.2
1.5

0.3

3,3-dimethyloxetane

0.5, ∞

3,3-dimethyloxetane

n-Hexane

JSR

530-
1160
550-
1000

10/N2

0.7

0.95d

0.5, 1, 2

1.07/He

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

1994
[449]

2012
[384]
2020
[452]

2011
[300]
1994
[407]

2017
[429]
2017
[429]
2020
[453]
1998
[411]

1999
[450]
2021
[451]

2015
[454]
2014
[419]

2014
[419]

methyloxirane, oxetane

methyloxirane

2,3-dimethyloxiranec, ethyloxirane,
2-methyloxetane, THF
2,3-dimethyloxirane, 2-ethyloxirane,
2-methyloxetane, THF

propyloxirane, 2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane,
2-ethyloxetane, 2,4-dimethyloxetane, 2-MTHF, THP
2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane, 2,4-dimethyloxetane,
2-MTHF
propyloxirane, 2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane,
2-ethyloxetane, 2,4-dimethyloxetane, 2-MTHF, THP
propyloxirane, 2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane,
2-ethyloxetane, 2,4-dimethyloxetane, 2-MTHF

2-ethyl-4-methyloxetane,
2,5-DMTHF, 2-ethylTHF
2,3-diethyloxirane, 2-methyl-3-propyloxirane, 2-
butyloxirane,
2-propyloxetane, 2-ethyl-4-methyloxetane,
2,5-DMTHF, 2-ethylTHF, 2-methylTHP

3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyloxirane,
2,2,4-trimethyloxetane, 2-isopropyloxetane, 3-propyloxe-
tane,
2,3-dimethylTHF, 2,4-dimethylTHF
2,2,4-trimethyloxetane, 2-ethyl-2-methyloxetane,
2,3-dimethylTHF, 3-ethylTHF, 4-methylTHP
tertbutyloxirane, 3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyloxirane,
2,3,3-trimethyloxetane, 3,3-dimethylTHF
2-methyl-2-isopropyloxirane, tetramethyloxirane
2,2,3-trimethyloxetane, 3-isopropyloxetane, 2,4-
dimethylTHF

2-Methyl
pentane

JSR

550-
1000

1.07/He

2

2

3-Methyl
pentane
2,2-Dimethyl
butane
2,3-Dimethyl
butane

a Only the saturated CEs with the same carbon number as the fuel are listed
b T and P in all RCM studies are those after compression
c cis and trans
d + 0.005% 3-methylpentane as impurity.

refined and missing reaction classes have been added, e.g. the Korcek
reaction [31] or more detailed 2nd and 3rd O2 addition chemistry [493],
but the general kinetic model development approach remains the same.
In  order  to  further  improve  earlier  low-temperature  oxidation
models, theoretical studies have been conducted to extract or confirm
systematic trends in rate expressions for the various reaction pathways
related  to  this  chemistry  [156,470,487,488,494,495].  Especially,  the
ring-size  and  substitution  patterns  of  the  hydroperoxyalkyl  carrying
carbon  and  radical  site  alter  the  pre-exponential  factors  and  barrier
heights  of  several  reaction classes  relevant to  low-temperature oxida-
tion.  Studies  specifically  addressing  CE  forming  reactions  will  be  dis-
cussed  in  detail  below.  The  availability  of  generic  rate  expressions  is
essential to extend basic oxidation mechanisms for small species such as
the validated AramcoMech 3.0 model [496] to larger regular alkanes.
These  models  can  further  be  augmented  with  ab  initio  calculated
oxidation  kinetics  to  address  subtle  deviations  from  the  generic  rate
expressions for specific fuels.

4.1.3.2. Generic  rate  expressions  for  cyclic  ether  formation  during  the
oxidation of alkanes. Several systematic studies on the formation of CEs
at  low-temperature  oxidation  conditions  are  available  and  these  are
listed in Table 10. The investigations of individual reaction systems are

not included.

 ̇
CH2CH2OOH → cy(CH2OCH2) +  ̇

Chan et al. [497], Wijaya et al. [207] and Miyoshi [494] calculated
the rate coefficient for the simplest member of a reaction class, which
was then used as the representative rate expression for the reaction class.
For  example,
OH  is  the  simplest  oxir-
ane  forming  reaction  that  involves  a  primary  radical  site,  while  the
corresponding
reaction
2,2-dimethyloxirane
 ̇
CCH2OOH → cy(C(CH3)2OCH2) +  ̇
(CH3)2
OH  is  the  simplest  reaction
that involves a tertiary radical site. Each reaction class is defined by the
CE formed and radical type involved. The above-mentioned examples
belong to the oxirane forming reaction classes from either p- or t-type
radicals.

forming

Miyoshi  [494]  showed  that  the  ab  initio  reaction  barriers  for  CE
formation  correlate  with  the  enthalpies  of  reaction  (Evans-Polanyi
relationship), which is used to estimate the activation energies of the
rate expressions. Villano et al. [487] averaged the ab initio/TST results
from a larger set of reactions by determining a common A factor and
providing Evans-Polanyi parameters to calculate the barriers from the
reaction enthalpies. Bugler et al. [499] did not derive generic rate ex-
pressions but a large set of individually calculated rate coefficients was
provided, from which such rules can be deduced. The studies mentioned
in Table 10 are discussed in more detail below.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101943

Table 9
Oxidation studies of C7-C16 alkanes performed after 1990, in which CE isomers have been quantified.

◦
X

fuel (%)

φ

Quantified CE isomersa

Fuel

T (K)

P (bar)/diluent

n-Heptane

JSR

550-1150

10/N2

550-1150

500-1100

10,40
/N2
1.07/He

500-1100

1.07/He

500-1100

10/He

τ(s)

1

0.1, 0.5, 2

2

1, 2

2

RCMd

667

3.3/N2-Ar-CO2

0-0.05

2-Methyl
heptane

2,5-Dimethyl
hexane

JSR

500-1200

10/N2

JSR

550-1150

10/N2

iso-Octane

JSR

550-1150

10/N2

500-1100

1.07/He

0.7

0.7

1

2.0

RCMd

708

13.4/N2-Ar-CO2

0-0.05

RCMd

684

20/N2-Ar-CO2

0-0.05

JSR

550-1150

10/N2

1

iso-Octane
+ anisole

iso-Octane +
n-heptanef

n-Decane

JSR

550-1150

10/N2

550-1100

1.07/He

1

1.5

n-Hexadecane
+ n-decaneg

JSR

550-1100

1.07/He

1.5

0.1

0.1,
0.05
0.5

0.1, 0.5

0.1

1.87

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.5
1
1.65

1.86e

0.1

0.1

0.23

0.2h

0.3, 0.5,
1, 1.5
1

0.25, 1,
2, 4
3

1

1

2-ethyl-5-methylTHFb,c, 2-propylTHFc

2- methyl-4-propyloxetaneb,
2-propylTHF, 2-ethyl-5-methylTHFb
2-ethyl-3-propyloxiraneb, 2-butyl-3-methyloxirane,
2-methyl-4-propyloxetane, 2,4-diethyloxetane, 2-propylTHF, 2-ethyl-5-methylTHF
2-ethyl-5-methylTHFb, 2-propylTHF

2-ethyl-5-methylTHFb, 2-propylTHF

2-methyl-4-propyloxetane, 2,4-diethyloxetane, 2-propylTHF, 2-ethyl-5-methylTHF

0.5, 1, 2

2-isopropyl-5-methylTHF, 2,2-dimethyl-5-ethylTHF, 3-methyl-5-propylTHF

0.5, 1, 2

2,2,5,5-tetramethylTHF

0.3, 0.5,
1, 1.5
0.25, 1, 2
0.25
1

1

1

1

1

1

2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF (below 1ppm)

3-tertbutyl-2,2-dimethyloxirane, 2-isopropyl-3,3-dimethyloxetane,
2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF
2-tertbutyl-3-methyloxetane, 2-isopropyl-3,3-dimethyloxetane,
2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF, 2,2,5-trimethylTHP

2-tertbutyl-3-methyloxetane, 2-isopropyl-3,3-dimethyloxetane,
2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF

2-isopropyl-3,3-dimethyloxetane
2-tertbutyl-3-methyloxetane, 2,2,4,4-tetramethylTHF,
+ 2-ethyl-3-propyloxirane, cis-2-butyl-3-methyloxirane,
2-methyl-4-propyloxetaneb, 2-propylTHF, 2-ethyl-5-methylTHFb, 2-ethylTHP

2,5-dipropylTHFb, 2-ethyl-5-butylTHFb, 2-methyl-5-pentylTHFb, 2-hexylTHF

2,5-dipropylTHF + sum of (2-hexyl-4-methyloxetane, 2-ethyl-4-pentyloxetane,
2-butyl-4-propyloxetane, 2-heptyloxetane,
2,5-dipropylTHF, 2-ethyl-5-butylTHF, 2-methyl-5-pentylTHF, 2-hexylTHF,
2-ethyl-6-propylTHP, 2-methyl-6-butylTHP, 2-pentylTHP)

2-methyl-5-undecylTHF + sum of (2-dodecylTHF, 2-ethyl-5-decylTHF,
2-propyl-5-nonylTHF, 2-butyl-5-octylTHF, 2-pentyl-5-heptylTHF,
2,5-dihexylTHF)

2009
[415]

L
.
-
S
.

T
r
a
n

e
t

a
l
.

Year& Ref.

1993
[412]
1995
[295]
2012, 2016
[32,33]
2015
[455]
2020
[456]
1995, 1996
[408,410]

2014
[457]

2011
[458]

1993
[412]
2016
[288]
1996
[410]

2021
[459]

1994
[413]

1994
[414]
2009, 2016, 2017
[288,415,460]

a only CEs with the same number of carbon atoms as the reactant are listed
b cis and trans
c  only maximum mole fractions are reported
d T and P in all RCM studies are those after compression
e 1.12% of iso-octane + 0.74% for anisole
f only relative CE amount was shown
g in Table 4, except 2-dodecylTHF and 2-methyl-5-undecylTHF, C16 CEs are shown under the lumped name “2-R-5-R’THF”
h 75% of n-decane + 25% of n-hexadecane.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101944




































































































































































































































L.-S. Tran et al.

an important role as they may freeze in transition states. Consequently,
an accurate treatment of these internal rotations is required to obtain
reliable pre-exponential factors.

The studies by Chan et al. and by Wijaya et al. are the first systematic
investigations of the effect of ring size and substituent on CE formation,
but they are based on limited sets of reactions – three each for oxirane,
oxetane and oxolane. Nevertheless, a clear trend towards lower activa-
tion energy when going from primary to secondary and tertiary radicals
was observed. Another outcome was that oxetane formation is slower
than oxirane or oxolane formation for the same radical type. CBS-QB3
was  found  to  be  a  reliable  method  (except  for  implementation  prob-
lems  in  the  Gaussian  software  package  used),  although  Wijaya  et  al.
[207] raised concerns about contributions of higher order corrections,
which might lead to unrealistic low barriers for some reactions. In those
cases, Wijaya et al. [207] corrected the ab initio results by 2.5 kcal/mol.
In 2011, Miyoshi [494] conducted a very detailed and comprehen-
sive  CBS-QB3  study  on  all  important  low-temperature  oxidation  re-
actions including CE formation. The impact of the radical structure on
barrier  heights,  reaction  energies  and  pre-exponential  factors  was
identified. Those can largely be related to ring strain effects in the cyclic
transition states. While for most reaction classes, only the substitution of
the radical carrying site (primary, secondary, tertiary) alters the reac-
tivity notably, the CE formation rate coefficient is also affected by the
type of carbon that carries the hydroperoxy group. High-pressure rate
coefficients were calculated for the simplest reactions of a given sub-
stitution pattern with Eckart tunneling corrected transition state theory
and the results were generalized in form of rate rules. Internal rotations
were accounted for, but only at an approximate Pitzer-Gwinn level. Next
 ̇
O/Q ̇OOH reactions, Miyoshi also analyzed CE formation reactions
to RO
following the addition of a second O2 to Q ̇OOH and concluded that the
rate expressions for these reactions were largely in line with those of the
first O2  addition. The work by Miyoshi provides the most detailed and
complete set of rate rules for CE forming reactions known as of today.
Villano  et  al.  [487]  also  used  the  CBS-QB3  method  to  study
alkyl + O2 reactions including CE formation. This study is very similar to
that of Miyoshi but not as comprehensive in terms of detailed rate rules.
One  difference  between  the  two  studies  is  that  Villano  et  al.  treated
every  internal  rotation  separately  as  1-D  rotor  with  effective  reduced
moments of inertia that largely decoupled this rotation from the external
modes. The explicit calculation and evaluation of hindrance potentials
might  have  allowed  Villano  et  al.  to  find  lower  energy  conformers,
which are sometimes difficult to locate. The rate rules by Villano et al.,
who also observed that the rate coefficients for CE formation depended

Fig. 26. 2,5-Dimethylhexane oxidation: measured PI energy scan at m/z 128
(white circles by Wang et al. [20] in JSR at 510 K overlaid with their absolute PI
spectrum of 2,2,5,5-tetramethylTHF (black line) scaled to align with the slope
at the onset energy (8.8 eV) of the m/z 128 signal. This figure also displays the
PI spectrum of 2,2,5,5-tetramethylTHF previously measured by Rotavera et al.
[380]  in  a  FR  at  650  K  (broken  red  line)  -  reproduced  from  Ref.  [20]  with
permission of Elsevier.

Table  11  compares  the  CE  rate  expressions  from  the  studies
mentioned in Table 10 at 700 K. These were calculated either directly
using the reported rate rules, if available, or they were deduced from
rate coefficients found in these studies. In the latter case, e.g. applicable
to the work by Bugler et al. [499], the reported rate expressions have
been generalized in terms of rate rules in order to calculate the entries in
Table 11.

The main conclusion one might draw from this compilation is that
the  CBS-QB3  based  rate  expressions  are  generally  higher  than  those
obtained by the study of Bugler et al. [499]. It should also be noted that
different  studies  using  the  same  CBS-QB3  method  clearly  report
different rate expressions for the same reaction class (or even reaction).
Some possible causes for this were already discussed in Part 2, e.g. the
discussion of the treatment of internal rotations in 2.1.2.2. In addition,
Wijaya et al. [207] have corrected the CBS-QB3 energies to account for
excessive higher order corrections, while such corrections have not been
applied by Miyoshi [494] nor by Villano et al. [487].

Prior to 2011, only a few systematic theoretical studies were avail-
able. Limited CPU resources and restrictions in the levels of theory led to
results  with  large  uncertainties  and  significant  differences  between
different groups [497]. In 2003, Wijaya et al. [207] calculated barrier
heights for CE formation that were generally found to be consistent with
the  earlier  studies  by  Chan  et  al.  [497]  and  [500]  but  the  A-factors
differed substantially. The authors pointed out that internal rotors play

Fig. 27. Temperature dependence of the mole fraction of 2-MTHF during the oxidation of n-pentane at (a) 1.07 bar in Nancy and (b) 10 bar in Orl ́eans (see initial
conditions in Table 8). Symbols are experimental data, lines simulations, pink color for φ = 0.3, black for φ = 0.5, red for φ = 1, and blue for φ = 2; reproduced from
the supplementary material of [429].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101945

L.-S. Tran et al.

on the degree of substitution of both the hydroperoxy group carrying site
and the radical site, are overall in good agreement with those developed
by Miyoshi. One notable difference was seen for the CE formation from
tertiary β-Q ̇OOH, for which Villano et al. found a lower activation en-
ergy  than  Miyoshi  but  in  line  with  that  found  by  Cord  et  al.  [498].
Villano et al. also carried out a steady state ME analysis for the reactions
on the n-C4H7+O2  PES and calculated the pressure-dependent rate ex-
pressions for this system. They showed that the predictions of a kinetic
model using high-pressure rate expressions agree at 500 K and 750 K
excellently  with
for
pressure-dependence. Even at 1000 K, the differences were found to be
small.

explicitly

accounts

that

one

the

Cord et al. [498], also applying the CBS-QB3 method, calculated rate
coefficients  for  nine  CE  producing  reactions  from  primary,  secondary
and  tertiary  hydroperoxyalkyl  radicals  forming  oxirane,  oxetane  and
tetrahydrofuran C4 products. The results were compared to generic ex-
pressions used in the EXGAS software and substantial differences were
observed. The authors point out that their results deviate clearly from
those  by  Miyoshi  [494]  and  suggest  that  differences  in  the  hindered
rotor treatment and the application of tunneling correction factors could
be reasons.

Bugler et al. [463] presented their own study on this subject. While
an  earlier  publication  by  Bugler  et  al.  [499]  recommended  rate  ex-
pressions based on the studies by Miyoshi [494] and Villano et al. [487]
for CE formation reactions with rather large uncertainty assignments,
two years later, they investigated 43 CE formation reactions involving
alkyl chains from C2 to C5 with the M06-2X/6-311++G(d,p) method to
calculate  geometries  and  frequencies  and  CCSD(T)/CBS  for  energies.
The different methodology provides an alternative evaluation of these
reactions compared to the CBS-QB3 investigations by Miyoshi [494] and
Villano et al. [487]. The re-evaluation was motivated by the suspicion
that CBS-QB3 predicted barriers were potentially systematically too low.
This would lead to an overestimation of CE formation and too high CE
yields. The newly calculated rate expressions are generally lower than
those obtained with CBS-QB3 (see Table 11).

Several other studies reporting on rate coefficients for individual CE
forming reactions seem to support Bugler ́s analysis that the prior CBS-
QB3 based rate rules might overestimate the CE formation step. Sheng
et al. employed CBS-Q/B3LYP/6-31G(d,g) level of theory to calculate
 ̇
the rate coefficient for hydroxyethyl reacting to give oxirane and
OH
radical [501] and basically reproduced the result by Wijaya et al. [207].
Oakley  et  al.  [502]  studied  the  formation  of  oxiranes  from  various
hydroperoxyalkyl  radicals  using  G4  theory.  They  concluded  in  agree-
ment with Bugler that the CBS-QB3 method underpredicts the barrier for
this  reaction  by  about  2.5  kcal/mol.  The  barriers  were  expressed  in

terms of an Evans-Polanyi relationship but no generic rate expression
was provided. Hashemi et al. [503] used in their high pressure ethane
oxidation  model  a  rate  coefficient  for  oxirane  formation  from  hydro-
peroxyethyl radical, which was very close to that of Bugler et al. and
lower  than  those  calculated  by  Villano  et  al.  and  Miyoshi.  This  rate
coefficient  was  extracted  from  a  ME  analysis  by  Klippenstein  [476]
based on a PES at the ANL0 level of theory, which, as mentioned in Part
2.1.1, is a high level coupled cluster composite approach that includes
CCSDT(Q) corrections. Xu et al. [504] recalculated the PES for alkyl+O2
(ethyl, propyl, butyl) at various coupled cluster type levels of theory and
concluded  that  CCSD(T)-F12a/cc-pVDZ-F12  was  the  best  method  for
ethyl+O2. The activation energy for this reaction is higher than those
obtained by Bugler et al. [463] or Villano et al. [487], but similar to that
of Miyoshi [494]. Nevertheless, the rate coefficient is predicted to be
lower than those obtained with CBS-QB3 by Miyoshi and Villano et al.
supporting the idea that the CBS-QB3 rate rule for this reaction over-
estimates the reactivity. The same is true for the study by Duan et al
[505], which calculated high-pressure and pressure-dependent rate ex-
pressions for CE forming reaction from the oxidation of n-butyl radicals.
Fig. 31a compares the generic rate expressions for several CE forming
reactions. Similar but more extended comparisons can be found in the
supporting material of Bugler et al. [499]. Unlike one would expect from
the previous discussion on activation energies, the Arrhenius plots are
rather  parallel  but  the  pre-exponential  factors  differ  substantially
(Fig.  31b)  with  those  calculated  by  Bugler  et  al.  being  systematically
smaller  than  those  from  the  CBS-QB3  studies  by  Miyoshi  [494]  and
Villano et al. [487]. As can be seen in Fig. 31c, the activation energies at
700 K calculated by Bugler et al. at the CCSD(T) level are not always
higher  than  the  corresponding  CBS-QB3  values.  This  does  not  neces-
sarily  contradict  statements  about  0  K  barriers  since  the  700  K  data
contain  thermal  contributions.  However,  most  importantly,  Fig.  31b
demonstrates the importance of the pre-exponential factors, which goes
back to proper treatments of internal rotors and symmetries. Given the
importance  of  these  rate  expressions  not  only  for  accurate  CE  yield
predictions but also to describe the competition between chain propa-
gation and chain branching correctly (and therefore ignition behavior),
the observed large spreads in the rate expressions, which has also been
noted by Atef et al. [467], is not satisfactory. More studies are needed to
improve this situation. For example, the G4 composite method, which
does not apply the often questioned [498,506] empirical spin contami-
nation correction used by CBSQB3 and has been shown by Simmie to
perform  better  than  CBS-QB3  [132]  could  be  tested.  If  successful  it
would provide a computationally affordable method to study large fuel
molecules. Alternatively, systematic coupled cluster and CASPT2 studies
that  account  for  multi-reference  character  in  the  transition  state  as

Fig. 28. Formation of hydroperoxide CEs: (a) lumped reaction scheme from Q ̇OOH radicals inspired by Warth et al. [469], (b) simulated formation of HOOCEs for
the conditions given in Fig. 3 in Part 1 using the model of Zhang et al. [33].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101946

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 29. Flow-rate analysis for 2-heptyl oxidation with focus on hydroperoxide CEs formation. The conditions are the same as in Fig. 3. The green area highlights
formation pathways of hydroperoxyoxirane derivatives. Numbers near the arrows are the rates (in mole/cm3/s unit) of the corresponding reaction averaged from
700 K to 1000 K, and numbers in square brackets near molecules are the peak mole fractions of the corresponding molecules. The numbers inserted in the transition
states belong to the ring size. For clarity reasons, several important pathways, such as KHP formation, are omitted.

Fig. 30. Schematic PES of the n-propyl+O2 PES. The red arrows demonstrate well-skipping reactions of chemically excited species, while the blue arrows follow step-
wise transformations that can be described by high-pressure limited rate expressions - reproduced from Ref. [473] with permission of ACS.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101947

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 10
Ab initio based development of generic rate expressions for CE forming reactions. p,s,t refer to primary, secondary and tertiary sites and CE-x specifies the CE type:
x = 3,4,5,6 are oxiranes, oxetanes, oxolanes and oxanes, respectively.

Method

Number of calculated reactions

Target

Authors & Ref.

Chan et al. [497]

Wijaya et al. [207]
Miyoshi [494]

Year

1999

2003
2011

DFT
BHandHLYP/6-311G**

CBS-QB3a
CBS-QB3

Villano et al. [487]

2012

CBS-QB3

Cord et al. [498]
Bugler et al. [499]

2012
2017

CBS-QB3
CCSD(T)/CBS//
M06-2X/ 6- 311++ G(d,p)

a preferred method, others used: DFT, CBS-Q

10

9
73

51

9
43

CE-3,4: p,s,t (radical sites)
CE-5: p,s (radical sites)
CE-6: p (radical site)
CE-3,4,5: p,s,t (radical sites)

CE-3,4,5,6: p,s,t (
CE-7: p-p and s-s sites
Ring substitution effects

 ̇QOOH+ radical sites)

 ̇QOOH + radical site combinations)

CE-3,4,5: p,s,t (most
CE-6: only (p,p), (p,s), (s,p)
CE-3,4,5: p,s,t (radical sites)
CE-3,4,5,6:
example reactions for
(most   ̇QOOH + radical site combinations), no explicit rate rules

shown in Table 2 and discussed in Section 2.1.1 would be helpful.

4.1.3.3. Modeling  of  cyclic  ether  formation  during  the  oxidation  of  n-
alkanes. In  the  last  three  decades,  many  models  considering  the  CE
formation from alkanes were developed, see for instance those by [384,
462,496] for propane, by [462,469,498,505,507] for n-butane, by [411,
429] for pentanes, by [454] for n-hexane, by [33,34,194,408,446,447]
for n-heptane, by Wang et al. [20] for 2,5-dimethylhexane, by [459,467,
508]  for  iso-octane,  by  [509]  for  iso-dodecane,  by  [464,491,510]  for
C8-C16 n-alkanes and by [457] for 2-methylalkanes from C7 to C20. This
list is by far not exhaustive, but it aims at including the major models
having  allowed  progress
in  modelling  alkane  oxidation  at
low-temperature. In addition, although all these models include reaction
channels  leading  to  CEs,  only  a  part  of  them  were  tested  against  CE
quantifications, which are available in a limited number of studies.

In  their  earliest  attempt  of  modelling  their  n-butane  RCM  experi-
ments, Minetti et al. [407] used the model by Wilk et al. [507]. Simu-
lations  using  this previously  developed  model  well  predicted the  fuel
consumption,  and  the  yields  of  the  reported  products  (CO,  ethylene,
propene,  butenes,  methanol,  propanal)  were  also  well  reproduced
(within  a  factor  of  2).  However,  the  model  overestimated  by  up  to  a
factor of about 10 the reported yields for all CEs (2,3-dimethyloxirane,
2-ethyloxirane, 2-methyloxetane and THF). Amongst the data listed in
Tables  8  and  9,  various  levels  of  agreement  were  reported  using  the
before-listed models with still significant deviations observed even after
the theoretical effort described in Part 4.1.3.2. A few examples of the
recently  obtained  best  agreements  using  theoretically  calculated  ki-
netics are discussed below.

In order to model their propane RCM data, Ramalingam et al. [452]
used the model independently developed in Galway [496]. Their sim-
ulations reproduced the methyloxirane yields very well at 50 bar and
quite well (slight overprediction) at 30 bar.

For  heavier  linear  alkanes,  Bugler  et  al.  [429]  in  Galway  used  an
updated version of their 2016 model [466] and showed improved pre-
dictions of 2-MTHF and 2,4-dimethyloxetane mole fractions from JSR
measurements at 1.07 bar and φ = 1 (see Table 8). Bugler et al. point out
that the use of pressure-dependent rate expressions makes a difference in
the  predictions,  which  contrasts  the  previously  discussed  analysis  by
Villano et al. for n-butane [487]. However, as is shown by Fig. 32a, in
JSR (P = 1 bar, φ = 0.5), while the agreement is excellent for the fuel
consumption, as it was also the case for RCM IDTs in the work of Bugler
et al. (see Ref. [429]), significant deviations can be seen in the prediction
of the mole fractions of all the observed types of CEs. Oxirane derivatives
are predicted best, but THF- and oxetane-derivatives are underestimated
below 700 K by more than a factor of two and THP by a factor of around
50.  In  the  model  of  Bugler  et  al.  [429],  THP  formation  in  n-pentane

oxidation proceeds mainly through the typical low-temperature oxida-
tion pathways. The underprediction of THP and its cause were not dis-
cussed by Burgler et al.. Note that, while different rate constants were
calculated  for  the  formation  of  cis-  and  trans-isomers,  they  were  not
considered in the pressure-dependent rate expressions included in the
model used for simulations. Although the model prediction for absolute
values of CE mole fractions still needs to be improved, the model pre-
dicts the peak positions of all CEs shown in Fig. 32a very well. It is also
noted that the first peak of CEs occurs in the NTC zone, which indicates
the close connection of CE formation to the NTC causing chemistry.

Again  in  Galway,  Zhang  et  al.  [33]  developed  a  model  for  the
low-temperature oxidation of n-heptane. The rate constants used for the
low-temperature oxidation chemistry were based on the calculation by
 ̇
Sharma et al. [156] for RO
O isomerizations and by Villano et al. [487]
for CE formations. Despite small adjustments of the calculated rate rules
to improve the agreement, significant deviations between experimental
and simulated results are observed in lean mixtures for fuel consump-
tion. Nevertheless, the distribution between the four oxirane-, oxetane-
and  THF-derivatives  that  were  experimentally  observed  [33]  (see
Table 9) is well predicted within the studied temperature range and for φ
from  0.25  to  4.  However,  the  formation  of  2-ethyl-3-propyloxirane  is
overestimated by more than a factor of five and no simulated profile for
2-ethyl-3-propyloxirane is reported. A possible cause for the observed
deviations  might  lie  in  the  oversimplified  consumption  chemistry  of
these CEs used in the model. In the models developed in Galway, each
 ̇
 ̇
CE is considered to react with
O to give two sets of products
OH and HO
including a radical, an unsaturated hydrocarbon, a ketone or an alde-
 ̇
hyde  (e.g.  C2H5CO
CH2  and
1-butene in the second set for H-abstraction from 2-ethyl-5-methylTHF
in the n-heptane oxidation model of [33]).

 ̇
CH2  and  propene  in  one  set  and  CH3CO

Concerning C7+ alkanes, Cai et al. [510] proposed optimized reac-
tion rate rules for the low-temperature oxidation of C7–C11 n-alkanes. As
a  starting  point  for  their  optimization  they  used  a  Livermore  model
[457],  in  which  the  low-temperature  oxidation  kinetics  was  updated
according to the work by Bugler et al. [429]. The optimization was done
with  experimental  IDTs  from  the  literature  for  C7-C11  n-alkanes.  The
obtained rate rules were then applied to develop a model for n-dodecane
giving satisfactory IDT prediction. Unfortunately, while these rate rules
involve  CEs,  the  accuracy  of  the  obtained  models  towards  the  pre-
dictions  of CE  could not  be tested  because  experimental data  are  not
available.

Concerning  branched  alkanes,  two  models  using  theoretically
calculated kinetics were developed in the group of Pitz and Westbrook in
Livermore, one for iso-octane [467] and one [509] for iso-dodecane. The
rate constants used for the low-temperature oxidation chemistry were
 ̇
O  isomerizations  and  from
updated  from  Villano  et  al.  [487]  for  RO

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101948

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 11
Rate expressions calculated with rate rules for CE forming reactions at 700 K. p,s,t refer to primary, secondary and tertiary carbons. CE ring sizes 3,4,5,6 refer to
oxiranes, oxetanes, oxolanes and oxanes, respectively. For keeping a reasonable size to this table, reaction classes, for which rate rules were only reported by Miyoshi,
were omitted. The number in parenthesis in the entries for Villano et al. and Bugler et al. indicates how many reactions were evaluated to derive this rate coefficient. All
other rate constants are based on a single reaction.

CE ring
size

HOO carrying carbon
type

Nature of radical
site

3

4

5

6

p
p
p
s
s
s
t
t
t

p

p

p

s

s

s

t

p

p

p

s

p
p
s

p
s
t
p
s
t
p
s
t

p

s

t

p

s

t

p

p

s

t

p

p
s
p

k(700 K) [s

(cid:0) 1]

Chan et al.a
[497]

6.9 × 108
8.3 × 108
2.3 × 109

Wijaya et al.
[207]

2.0 × 107
1.5 × 107
2.0 × 108

3.0 × 105
6.3 × 106b

6.5 × 104

6.3 × 105

1.7 × 105

1.3 × 106

1.2 × 106

7.5 × 106

1.2 × 106

1.0 × 107

3.2 × 106

N/A

6.6 × 106

1.5 × 106

N/A

Miyoshi[494]

2.1 × 108
4.4 × 108
1.0 × 109
7.3 × 108
6.0 × 108
1.1 × 109
1.5 × 109
3.4 × 109
1.5 × 109

3.6 × 105,
1.2 × 106b,
3.6 × 106c
3.3 × 106,
7.9 × 106b,
1.8 × 107c
1.0 × 107,
5.5 × 107b,
4.3 × 107c
2.4 × 106,
3.8 × 107b,
1.5 × 107c
9.8 × 106,
1.7 × 107b,
9.8 × 107c
6.9 × 107,
6.5 × 108b,
1.5 × 108c
6.7 × 106,
2.4 × 107b,
6.6 × 107c

7.3 × 106,
1.4 × 108c1,
7.6 × 107c2
6.8 × 107,
4.0 × 108c1,
1.4 × 108c2
2.2 × 108,
5.8 × 108c1,
7.3 × 108c2
4.1 × 106,
4.2 × 103c1,
8.5 × 107c2

1.1 × 106
3.6 × 106
1.1 × 105

Cord et al.
[498]

1.7 × 108
2.3 × 108
1.5 × 109

Villano et al.d
[487]

1.4 × 108 (1)
1.0 × 109 (6)
1.6 × 109 (1)
7.0 × 108 (4)
9.7 × 108 (6)
3.1 × 109 (1)
2.3 × 109 (2)
2.3 × 109 (1)

Bugler et al.d
[463]

6.5 × 107 (1)
6.0 × 107 (3)e
2.6 × 108 (2)
3.8 × 108 (4)
4.6 × 108 (7)

3.7 × 108 (2)
4.1 × 108 (1)

1.4 × 106 (4)

1.9 × 105

3.0 × 105 (4)

3.0 × 106 (4)

3.8 × 105

1.5 × 105 (4)

7.7 × 106 (1)

3.8 × 106

3.8 × 105 (1)

2.5 × 106 (4)

9.8 × 105 (4)

2.0 × 106 (2)

3.9 × 105 (2)

1.7 × 107 (1)

3.3 × 106 (1)

2.7 × 105 (1)

1.4 × 107 (2)

3.1 × 106

2.2 × 106 (3)

4.1 × 107 (2)

3.0 × 106

4.6 × 106 (1)

1.8 × 108 (1)

1.8 × 107

7.8 × 106 (1)

1.1 × 106 (1)

2.3 × 106 (4)
1.3 × 107 (1)
5.5 × 105 (1)

2.6 × 105 (1)

a rate rules for reverse reactions are also reported but not compared here.
b methyl substitution on non-reacting ring carbon.
c double methyl substitution on non-reacting ring carbon
c1 : vicinal to OOH
c2 : vicinal to radical site.
d reevaluated based on the rate coefficients given in the study.
e  one entry is ignored (outlier).

Miyoshi  [494]  (with  A × 2)  for  CE  formations.  For  this  last  reaction
class, Atef et al. [467] noted in the case of iso-octane significant differ-
ences between the rate constants obtained with the rate rules of Villano
et al. [487] and with those of Miyoshi [494]. The reason for this is in the
thermochemistry,  because  Villano  et  al.  formulate  their  rate  rules  as
function of the enthalpy of reaction. Atef et al. [467] and Fang et al.
[509] did not report simulated CE formation; however, the first model
was  later  embedded  in  that  of  Mergulh ̃ao  et  al.  [459]  for  an  iso--
octane/anisole mixture. Fig. 32b presents a comparison between the CE
yields simulated using this model and those experimentally measured in

the  RCM  of  Lille  (see  Table  9).  Taking  into  account  that  the  model
notably overestimates the fuel consumption (see Fig. 3 in [459]), the
distribution  of  C8  oxetane-  and  THF-derivatives  is  reasonably  well
reproduced.

Observed deviations in the predictions of CE mole fractions can be
explained by uncertainties in the kinetics of the reactions yielding them,
but  also  by  inaccurate  mechanisms  for  their  consumption.  As  further
discussed in Part 5, the recent work of Rotavera group [395,511] points
out that reactions that consume CEs are often too simplified in kinetic
models.  Moreover,  these  studies  point  out  that  there  are  mechanistic

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101949

L.-S. Tran et al.

connections between CEs and products that were thought previously to
derive primarily from KHPs. The need to properly account for secondary
reactions of CEs has been realized for a long time (e.g. [469]), but in the
past  the  lack  of  accurate  kinetics  made  a  proper  inclusion  of  such
chemistry impossible and chemical analogy principles had to be used
[464]. Given the availability of fast ab initio methods, Christianson et al.
[395,511]  argue  that  detailed  kinetic  information  needs  to  be  imple-
mented  in  order  to  account  for  the  complexity  of  CE  consumption
pathways.

4.2. Formation of cyclic ethers during the low-temperature oxidation of
cyclic and unsaturated hydrocarbons

When looking at CE creation during the low-temperature oxidation
of gasoline and Diesel fuel components, not only their production from
linear and branched alkanes should be examined but also their forma-
tion from cyclic alkanes, alkylbenzenes, linear and branched alkenes, as
well as from linear and cyclic dienes. Table 12 lists the studies published
since  1994,  which  present  quantifications,  including  mole  fraction
profiles (time or temperature dependences), of the CEs produced during
the low-temperature oxidation of these cyclic or unsaturated reactants.

4.2.1. Cyclic ethers from cyclic alkanes

Although the reactivity of C≥5 cycloalkanes during low-temperature
oxidation is lower than that of the similar alkanes with the same number
of  carbon  atoms,  a  marked  NTC  behavior  is  always  observed,  for
example  for  cyclopentane  [512–514]  and  cyclohexane  [418,515].
Similar to the low-temperature oxidation chemistry of alkanes, the for-
mation of the CEs listed in Table 12 from cyclic alkanes occurs through a
series  of  reactions  involving  an  H-abstraction  from  the  fuel,  a  first
 ̇
OH radical
addition of alkyl radicals to oxygen, an isomerization and an
elimination. However, the isomerization is in most cases hindered by the
necessity to  go through  bicyclic transition states, which  increases the
ring strain compared to open chain alkanes [516].

As is shown in Table 12 for cyclic alkane oxidation, quantitative CE
information is available from JSR experiments at Nancy and Shanghai,
and from RCM tests at Lille. The oxidation of cyclic alkanes was also
studied  in  JSR  in  Orl ́eans  but  no  CE  formation  was  reported  in  their
cyclohexane studies [517,518] at temperatures starting from 750 K nor
in  the  experiments  of  Ristori  et  al.  [519]  on  n-propylcyclohexane
oxidation  at  temperatures  starting  from  950  K,  i.e.  above  the
low-temperature reaction zone. While qualitative information is avail-
able [520], no quantification for CEs during cyclopentane oxidation was
reported  in  the  literature.  Below,  first  the  results  for  cyclohexane
oxidation  are  discussed  and  afterwards  those  for  alkylcyclohexane
oxidation.

the

from  cyclohexane. Since  1994,

4.2.1.1. Cyclic  ethers
low-
temperature  oxidation  of  cyclohexane  was  first  studied  by  Lemaire
et al. [521] in a RCM with ignition and cool flame delay time recording,
as well as product quantification. The measured CEs were assigned as 1,
2-epoxycyclohexane,  1,3-epoxycyclohexane,  1,4-epoxycyclohexane.
These  results,  together  with  the  related  IDTs,  are  well  predicted  by
models  such  as  those  developed  in  Milano  [526],  Nancy  [516],  and
Livermore  [515].  However,  as  first  explained  by  Gulati  and  Walker
[527] based on their GC quantification of the CEs produced during the
addition  of  cyclohexane  to slowly  reacting  H2-O2  mixtures  in  a  static
reactor at 753 K, although the cyclohexane chair form permits the for-
mation of the relatively strain-free six-membered ring of the transition
state leading to 1,3-epoxycyclohexane, the rigidity of the chair imposes
too much strain for the formation of the oxetane ring and its rupture to
form hex-5-enal is energetically more favorable [527]. This hypothesis
was  considered  in  the  modelling  approaches  of  Milano  [526],  Nancy
[516], Livermore [515], and Shanghai [522]. The three first modelling
approaches were mostly based on corrections due to the change in the

strain  energies  in  the  transition  states  of  the  RO2  isomerizations;  the
fourth one on theoretical calculations. Fig. 33a presents a comparison of
the  experimental  results  of  Lemaire  et  al.  [521]  with  the  predictions
obtained using the model of [516] for the yields of 1,2-epoxycyclohex-
ane,1,4-epoxycyclohexane and hex-5-enal (Yproduct in Fig. 33a).

1,2-Epoxycyclohexane,  1,4-epoxycyclohexane  and  hex-5-enal  were
also quantified during the JSR study of the low-temperature oxidation of
cyclohexane  of  Serinyel  et  al.  [418].  These  authors  studied  three
equivalence ratios, 0.5, 1 and 2, and demonstrated that a decrease of the
equivalence  ratio  notably  increases  the  CE  yields.  These  authors  pro-
posed a kinetic model based on theoretically calculated rate constants
for the reactions of cycloalkylperoxy radicals [220], with overall good
predictions of IDTs and product formations, but significant deviation for
the amounts of C6 oxygenated species.

Two  recent  JSR  studies  at  Shanghai  [522,528]  with  SVUV-PIMS
analysis present mole fraction profiles as a function of temperature of
a  lumped  C6H10O  species  assumed  to  include  the  three  molecules  of
Fig.  33a  (1,2-epoxycyclohexane,  1,4-epoxycyclohexane,  hex-5-enal)
together  with  cyclohexanone.  The  most  recent  paper  [522]  also  pre-
sents results using GC-FID to quantify these three molecules (the sum of
YCE peak is ~1.6 ± 0.16%) during the JSR study of the low-temperature
oxidation of cyclohexane, as is shown in Fig. 33b. The studies of Zou
et al. [522] and Serinyel et al. [418], both detected hex-5-enal, which
was  presumed  to  form  from  1,3-epoxycyclohexane,  in  significantly
higher  yields  than  those  of  the  two  bicyclic  CEs.  As  is  also  shown  in
Fig. 33b, CE formation below 800 K is well predicted by the last model
proposed by the Shanghai group [522]; the obtained prediction of the
data of Serinyel et al. [418] is also overall satisfactory. The cyclohexane
model of Zou et al. [522] was based on a theoretical study performed by
the same group [529], in which pressure- and temperature-dependent
rate constants and branching ratios were determined from solutions of
the RRKM/master-equation for the major reaction channels in the first
and  second  oxygen  additions.  The  authors  noted  that  rapid
inversion-topomerization processes facilitate fast equilibrium between
axial and equatorial conformers, which can greatly counterbalance the
influence  of  initial  positions  of  side-chain  peroxy  and  hydroperoxy
groups on low-temperature oxidation process. For example, the equa-
 ̇
O radicals preferably switch the peroxy group from equatorial
torial-RO
 ̇
to axial position by inversion-topomerization and form the axial-RO
O
radicals with an overall energy barrier of 11.08 kcal/mol that is much
lower  than  the  barrier  of  intramolecular  hydrogen  transfer  (≥31.8
kcal/mol)  and  concerted  elimination  (32.0  kcal/mol).  The  γ-Q ̇OOH
 ̇
OH radical, or
radical could react to form the corresponding oxetane and
 ̇
alternatively  by  ring-opening  to  yield  the  unstable  [C=CCC
COOH]
 ̇
species,  which  instantaneously  decomposes  to  5-hexenal  and
OH.  At
CBS-QB3 level, the energy for the corresponding transition state is about
3 kcal/mol higher than that for the oxetane formation. The entropy on
the other hand favors ring-opening. Several studies [418,515,528,530,
531] have shown that the ring-opening step is fast, which would explain
why  5-hexenal is  detected  in  high quantities. As  shown  in [528], the
calculated or estimated rate expressions of five studies [418,515,528,
530,531] deviate by several orders of magnitude, which in part might be
caused by different methodologies used and partly by the existences of
several  conformers.  Given  this  severe  uncertainty  in  the  rate  expres-
sions, the overprediction of the 5-hexenal yield by only a factor of two
seen in Fig. 33a is quite reasonable.

4.2.1.2. Cyclic  ethers  from  alkylcyclohexanes. Methylcyclohexane  is  a
simple alkylcycloalkane frequently suggested as a potential surrogate to
represent  the  naphthenic  content  in  transportation  fuels  [532].  Its
low-temperature oxidation chemistry with a notable NTC behavior was
studied in the first decade of this millennium in RCM experiments but
without product formation measurements [533–535]. Methylcyclohex-
ane  oxidation  was  also  investigated  in  a  CFR  (Cooperative  Fuel
Research)  engine  by  Yang  et  al.  [536]  who  report  only  CO

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101950

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 31. Comparison of rate expressions for selected CE formation reactions. (a): Arrhenius plots of rate expressions for Q ̇OOH cyclization forming methyl oxirane,
methyl  oxetane, furan and methyl  furan, respectively.  (b): Comparison of  pre-exponential factors (A) at 700 K  of different rate  rule studies. (c): Comparison of
activation  energies  (Ea)  at  700  K  of  different  rate  rule  studies.  The  Arrhenius  A  and  Ea  are  either  directly  taken  from  the  rate  expression  or  calculated  as
A = AmodArrh × Tn × en and Ea = E + nRT from modified Arrhenius rate expressions. References: Wijaya et al. [207], Miyoshi [494], Villano et al. [487], Cord et al.
[498], Bugler et al. [499], Xu et al. [504] and Duan et al. [505]. In the CE-n_x label, the n value refers to the ring size and x denotes the type of radical (primary,
 ̇
secondary, tertiary) as defined in Table 11 for a primary HO
O carrying C-atom. In (a) all color lines are CBS-QB3 based while the black lines indicate coupled cluster
type calculations.

measurements. This study analyzed the impact of steric cyclic structure
on  the  low-temperature  oxidation.  For  the  RCM  studies,  reasonable
detailed kinetic models were proposed in each of the three papers; the
latest one by Weber et al. [535] being based on theoretical calculations,
especially those from the work of Yang et al. [536].

In  2019,  Bissoonauth  et  al.  [424]  reported  CE  measurements  for
methylcyclohexane from a JSR study by the Nancy group together with
modelling by the group of Sarathy at KAUST. This was done in order to
validate their detailed kinetic model based on an update of that of Weber
et al. [535]. Fig. 34a displays the observed CE mole fractions, showing
that the highest YCE  was found for two oxirane derivatives (1-oxaspiro
[2,5]octane  and  1-methyl-7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]heptane),  which  could
not  be separated  by  GC analysis, while  a product  with  THF  structure
(1-methyl-7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptane) was detected in lower amounts.
The maximum sum of YCE is ~2.5 ± 0.25%. Note that the two oxiranes
 ̇
originate from the tertiary RO
O radical. Fig. 34a also displays results
from  the  simulations,  showing  that  while  the  predictions  are  very
satisfactory for the reactant and for unsaturated hydrocarbons and al-
dehydes,  they  deteriorate  for  CEs,  especially  the  oxirane  derivatives.
This led Bissoonauth et al. [424] to conclude that more work on the CE
sub-mechanism is necessary.

Quantification of CEs during the low-temperature oxidation of eth-
ylcyclohexane was first reported in 2012 by Husson et al. [417] using a
JSR  coupled  to  a  GC.  These  results  are  displayed  in  Fig.  34b,  which
shows the four quantified CEs. Those include 2 sets of products: one set
of  two  CEs  (1-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]heptane,  1-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo
[2.2.1]heptane)  in  which  the  newly  formed  CE  ring  is  fused  to  the
cyclohexane ring, and a second set of two CEs (2-methyl-1-oxaspiro[2.5]
octane, octahydro-1-benzofuran) in which the new CE ring is formed on
the side chain. The largest experimental YCE was obtained for these last
two CEs (peak value above 2 ± 0.2% for each of them). In line with their
previous methylcyclohexane model, Wang et al. [538] reported the first
simulations of the data of [417], together with an experimental study
performed in a JSR at atmospheric pressure with SVUV-PIMS analysis
and made in order to identify highly oxygenated products, thus without

individual  CE  quantification  nor  simulations.  In  their  recent  experi-
mental and modelling study of ethylcyclohexane oxidation, Zou et al.
[537]  reported measured and simulated  temperature dependent mole
fractions (peak YCE ~10% at 650 K, τ = 2 s) of a lumped C8H14O species,
which presumably consists mainly of the CEs octahydro-1-benzofuran
and  1-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]heptane,  but  also  of  2-ethylhex-5-enal
and 2-ethylcyclohexan-1-one. The total mole fraction profiles of these
species were well predicted by the model of Zou et al. [537] for the three
equivalence ratios studied (φ = 0.5, 1 and 2). Zou et al. [537] also used
their model to simulate the data of Husson et al. [417]. However, the
mole fraction profiles of only two of C8H14O CEs (1-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo
[4.1.0]heptane,  1-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptane)  were  presented
and  show  a  significant  under-prediction  as  seen  in  Fig.  34c.  Fig.  34
clearly  demonstrates  that  most  of  the  bicyclic  CEs  observed  during
ethylcyclohexane  oxidation  result  from  reaction  sequences  that  pre-
sumably  include  the  abstraction  of  the  tertiary  H-atom,  either  by
metathesis or through internal isomerization.

Continuing with increasing alkyl chain, CE quantifications were re-
ported  in  2010  during  n-propylcyclohexane  oxidation  experiments
performed in the Lille RCM in the group of Minetti [26]. This work re-
ports on measurements of cool flame delay times and IDT, as well as on
product  quantification. The time dependence  of the  mole  fractions of
seven CEs was measured as shown in Fig. 35, under lean conditions (φ
from 0.3 to 0.5). These include oxirane, oxetane and THF derivatives,
with  2-ethyl-1-oxaspiro[2,5]octane  and  2-methyl-1-oxaspiro[2,5]non-
ane having the highest YCE.

Fig. 35 shows that the two bicyclic ethers produced in the highest
quantities  are  those  formed  through  reactions  involving  tertiary  H-
atoms. To the authors’ best knowledge, no modelling attempt of these
RCM results has been made. Note that Ristori et al. [519] also reported
an  experimental  and  modelling  study  on  the  JSR  oxidation  of  n-pro-
pylcyclohexane. This study was performed at temperatures above 950 K.
CE formation was not discussed.

To  finish  the  discussion  on  alkylcyclohexanes,  the  Nancy  group
detected  a  large  number  of  species  with  a  molar  mass  of  154  g/mol

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101951

L.-S. Tran et al.

addition to ignition and cool flame delay times, they reported YCE of five
CEs, two oxirane, two oxetane and one THF derivatives. This last com-
pound, 2-phenylTHF, is produced with a YCE  (10%) at least five times
higher than those of the other CEs. Ribaucour et al. [524] presented a
detailed kinetic model reproducing their data with overall acceptable
agreement  for  delay  times,  benzaldehyde  and  styrene  selectivity,  but
significant deviations for YCE.

Only 2,3-dihydro-1-benzofuran, a CE with one carbon atom less than
the reactant, was quantified during JSR experiments on n-butylbenzene
oxidation performed in Nancy close to atmospheric pressure [525]. Due
to the fact that n-butylbenzene is not very reactive at low-temperature
under the conditions of this study, only traces (amounts < 0.1 ppm) of
2-phenylTHF,  2-ethyl-3-phenyloxirane,  and  2-benzyl-3-methyloxirane
were observed. No CE formation was observed in the JSR experiments
at  10  bar  by  Di ́evart  et  al.  [541]  in  Orl ́eans  despite  investigating  the
500-1150 temperature range and observing a notable NTC behavior for
the lean mixture. Husson et al. [525] proposed a detailed kinetic model
which  overall  satisfactorily  predicted  the  JSR  data  as  well  as  IDTs
measured  in  ST  and  RCM.  However,  CE  predictions  using  this  model
under RCM conditions at φ = 0.5 predicted 2-ethyl-3-phenyloxirane to
be the CE with the highest yield, while 2-phenylTHF was experimentally
found to be the major CE in the study of Ribaucour et al. [524] at similar
conditions but at φ = 1.

4.2.2.2. Di-alkylbenzenes. In the RCM in Lille, CE quantifications were
reported  from  o-xylene  and  o-ethyltoluene  oxidation  studies.  To  the
author’s best knowledge, these results have never been modelled. In o-
xylene oxidation, a THF derivative (1,3-dihydro-2-benzofuran) can be
formed by bridging both alkyl chains [523]; this bridging is not possible
for m- and p-xylenes, explaining their lower reactivity and why neither
cool flame, NTC nor CE were detected for these last two reactants [542].
The  1,3-dihydro-2-benzofuran  (13%)  yield  in  o-xylene  oxidation  is
higher  than  that  of  2-methylbenzaldehyde  (9%)  [523]  that  is  formed
from the same Q ̇OOH radical. As illustrated in Fig. 36, the theoretical
study  of  Ye  et  al.  [543]  explains  how  the  classical  low-temperature
scheme  described  in  Part  1  is  also  valid  for  o-xylene.  The  peroxy
radical  formed  by  O2  addition  to  the  benzylic  radical  site  abstracts  a
H-atom from the ortho-methyl chain, which facilitates the isomerization
RO

 ̇
O ⇌ Q ̇OOH.
The  alkyl  chain  bridging  is  also  observed  for  o-ethyltoluene,  for
which  a  THF  (1-methyl-1,3-dihydro-2-benzofuran)  and  a  THP  (3,4-
dihydro-1H-2-benzopyran) derivative can be produced. 2-methylpheny-
loxirane  was  also  observed  in  o-ethyltoluene  oxidation  experiments.
With  a  YCE  of  about  15%,  1-methyl-1,3-dihydro-2-benzofuran,  which
originates from the benzylic radical, is more abundant than 3,4-dihydro-
1H-2-benzopyran, which is produced from the less stable 2-phenylethyl
radical [523].

4.2.3. Cyclic ethers from olefins and dienes

The need for a thorough understanding of alkene low-temperature
oxidation  arises  from  the  fact  that  these  unsaturated  compounds  are
the  most  abundant  products  of  alkane  oxidation.  The  combustion
chemistry of alkenes and alkadienes is synthesized and discussed in a
recent review paper of Zhou et al. [544]. While all reactions classes are
discussed in [544], we focus in the present review on the formation of
CEs. As is shown in Fig. 37 for the case of 1-hexene, the number of re-
action pathways leading to CEs starting from alkenes is larger than from
alkanes. Alkenyl radicals obtained from H-abstractions from the fuel can
lead  to  unsaturated  CEs  by  the  same  reaction  series  as  described  for
 ̇
alkanes, an addition to oxygen followed by an isomerization and an
OH
radical elimination. However, resonance stabilization in allylic alkenyl
radicals, which is the most likely formed type of radicals, leads to a low
 ̇
stability of the RO
O radicals. Furthermore, the barriers for isomerization
reactions across a double bond are higher than for corresponding C-H
bonds in alkanes. For these reasons, alkene oxidation is slower than the

Fig.  32. Example  of  CE  mole  fraction  predictions  in  alkane  oxidation  using
recent models: (a) n-pentane in a JSR in Nancy along with fuel mole fraction (1:
propyloxirane, 2: 2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane, 3: 2-ethyloxetane, 4: cis+trans 2,4-
dimethyloxetane,  5:  2-MTHF,  6:  THP)  (see  Table  8,  φ = 0.5)  vs.  predictions
with  the  Galway  model  (both,  the  model  used  for  the  simulations  and  the
experimental data were taken from [429]), (b) iso-octane (in presence of ani-
sole) in the Lille RCM (see Table 8) vs. predictions by a model developed based
on that of Livermore - reproduced from Ref. [459] with permission of Elsevier.

during  their  JSR  study  of  n-butylcyclohexane  oxidation.  These  corre-
spond  to  cyclic  ethers,  ketones  and  aldehydes  with  the  same  carbon
number as the reactant. However, contrary to the previously described
ethylcyclohexane work, these important products could not be identi-
fied accurately due to too crowded chromatograms.

4.2.2. Cyclic ethers from alkylbenzenes

The reactions involved in CE formation from alkylbenzenes are very
similar to those playing a role in alkane oxidation: H-abstraction from
 ̇
the fuel, first addition of alkyl radical to oxygen, isomerization and
OH
radical elimination. Contrary to cycloalkanes, the phenyl ring itself is
unreactive  at  low  temperatures  but  affects  the  reactivity  of  the  alkyl
chain by induced resonance stabilization. As is shown in Table 12, CEs
were observed in n-butylbenzene and C8-C9 di-alkylbenzene oxidation,
by  the  research  groups in  Lille  and  in  Nancy. CE  formation was  only
reported for those alkylbenzenes that displayed a marked NTC behavior.
Traces of THF derivatives across the alkyl chain were reported during a
JSR study of n-hexylbenzene oxidation performed by the Nancy group
[539,540].

4.2.2.1. n-Butylbenzene. As  is  shown  in  Table  12,  the  first  authors  to
mention CE formation from n-butylbenzene oxidation were Ribaucour
et al. [524] in 2000 using the RCM of the group of Minetti in Lille. In

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101952

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 12
Studies of the oxidation of cyclic alkanes and alkylbenzenes, in which CE isomers have been quantified.

Fuel

T (K)

Cyclohexane

RCMc

600-900

JSR

JSR

JSR

500-
1100
500-840

500-
1100

500-
1100

Methyl

cyclohexane

Ethyl

cyclohexane

P (bar)/
diluent

7-14
/N2-Ar-CO2
1.07/
He
1.04/
Ar

1.07/
He

1.07/
He

τ(s)

◦
X

fuel (%)

0-
0.05
2.0

2.31

0.67

φ

1

0.5, 1, 2

Quantified CE isomersa,b

1,2-epoxycyclohexane, 1,3-epoxycyclohexane, 1,4-
epoxycyclohexane
1,2-epoxycyclohexane, 1,4-epoxycyclohexane

4.0

1

0.25

1,2-epoxycyclohexane, 1,4-epoxycyclohexane

2.0

0.57

0.25, 1, 2

1-oxaspiro[2,5]octane, 1-methyl-7-oxabicyclo [4.1.0]heptane,
1-methyl-7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptane

2.0

0.5

0.25, 1, 2

n-Propyl

cyclohexane

RCMc

620-930

4.5-13.4
/N2-Ar-CO2

0-
0.03

0.46, 0.62,
0.77

0.3, 0.4,
0.5

o-Xylene

RCMc

704

RCMc

694

15.6/N2-Ar-
CO2

15.3/N2-Ar-
CO2

0.35

2.51

0.37

2.20

o-Ethyl

toluene

n-Butyl

benzene

RCM

640-840

15.4
/N2-Ar-CO2

0-
0.05

1.55

JSR

550-
1100

1.07/
He

2.0

0.4

0.25, 1, 2

1

1

1

2-methyl-1-oxaspiro[2.5]octane, 1-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]
heptane,
1-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptane, octahydro-1-
benzofuran

2-cyclohexyl-3-methyloxirane, 2-ethyl-1-oxaspiro[2.5]octane,
8-ethyl-7-oxabicyclo[4.2.0]octane, 2-methyl-1-oxaspiro[3.5]
nonane,
1-propyl-7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]heptane,
7-ethyl-6-oxabicyclo[3.2.1]octane,
2-methyloctahydro-1-benzofuran

1,3-dihydro-2-benzofuran

2-methylphenyloxirane, 1-methyl-1,3-dihydro-2-
benzofuran,
3,4-dihydro-1H-2-benzopyran

2-benzyl-3-methyloxirane, 2-ethyl-3-phenyloxirane,
2-methyl-4-phenyloxetane, 2-benzyloxetane,
2-phenylTHF
2-phenylTHF

Year &
Ref.

2001
[521]
2013
[418]
2021
[522]

2019
[424]

2012
[417]

2010
[26]

2000
[523]

2000
[523]

2000
[523,524]

2012
[525]

a only CEs with the same number of carbon atoms as the reactant are listed
b oxetane derivatives are in italics and THF ones in bold (others are oxirane or THP derivatives)
c T and P in all RCM studies are those after compression.

Fig. 33. Oxidation of cyclohexane (see conditions in Table 12): (a) RCM selectivity of the CEs measured by Lemaire et al. [521] (symbols) and kinetic modelling by
Buda et al. [516] assuming that 1,3-epoxycyclohexane is decomposed to hex-5-enal; (b) JSR experimental (symbols) and predicted (lines) mole fractions by Zou et al.
(reproduced from Ref. [522] with permission of Elsevier).

oxidation of the corresponding alkane.

As also shown in Fig. 37, radical additions to the fuel double bond are

important CE sources:

• as proposed by the teams of Walker in Hull [545] and Stark in York
[546,547], the single-step epoxidation of alkenes by peroxy radicals,
 ̇
O  radicals,  which  starts  with  radical  addition  to  the
especially  HO

double bond followed by cyclization forming the CE formation and
hydroxyl radicals as bimolecular products.

• H-addition and CH3 radical addition reactions (less often considered
in modelling, since no Cn+1 products are usually detected) provide a
source of alkyl radicals, which lead to CE formation by the series of
reactions previously described for alkyl radicals.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101953

L.-S. Tran et al.

•  ̇

OH radical addition to the alkene double bond produces a hydrox-
 ̇
yalkyl radical, which adds to oxygen and after isomerization and
OH
radical elimination yields a CE bearing an alcohol function.

As is shown in Table 13, quantitative CE data were obtained during
the oxidation of linear C5+ alkenes, but also for a linear C6  diene, 1,5-
hexadiene,  as  well  as  for  two  cyclic  unsaturated  C6  molecules,  cyclo-
hexene and cyclo-1,3-hexadiene. CE quantifications are only available
from RCM experiments in Lille and JSR studies in Nancy. Fig. 37 pre-
sents  all  CEs  identified  using  GC-MS  by  Meng  et  al.  [548]  during
1-hexene JSR, as listed in Table 13.

Except for the special case of the oxidation of cyclo-1,3-hexadiene
(see further discussion), the behavior of the unsaturated hydrocarbons
in Table 13 can be divided into those showing no NTC behavior (CEs
 ̇
(oxirane derivatives) are only produced through HO
O radical epoxida-
tion)  and  those  displaying  NTC  behavior.  The  oxidation  of  the  latter
group  of  molecules  produces  CEs  through  O2  addition  pathways.
Amongst the molecules in Table 13, which produce CEs only through
 ̇
HO
O  radical  addition  to  the  double  bond,  are  propene,  2-methyl-2-
butene,  1,5-hexadiene  and  cyclo-1,3-hexadiene.  The  first  three  mole-
cules were studied in a JSR close to atmospheric pressure [549–551] and
only oxirane derivatives were quantified as CE. The peak YCE  of meth-
yloxirane (0.2 ± 0.01%) formed in propene oxidation was observed at
925 K (φ = 1), that of 2,3,3-trimethyloxirane (2.7 ± 0.27%) in 2-meth-
yl-2-butene  oxidation  was  recorded  at  800  K  (φ = 1),  and  that  of
but-3-enyloxirane (1.4 ± 0.14%) in 1,5-hexadiene oxidation at 785 K
(φ = 1).  These  experimental  results  were  reproduced  by  simulations
using kinetic models developed by the same authors with good agree-
ments for propene and 1,5-hexadiene, but the CE from branched 2-meth-
yl-2-butene was overpredicted by a factor of about two. The lack of NTC
and  the  sole  production  of  oxiranic  CEs  from  these  molecules  can  be
 ̇
O  addition  being  the  only  CE  formation  process,
explained  by  HO
 ̇
O/Q ̇OOH chemistry plays no role for these molecules.
meaning that RO

During cyclo-1,3-hexadiene RCM oxidation by Lemaire et al. [521],
the  oxirane  derivative  7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]hept-2-ene  was  quantified
with a peak YCE  of 1%, but also, despite the lack of NTC behavior, a
dihydrofuran derivative, 7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]hept-2-ene with a peak YCE
 ̇
of 2.7%. Both CEs may be assumed to be formed by addition of an HO
O
radical to the end of one of the double bonds forming a resonantly sta-
bilized Q ̇OOH intermediate [521], as summarized in Fig. 38. The elec-
tron delocalization in the Q ̇OOH radical intermediate allows it produce
either the oxirane or the THF derivative. The THF derivative is formed
with the highest yield (maximum YCE above 2.7%). Cyclo-1,3-hexadiene
RCM  oxidation  has  been  modeled  by  Sch ̈onborn  et  al.  [217]  using  a
manually  constructed  mechanism  based  on  the  rules  of  the  EXGAS
generation algorithm [194]. This model reproduced the results obtained
by  Lemaire  et  al.  [521]  for  7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]hept-2-ene  well  but
postulated 7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]hept-2-ene to further decompose in furan
and ethylene. Sch ̈onborn et al. [217] assumed this second CE observed
by Lemaire et al. [521] to rather be the sum of co-eluted 6-oxabicyclo
[3.1.1]hept-2-ene  (an  oxetane  derivative  obtained  from  the  reaction
series  starting  by  H-addition  to  the  double  bond  and  involving  O2
addition) and hexa-3,5-dienal, obtained by pericyclic decomposition of
this oxetane derivative. Note that the absence of NTC behavior would
make an O2 addition reaction sequence quite unlikely.

Among the molecules of Table 13,1-pentene [411], 1-hexene [548],
1-octene [421], and cyclohexene [521] display NTC behavior in their
oxidation and produce CEs also from pathways starting by O2 addition.
1-Pentene is the smallest alkene, for which NTC behavior has been re-
ported.  The  RCM  results  of  Ribaucour  et  al.  [411]  indicate  that  cool
flames are visible only between 700 and 800 K and that the not very
intense  NTC  zone  is  restricted  to  the  narrow  temperature  region
760–800 K. The CEs found in 1-pentene oxidation are the same as those
reported in n-pentane oxidation, with propyloxirane, the CE obtained
 ̇
O  radical  epoxidation  of  1-pentene  being  observed  in  the
from  HO
clearly highest amount (maximum YCE of 2.7%). Other CEs are derived

Fig. 34. Experimental (symbols) and predicted (lines) mole fractions during C7-C8 alkylcyclohexane oxidation in a JSR (see conditions in Table 12): (a) reactant and
initial oxidation products in methylcyclohexane [424]; (b) all CEs quantified in ethylcyclohexane oxidation [417] ((●) φ = 0.25; (+) φ = 1; (□) φ = 2); (c) com-
parison  between  simulations  by  [537]  and  experimental  results  of  [417]  for  ethylcyclohexane  oxidation.  When  several  molecules  are  shown  in  a  figure,  the
experimental  profile  represents  the  summed  mole  fractions  of  the  displayed  molecules,  while  the  simulated  profile  is  the  sum  of  all  the  isomers  with  similar
structures. Reproduced from Ref. [424] with permission of Elsevier, from Ref. [417] with the permission of ACS, and from the supplementary material of [537].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101954

L.-S. Tran et al.

from the pentyl radicals that are formed through H-atom addition to the
double bond. The model proposed by [411] predicts these experimental
results reasonably well.

Measurements of IDTs during cyclohexene RCM oxidation indicate a
narrow NTC range limited to 20 K. The presence of three CEs were re-
ported,  1,2-epoxycyclohexane,  a  CE  also  produced  from  cyclohexane,
which is the CE with the highest yield (maximum YCE of 0.6%), and the
two CEs also formed in cyclo-1,3-hexadiene oxidation, which are 7-oxa-
bicyclo[4.1.0]hept-2-ene  and  7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]hept-2-ene.  The  CE
results were modeled by Ribaucour et al. [552], who showed that the
 ̇
most abundantly produced 1,2-epoxycyclohexane was formed via HO
O
radical addition to the fuel molecule, while both unsaturated bicyclic
ethers were formed by reaction series involving the abstraction of the
 ̇
allylic  H-atom,  followed  by  O2  addition,  isomerization,  and
OH
elimination.

corresponding

1-Hexene  and  1-octene  display  significant  reactivity  during  low-
temperature  oxidation  in  a  JSR  [421,548],  with  maximum  observed
fuel conversions below 800 K of 40% and 50% (φ = 0.5 at conditions
given  in  Table  13),  respectively.  For  1-hexene,  all  CEs  displayed  in
Fig. 39a were quantified. For 1-octene, quantitative data were only re-
ported  for hexyloxirane  and  for 2-propyl-5-hydroxymethylTHF.  Other
cyclic  ethers  were  also  detected  but  could  not  be  quantified  due  to
co-elution and relatively small concentrations [421]. Fig. 39a shows the
chromatogram
trans-2--
propyl-5-hydroxymethylTHF,  together  with  not  quantified  CEs  with
similar retention times. Fig. 39b displays the temperature dependence of
XCE  for  the  alkyloxiranes  and  hydroxyTHF  derivatives  obtained  from
1-hexene and 1-octene. Detailed kinetic models, in which the kinetics of
the most important reactions was updated based on theoretical calcu-
lations  (e.g.  [553–555]),  were  proposed  for  both  fuels  by  [421,548].
However, while an overall acceptable agreement between experiments
and  simulations  was  obtained  for  the  main  products  produced  in  the
oxidation of both fuels, and for propyloxirane and 5-methyl-5-hydroxy-
methylTHF in 1-hexene oxidation, CE predictions for 1-octene oxidation
deviated substantially.

and

cis-

to

The group of Qi in Hefei studied the oxidation of 1-heptene in a JSR
coupled to a SVUV-PIMS detector [556]. They reported the detection of
C7 hydroxyCEs and unsaturated oxirane and THF derivatives. However,
SVUV-PIMS  does  not  allow  to  distinguish  between  hydroxyCEs  and
alkenylhydroperoxides  of  the  same  size,  as  was  previously  noted  by
Battin-Leclerc et al. [420] during their investigation of the JSR oxidation
of 1-hexene also using the SVUV-PIMS setup in Hefei.

Unlike the situation for alkanes, comprehensive systematic studies of
CE formation in alkene oxidation are not known. As shown in Fig. 37 and
as pointed out by Battin-Leclerc et al. [420], three reaction types lead to

Fig. 35. YCE during n-propylcyclohexane RCM two-stage ignition (T and P after
compression were 669 K and 7 bar, respectively, φ = 0.5 (see Table 12)). The
cool flame and ignition regions are indicated as grey zones. Experimental re-
sults were connected by a line to guide the eye. Reproduced from Ref. [26] with
permission of Elsevier.

forms

 ̇
OH. In a  related reaction sequence,  HO

 ̇
CE  formation:  (1)  HO
O  radical  addition  to  the  double  bond  forming
Q ̇OOH, which ring-closes to the corresponding oxirane derivative while
 ̇
OH radical. (2) Alkenyl radical addition to O2  forming a
releasing an
 ̇
O radical, which isomerizes to Q ̇OOH and subsequently produces CE
RO
 ̇
and
O addition  to the alkenyl
radical
the  corresponding  hydroperoxide,  which  upon
H-abstraction  could  form  the  Q ̇OOH  radical.  (3)  Radical  (or  atom)
addition  to  the  double  bond  leading  to  a  (substituted)  alkyl  radical,
which  proceeds  through  the  O2  addition  pathway  to  CE.  Despite  the
larger number of pathways to CE, the low-temperature oxidation reac-
tivity of alkenes is lower than that of alkanes. Since the reaction types
(2) and (3) are not specific to CE formation from alkenes, they will not
be discussed in detail except for pointing out that the most stable radi-
cals formed from alkenes are the resonantly stabilized allylic radicals,
 ̇
which form only weakly bound RO
O radicals and thus subsequent re-
actions  are  hindered  by  barriers  higher  than  the  energy  needed  for
redissociation  [557,558].  This  is  one  reason  for  the  low  reactivity  of
alkenes. Radical addition to the double bond has been discussed, e.g., by
Burke [549] in propene oxidation, however, their rate analysis suggests
 ̇
that HO
O addition to the double bond is the only important CE forma-
tion pathway.

Concerning reaction type (1), Villano et al. [488] used the CBS-QB3
 ̇
O addition to double bonds,
level of theory to develop rate rules for HO
 ̇
which either produces Q ̇OOH or, as a concerted reaction, RO
O radicals.
YCE thus depends on the competition between these channels, although
Villano et al. show that the concerted addition only plays a role for al-
 ̇
O
kenes  with  a  terminal  double  bond.  The  activation  energies  for  HO
addition to double bonds follow an Evans-Polanyi relationship with a
steep slope of > 0.9. This indicates a late TS, meaning that the stability of
the  formed  products  determines  largely  the  reaction  barrier.  A  com-
parison to individual rate coefficients calculated in other studies [107,
142,494]  shows  significant  uncertainty  in  the  rate  expressions  for
Q ̇OOH  formation,  while  those  for  the  competing  concerted  addition
agree well. The CBS-QB3 rate coefficients of Villano et al. are found to be
generally  faster  than  the  experimental  rate  coefficients  measured  by
Baldwin et al. [559], even though they agree within the error limits. This
calls for calculations at higher levels of theory to validate or improve the
rate  expressions  for  epoxidation.  Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that
pressure-dependence is important for this reaction class [107,142,488,
 ̇
494,560], because the quick release of an
OH radical by the chemically
activated  adduct  forming  a  CE  competes  with  collision  stabilization
(however only at very high pressures), and with redissociation at low
pressures as shown for 1-butene in Fig. 8 in the paper of Villano et al.
[488].

4.3. Formation of cyclic ethers during the low-temperature oxidation of
oxygenated molecules

In addition to hydrocarbons, CEs were also quantified in the oxida-
tion  of  methyl  esters,  ethers,  alcohols  and  aldehydes.  This  will  be
described in the following paragraphs. Tables 14 and 15 list the studies
published since 1994 in which CE yields have been quantified. For all
oxygenated compounds listed in Tables 14 and 15, CE quantifications
were obtained in JSR experiments in Nancy using GC detection, except
for  2-methyl-1-butanol,  diethyl  and  di-n-propyl  ethers,  which  were
studied in Orl ́eans using the same method.

4.3.1. Methyl esters

Since methyl esters are considered suitable surrogates for biodiesel,
their low-temperature oxidation has been thoroughly investigated in the
last  two  decades  [561].  However,  only  few  studies  address  the
low-temperature oxidation of methyl esters with a size comparable to
those present in actual fuels (from 16 carbon atoms [47]). As is shown in
Table  14,  CEs  were  quantified  in  the  oxidation  of  saturated  (methyl
decanoate and methyl palmitate, YCE of ~7 ± 0.7% for both fuels under
stoichiometric  conditions)  and  unsaturated  (methyl-10-undecenoate

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101955

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 36. Relative energies of major reaction pathways on PES of o-xylyl + O2 at 0 K in kcal/mol (the initial bimolecular reactants are set to energy zero) – reproduced
from Ye et al. [543] with permission of Elsevier.

and  methyl  oleate,  YCE  of ~0.7 ± 0.07%  and ~0.6 ± 0.06%, respec-
tively, under stoichiometric conditions) methyl esters. These four esters
display  considerable  low-temperature  oxidation  reactivity  including
NTC behavior. In the studies listed in Table 14, no species indicating the
occurrence of H- or OH- or HOO-additions on the C=O bond was found.
The  data  obtained  for  the  total  CE  yield  from  methyl  decanoate  was
satisfactorily reproduced using kinetic models developed either by the
Nancy  group  [15]  or  by  the  Livermore  group  [562].  These  detailed

kinetic models indicate that the measured THF derivatives are formed in
very similar ways as alkanes (see Part 4.1.3). This being said, it is sur-
prising  that  no  quantitative  CE  data  have  been  reported  in  oxidation
studies  of  middle  sized  methyl  esters  below  800  K,  e.g.,  methyl  hex-
anoate oxidation in a FR [563] or methyl octanoate oxidation by Togb ́e
et al. [564] and methyl heptanoate oxidation by Dayma et al. [565] in a
JSR. No CE measurement can be found in this last paper, but it is noted
that  their  simulation  predicted  67%  of  the  fuel  to  be  consumed  by

Fig. 37. CE formation pathways from 1-hexene (according to [420]). Only reactions leading to CEs are displayed.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101956

L.-S. Tran et al.

were quantified during the oxidation of the three linear C4-C6 aldehydes.
During  their  JSR  low-temperature  oxidation,  these  three  compounds
display a higher reactivity than the corresponding alkanes with the same
number of carbon atoms. The oxidation of all three aldehydes exhibits
strong NTC behavior [293,569]. The CEs detected contain one carbon
atom less  than the aldehyde. As  illustrated in Fig. 41a, these CEs are
formed from the alkyl radical obtained after abstraction of the aldehydic
H-atom followed by CO loss. The activation energy in the rate expres-
sions for H-abstraction of the aldehydic H-atom is estimated to be 4.5
kcal/mol lower than that for the analogous H-abstraction reaction from
a primary H-atom of alkanes [574]. In the case of n-hexanal, lactones
(see mole fractions in Fig. 41b) can also be produced by O2 addition to
the radicals yielded by abstraction of a non-aldehydic H-atom. In the
case of n-pentanal, 2,3-DHF and furan, obtained by dehydrogenation of
the THF product were also detected, however in yields below 1% [575].
The peak YCE was observed at 800 K for n-butanal (methyloxirane, 0.5 ±
0.05%, φ = 0.5), 725 K for n-pentanal with THF being the major CE (4.5
± 0.45%, φ = 0.5), and at 700 K for n-hexanal with 2-MTHF being the
major  CE  (5.7  ± 0.9%,  φ = 0.5)  followed  by  5-ethyl-dihydrofuranone
with  about  half  the  yield  of  2-MTHF.  CE  formation  is  favored  under
stoichiometric and lean mixtures.

Together with their experimental study, Rodriguez et al. [293] pro-
posed a detailed kinetic model for n-hexanal oxidation mainly generated
by the EXGAS generation algorithm [194], considering a virtual blend of

pathways yielding CEs. In their recent study of ozone-initiated oxidation
of methyl hexanoate in a JSR with SVUV-PIMS, Rousso et al. [566] re-
ported at temperatures starting from 450 K a signal at m/z value that
corresponds  to  CEs.  This  signal  was  not  observed  in  the  absence  of
ozone. However, this signal might also be due to carbonyl products, the
formation of which might be favored at these low temperatures through
disproportionation of RO

 ̇
O radicals.

In  their  recent  JSR  study  of  methyl  heptanoate  oxidation  using
SVUV-PIMS,  Zhai  et  al.  [567]  did  not  mention  any  MS  signal  at  m/z
corresponding to CEs, but only reported the mole fractions of unsatu-
rated  C4-C6  methyl  esters  pointing  out  that  they  derived  from  CE
decomposition.

Molecules including both THF and ester groups were quantified by
the Nancy group [15] during the JSR oxidation of methyl decanoate. The
temperature  dependence  of  their  mole  fraction  was  predicted  with
acceptable accuracy by their model, which included a rather detailed
sub-mechanism of ester group substituted CE consumption reactions via
H-abstractions with taking into account the ester function location (inside
and outside the CE ring).

While there is not yet any modeling study to support this assumption,
CE formation chemistry in the oxidation of unsaturated methyl esters
appears experimentally to be similar to that proposed for alkenes (see
 ̇
Part  4.2.3),  meaning  that  oxirane  formation  starts  with  HO
O  radical
addition to the double bond in the fuel and subsequent cyclization and
 ̇
OH  radical  release.  This  proposed  mechanism  is  supported  by  the
presence of methyl 9-(oxiran-2-yl)nonanoate and methyl 8-(3-octylox-
iran-2-yl)octanoate in the JSR oxidation of methyl-10-undecenoate and
methyl  oleate,  respectively.  In  methyl-10-undecenoate  oxidation,  the
formation of methyl 7-[4-(hydroxymethyl)oxetan-2-yl]heptanoate and
methyl  6-[5-(hydroxymethyl)THF-2-yl]hexanoate  was  assumed  by
 ̇
Meng et al. [568] to be initiated by
OH addition to the double bond. The
formation  of  methyl  6-(5-methylTHF-2-yl)hexanoate  starts  with  H
addition,  and  the  formation  of  methyl  2-[5-but-3-en-1-yl-THF-2-yl]
propanoate  is initiated by an H-abstraction reaction. These formation
pathways are summarized in Fig. 40.

4.3.2. Aldehydes

Aldehydes  are  not  part  of  automotive  fuels,  but  they  are  notable
products of alkane and alkene oxidation. As is shown in Table 14, CEs

Fig. 38. Possible formation pathways of CEs from cyclo-1,3-hexadiene oxida-
tion based on the study of [521].

Table 13
Studies of the oxidation of linear and cyclic alkenes and dienes, in which CE isomers have been quantified.

Fuel

Propene

JSR

T (K)

800-
1000

1-Pentene

RCMc

733

2-Methyl-2-butene

JSR

1-Hexene

JSR

1-Octene

JSR

1,5-Hexadiene

JSR

600-
1150

500-
1100

500-
1100

500-
1100

P (bar)/
diluent

τ (s)

◦
X
fuel
(%)

1.07/He

2.0

1.1, 1.65

Quantified CE isomersa,b

0.64, 1.68,
2.19

methyloxirane

6.9/N2-Ar-
CO2

-

2.56

1.067/He

1.5

1

1

1

2-propyloxirane, 2-ethyl-3-methyloxirane,
2-ethyloxetane, 2,4-dimethyloxetane, 2-MTHF

2,2,3-trimethyloxirane

1.067/He

2.0

0.95

0.5, 1, 2

butyloxirane, 2,3-diethyloxirane, 2,5-dimethylTHF,
2-methyl-5-hydroxymethylTHF, 2,5-dimethyl-2,5-
dihydrofurand

1.067/He

2.0

0.5

0.25, 0.5, 1, 2

hexyloxirane,
2-propyl-5-hydroxymethylTHFd

1.067/He

2.0

0.8

1, 2

but-3-enyloxirane

Cyclohexene

RCMc

600-900

Cyclo-1,3-

hexadiene

RCMc

600-900

7-14
/N2-Ar-CO2

7-14
/N2-Ar-CO2

0-
0.05

0-
0.05

2.44

2.59

1

1

a only CEs with the same number of carbon atoms as the reactant are listed
b oxirane derivatives are in italics and THF ones in bold
c T and P in all RCM studies are those after compression
d cis and trans.

1,2-epoxycyclohexane, 7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]hept-2-ene,
7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]hept-2-ene

7-oxabicyclo[4.1.0]hept-2-ene,
7-oxabicyclo[2.2.1]hept-2-ene

Year &
Ref.

2014
[549]

1998
[411]

2015
[550]

2017
[548]

2017
[421]

2017
[551]

2001
[521]

2001
[521]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101957

L.-S. Tran et al.

n-hexanal  and  n-pentane  to  better  account  for  the  chemistry  of  the
n-pentyl radical, and predicting well the formation of the three observed
CE  isomers.  Based  on  their  experience  with  smaller  aldehydes  [574],
Pelucchi et al. [569] proposed kinetic models for the JSR oxidation of
the three linear aldehydes based on the lumping approach developed in
Milano [576]. Overall reasonable predictions of the CEs of the same type
as  from  alkanes  were  obtained  for  the  three  fuels,  as  well  as  for  the
lactone  yields  in  n-hexanal  oxidation,  as  is  shown  in  Fig.  41b,  which
presents the comparison experiments/simulations for the total sum of
lactones using the lumped model.

4.3.3. Saturated and unsaturated alcohols

The  interest  in  studying  the  low-temperature  oxidation  of  large
saturated alcohols lies in the fact that they are amongst the newly pro-
posed biofuels with LHVs higher than ethanol [14]. No low-temperature
reactivity was observed during the JSR oxidation of the n-alcohols listed
in Table 15 [573] at 1 bar, even though about 40% maximum conversion
was obtained during that of n-hexanol at 10 bar in Orl ́eans (T = 650 K,
φ = 0.5,  t = 0.7  s,  0.1%  initial  fuel)  [577].  Except  for  oxirane  and
methyloxirane,  which  originated  from  the  abundantly  produced
ethylene and propene, respectively, and which were observed during the
JSR oxidation of the three listed n-alcohols by Pelucchi et al. [572], only
low amounts of CE formation were reported in the literature on alcohol
oxidation. Specifically, no fuel-specific CE (containing fuel’s OH group)
were  experimentally  quantified  even  though  CE  pathways  with  low
energy barriers exist. Hydroxy CEs (e.g. 2-hydroxy-3-ethyloxirane), the
formation  of  which  was  postulated  by  Welz  et  al.  [578]  during  their
study of n-butanol oxidation, could not be detected in a JSR experiment
[572]. Due to possibly important fragmentation of hydroxyCEs, only a
weak  signal  was  recorded  at  m/z  88  (C4H8O2)  during  the  chlorine
atom-initiated reaction investigated in FRs using SVUV-PIMS by [578].
In  recent  modeling  studies,  some  fuel-specific  CEs  were  predicted  to
(cid:0) 4) during
form in non-negligible mole fractions (up to a magnitude of 10
the  oxidation  of  n-butanol  or  n-pentanol  [572,579].  Rotavera  and
Taatjes  [16,579]  recently  demonstrated  a  profound  influence  of  the
branching ratio of H-abstractions from n-butanol by OH on the forma-
tion  of  2-hydroxytetrahydrofuran.  However,  this  CE  has  not  been
experimentally detected from n-butanol oxidation. Further experiments
on alcohol oxidation are needed to resolve this question [16,579].

Amongst the CEs formed from n-alcohols listed in Table 15, THF was

experimentally quantified in n-butanol oxidation and 5-ethyl-dihydro-
furanone in n-hexanol oxidation. Since alcohol oxidation produces the
corresponding aldehydes as major products, it is possible that the two
observed CEs are actually products of these aldehydes and not of the
alcohols.  This  interpretation  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  kinetic
model for alcohol oxidation of Milano [572] did not predict these CEs
but  otherwise  performed  well  in  simulating  most  other  oxidation
products including oxirane and methyl oxirane. No CE formation was
reported  in  the  oxidation  of  n-hexanol  in  a  JSR  at  10  bar  studied  at
Orl ́eans  [577].  Even  for  n-octanol  oxidation,  which  exhibits  strong
low-temperature reactivity and notable NTC behavior, no CE formation
was reported either in ST (20 bar, with similar ignition performance as
n-octane) nor in JSR (10 bar with a start of reactivity at 550 K) experi-
ments. Instead, high amounts of C2-C7 aldehydes [580] were formed.

Looking  at  branched  saturated  alcohols,  2,3-dimethyloxirane  was
quantified as the sole CE in the JSR study of the oxidation of 2-methyl-1-
butanol in Orl ́eans [581]. No NTC behavior was reported for this fuel
 ̇
O  epoxidation  of
and  CE  formation  was  assumed  to  be  caused  by  HO
2-methyl-1-butene,  a  product  obtained  in  large  quantities  under  the
conditions of that study. The model proposed by [581] underestimates
the formation of 2-methyl-1-butene by a factor of about two.

Concerning unsaturated alcohols, 3-methylfuran (peak YCE  of 1.4%
at  850  K,  φ = 1)  was  quantified  in  the  JSR  oxidation  of  3-methyl-2-
buten-1-ol  (commonly  named  prenol)  above  800  K  by  De  Bruycker
et  al. [573]. A small NTC  zone was observed for this fuel  under lean
conditions.  This  unsaturated  CE,  the  formation  of  which  is  well  pre-
dicted by the model developed by [573], is formed through 3-methyl-2--
butenal, a major product of prenol oxidation, by abstraction of a primary
H-atom  followed  by  cyclization.  During  the  study  of  the  chlorine
atom-initiated low-temperature oxidation of prenol in a FR (550 K, 8
Torr) using SVUV-PIMS, Welz et al. [582] recorded a strong signal at m/z
82 (C5H6O) and tentatively assigned it as 3-methylfuran. The slow rise of
the  3-methylfuran  signal  suggests  that  it  was  formed  as  a  secondary
product.

4.3.4. Linear, branched and cyclic ethers

As reviewed by Cai et al. [583], acyclic ethers have recently attracted
considerable attention as potential diesel fuel substitutes or additives in
CI engines. Table 15 shows that CE isomers were quantified in the JSR
oxidation of C4, C6,  C8  linear symmetrical mono-oxygenated ethers, as

Fig.  39. CEs  in  C6-C8  alkene  JSR  oxidation:  (a)  chromatogram  of  the  CEs  from  1-octene  with  retention  times  close  to  that  of  2-propyl-5-hydroxymethylTHF
(reproduced  from  [421]  –  with  the  permission  of  Elsevier);  (b)  experimental  and  simulated  temperature  dependence  of  the  mole  fractions  of  the  alkyloxirane
and hydroxy cyclic ether of the same size as the fuel under conditions given in Table 13 (drawn from the data of [421,548]). In (b), top panel: 1-hexene oxidation,
bottom panel: 1-octene oxidation.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101958

L.-S. Tran et al.

well  as  of  dimethoxymethane,  a  di-oxygenated  ether.  The
low-temperature  oxidation  of  mono-oxygenated  ethers  is  remarkable
because the reactivity starts at temperatures as low as 450 K and displays
under some conditions a double NTC region [22,433,584]. Some of the
observed  CEs  contain  two  ring  oxygens,  e.g.  dioxetane  derivatives,
dioxolane derivatives or dioxane derivatives.

The low-temperature oxidation of diethyl ether was studied as a neat
compound at 1 bar [22,570], 5 bar [453] and 10 bar [570], and in a
mixture  with  n-pentane  between  2.5  and  10  bar.  Only  2-methyl-1,
3-dioxolane  was  reported  as  CE  product.  Fig.  42a  shows  that
2-methyl-1,3-dioxolane is formed at lower temperature (about 100 K)
than 2-MTHF. This coincides with the fact that diethyl ether oxidation
occurs at lower temperature than n-pentane oxidation. Above 600 K, the
 ̇QOOH  radical  to  CE  competes  with  the  formation  of
conversion  of
carbonyl compounds. Note that the latter are not only formed through
the typical [RR’  ̇COOH] → RR’C=O +  ̇
OH decomposition mechanism but
 ̇COR moiety (→  C=O+  ̇R). The high
also through fast β-scission of the
tendency of carbonyl compound production leads to lower CE yields. In
diethyl ether oxidation (for 2-methyl-1,3-dioxolane, the peak YCE is 1.5

± 0.2%)  the  maximum  CE  yield  is  clearly  lower  than  in  n-pentane
oxidation (peak Y2-MTHF is 2.7 ± 0.4%).

Serinyel et al. [586] in Orl ́eans were the first to study di-n-propyl ether
oxidation in a JSR over a temperature range from 450 to 1250 K and

pressures  of  1  and  10  bar,  with  an  initial  fuel  mole  fraction  of  0.1%
(φ = 0.5,  1,  2  and  4)  and  constant  residence  times  (70  and  700  ms,
respectively).  While  they  observed  very  strong  low-temperature  reac-
tivity even below 500 K coupled with strong NTC behavior, CEs were
only detectable in trace amounts. A subsequent study by the same group
[571]
focused  more  on  hydroperoxide  characterization  using
high-resolution  MS  (orbitrap)  or  liquid  chromatography  coupling.
Nevertheless Belhadj et al. [571] also quantified CEs in GC spectra and
report  a maximum YCE  of 0.4 ± 0.06% for 2-(propoxymethyl)oxirane
and of ~6 ± 0.9% for 2-ethyl-4-methyl-1,3-dioxolane. For comparison,
the  maximum  YCE  of  2-ethyl-5-methylTHF  obtained  from  n-heptane
under similar conditions was ~7.5 ± 0.8% [295]. Belhadj et al. [571]
also observed a signal at m/z 116 in their mass spectra, which is thought
to arise from a CE with the same number of carbon atoms as the fuel. No
comparisons  between  experimental  data  and  model  predictions  were
presented for the detected CE mole fractions. Finally, Fan et al. [587]
investigated  di-n-propyl  ether  oxidation  in  a  JSR  at  near-atmospheric
pressure  using  PI-MBMS  at  Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Laboratory
and also observed a signal at m/z 116 that was identified to be mainly
2-ethyl-4-methyl-1,3-dioxolane and 2-propoxyoxetane according to the
recorded PIE curves; no quantification was performed.

Four CE isomers containing 8 carbon atoms were quantified in the di-
n-butyl ether JSR oxidation study in Nancy. These are 2-THFFBE, cis and
trans  4-ethyl-2-propyl-1,3-dioxolane  (separated  but  with  MS  not

Table 14
Studies of the oxidation of saturated and unsaturated methyl esters and aldehydes, during which CE isomers have been quantified.

Fuel

T (K)

P (bar)/
diluent

Methyl

decanoate

JSR

500-
1000

1.07
/He

τ (s)

fuel

◦
X
(%)

1.5

0.21

φ

1

Methyl

palmitate +
n-decanec

JSR

550-
1100

1.07
/He

1.5

0.2d

1

Methyl-10-

undecenoate

JSR

500-
1100

1.07
/He

1.5

0.21

0.5, 1, 2

Quantified CE isomersa,b

2-methylhexanoateTHF, 2-methyl-5-methylpentanoateTHF,
2-ethyl-5-methylbutanoateTHF, 2-propyl-5-
methylpropanoateTHF,
2-butyl-5-methylethanoateTHF, 2-pentyl-5-
methylmethanoateTHF,
5-octyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-one

methyl 4-(5-methyloxolan-2-yl)undecenoate +
+ sum of (methyl-11-(5-methyloxolan-2-yl)undecanoate,
methyl-10-(5-ethyloxolan-2-yl)decanoate,
methyl-9-(5-propyloxolan-2-yl)nonanoate,
methyl-9-(5-butyloxolan-2-yl)octanoate,
methyl-9-(5-pentyloxolan-2-yl)heptanoate,
methyl-9-(5-hexyloxolan-2-yl)hexanoate,
methyl-9-(5-heptyloxolan-2-yl)pentanoate
methyl-9-(5-octyloxolan-2-yl)butanoate
methyl-9-(5-nonyloxolan-2-yl)propanoate
methyl-9-(5-decyloxolan-2-yl)acetate
methyl-9-(5-undecyloxolan-2-yl)formate
methyl-11-(oxolan-2-yl)dodecanoate
5-tetradecyl-1,3.dioxolan-4-one2-yl)formate)

methyl 9-(oxiran-2-yl)nonanoate,
methyl 7-[4-(hydroxymethyl)oxetan-2-yl]heptanoate,
methyl 2-[5-but-3-en-1-yl-THF-2-yl]propanoate,
methyl 6-(5-methylTHF-2-yl)hexanoate,
methyl 6-[5-(hydroxymethyl)THF-2-yl]hexanoate

Methyl

oleate+
n-decane

n-Butanal

n-Pentanal

n-Hexanal

JSR

500-
1100

1.07
/He

JSR

JSR

JSR

500-
1100

500-
1100

475-
1100

1.067
/He

1.067
/He

1.067
/He

1.5

0.2d

1

methyl 8-(3-octyloxiran-2-yl)octanoate

2.0

0.5

0.25, 1, 2  methyloxirane

2.0

0.5

0.25, 1, 2

THF, ethyloxirane, 2,3-dimethyloxirane

2.0

0.5

0.25, 1, 2

2-MTHF,
6-methyl-tetrahydropyranone, 5-ethyl-dihydrofuranone

Year &
Ref.

2010
[15]

2009
[415]

2017
[568]

2010
[416]

2019
[569]

2019
[569]

2017
[293]

a only CEs including a saturated alkyl chain, with the same number of carbon atoms (n) as the reactant or with n-1 atoms of carbon (in italics in the list) are listed
b hydroxy CEs in bold
c in Table 4, except methyl-9-(5-undecyloxolan-2-yl)formate, methyl-11-(oxolan-2-yl)dodecanoate and methyl 11-(5-methyloxolan-2-yl)undecanoate, C17 CEs are

shown under the lumped name “2-R-5-(MeOOCR’)THF”

d 74% n-decane/26% ester.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101959

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 15
Studies of the oxidation of linear mono- and di-oxygenated ethers and saturated and unsaturated alcohols, during which CE isomers have been quantified.

Fuel

Diethylether

JSR

T (K)

450-
1250
400-
1100
400-
1100

P (bar)/
diluent

1, 10 /N2

1.07/He

τ (s)

0.07-
0.7
2.0

fuel

◦
X
(%)

0.1

1

2.5-10b/He

2.0

0.5

φ

Quantified CE isomersa

0.5, 1, 2

2-methyl-1,3-dioxolane

1

1

2-methyl-1,3-dioxolane

2-methyl-1,3-dioxolane

Di-n-propyl ether

JSR

450-950

10/N2

0.7

0.1

0.5

2-(propoxymethyl)oxirane, 2-ethyl-4-methyl-1,3-
dioxolanec,d

Di-n-butyl ether

JSR

Dimethoxy
methane

n-Butanol

n-Pentanol

n-Hexanol

JSR

JSR

JSR

JSR

2-Methyl-1-butanol

JSR

3-Methyl-2-buten-1-

JSR

ol

435-
1100

500-
1100

500-
1100

500-
1100

500-
1100

700-
1200

500-
1100

1.07
/He

1.07
/He

1.07
/He

1.07
/He

1.07
/He

10
/N2

1.07
/He

2.0

2.0

1

1

1

oxirane, methyloxirane, 2-THFFBE,
4-ethyl-2-propyl-1,3-dioxolaned, 4-methyl-2-propyl-1,3-
dioxane

0.25, 1, 2

2-methoxy-1,3-dioxetane

2.0

0.5

0.5, 1.0, 2.0

THF

2.0

0.5

0.5, 1.0, 2.0

oxirane, methyloxirane

2.0

0.5

0.5, 1.0, 2.0

5-ethyl-dihydrofuranone

0.7

0.1

0.5, 1.0, 2.0,
4.0

2,3-dimethyloxirane

2.0

0.8

0.5, 1, 2

3-methylfuran

Year &
Ref.

2018
[570]
2019
[22]
2020
[453]

2021
[571]

2019
[422]

2018
[433]

2020
[572]

2020
[572]

2020
[572]

2016
[573]

2016
[573]

a When they are present, only the saturated CEs with the same carbon number as the fuel are listed (other CEs are in italics)
b at 5 bar: neat DEE, at other pressures: DEE blended with n-pentane (equimolar mixture)
c  only maximum mole fractions are reported
d cis and trans.

allowing  to  distinguish  them),  and  4-methyl-2-propyl-1,3-dioxane
[422]. In the same paper, the m/z 144 signal, which is assigned to the
sum of CEs, was followed by MS in a FR at Bielefeld. Comparisons be-
tween experimental results for CEs in both reactors and simulation using
the  models  developed  by  Cai  et  al.  [588]  and  by  Thion  et  al.  [584]
indicate a better performance of the model by Cai et al. [588] that was
developed to reproduce ignition and flame speed data. Thion et al. [584]
studied the di-n-butyl ether low-temperature oxidation in a JSR study at
Orl ́eans at 1 and 10 bar. They reported the formation of 2,3-DHF but did
not mention any CEs with 8 carbon atoms amongst the observed prod-
ucts.  However,  using  the  same  experimental  methodology  as  in  their
work on di-n-propyl ether [571], the group of Dagaut [296] reported a
signal at m/z 144 related to C8 CEs not only in the effluent of a JSR (560
K and 10 bar), but also in gas samples from a RCM (570 K and 7 bar).
No  CE  isomers  were  quantified  in  the  studies  of  the  oxidation  of
branched ethers. However, the temperature dependence of the signal at
m/z  116  corresponding  to  CEs  or  ketones  with  the  same  number  of
carbon atoms as the fuel was reported in the JSR study of diisopropyl
ether oxidation using SVUV-PIMS [585]. No NTC region was observed
for this fuel. From comparison between measured and calculated PIEs,
the m/z 116 signal was attributed mainly to 2-methyl-2-[(propan-2-yl)
oxy]oxirane,  2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-1,3-dioxetane,  and  2,2,4-trimethyl-1,
3-dioxolane.  Ketone  formation  was  not  considered.  The  shape  of  the
temperature dependence of the m/z signal at 116 agrees well with the
sum of the mole fractions of these three CEs predicted using a kinetic
model  developed  by  the  authors,  with  2,2,4-trimethyl-1,3-dioxolane
being the major product as is shown in Fig. 42b.

Concerning dioxygenated ethers, a low yield of 2-methoxy-1,3-diox-
etane  (peak  YCE  of  0.8  ± 0.08%  at  510  K,  φ = 0.25)  was  reported  by
Vermeire et al. [433] in the JSR oxidation of 1,2-dimethoxymethane,
which  started  to  react  around  650  K  and  displayed  weak  NTC
behavior. CE formation was simulated with a kinetic model developed
by  the  authors  based  on  theoretical  calculations.  The  reaction  path
analysis indicates the importance of the competition of the CE formation

and the CO bond breaking reactions in the consumption of the Q ̇OOH
radical. Both reactions proceed through transition states with an energy
barrier  of  125  kJ/mol  (29.9  kcal/mol).  The  oxidation  of  dimethoxy-
methane  was  also  studied  by  Marrod ́an  et  al.  [589]  in  a  FR  (at  tem-
peratures  from  373  to  1073  K  at  20,  40,  60  bar)  but  CEs  were  not
detected.

In their JSR study of 1,2-diethoxyethane oxidation at 10 bar with GC-
FID diagnostics at Orl ́eans, Sun et al. [385] reported no CE detection.
However, when using SVUV-PIMS at 1 bar at Berkeley, the signal at m/z
104.05 (C4H8O3) was assigned to 4-methoxy-1,3-dioxolane based on the
calculated IE (9.68 eV), which agreed with the measured value. Also, the
measured m/z 104 signal profile shape agrees well with the predicted
profile for 4-methoxy-1,3-dioxolane calculated using the kinetic model
developed by the authors.

Cyclic ethers as fuels are discussed in detail in Part 5. CEs as products
of cyclic ether oxidation were only quantified in THF oxidation; those
are  2,3-DHF  and  2,5-DHF,  which  were  quantified  by  GC  during  JSR
experiments in Nancy [282] and detected in RCM in Lille. The formation
of both CEs was reasonably well reproduced using the model of Fenard
 ̇
et al. [283]. They were formed through HO
O elimination from the two
possible THF-yl peroxy radicals. In their study of THF oxidation in a JSR
combined  with  high-resolution  MS  analytics,  Belhadj  et  al.  [590]
recorded signals at the m/z corresponding to 2,3-DHF and 2,5-DHF, but
also to 2-hydroperoxyTHF, to 2-hydroperoxy-3,4-DHF and to the KHP
isomers  deriving  from  THF.  THF  low-temperature  oxidation  can  also
yield  bicyclic  ethers.  However,  for  α-Q ̇OOH  (which  is  a  hydro-
peroxyfuryl radical in which the hydroperoxy group is attached to the
carbon (Cα) next to the ether oxygen), ring-opening proceeds through
lower  barriers  than oxirane  (or  oxetane) ring  formation,  which  effec-
tively prevents bicyclic ethers to be formed. Very little β-Q ̇OOH (which
is  a  hydroperoxyfuryl  radical  in  which  the  hydroperoxy  group  is
attached  to  the  carbon  next  to  Cα)  is  formed  due  to  the  preferred
H-abstraction from the α site. According to the PES presented by Fenard
et al. [283] bicyclic diether formation starting from the β-Q ̇OOH radical

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101960

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 40. Examples of possible formation pathways of CEs during the low-temperature oxidation of methyl-10-undecenoate.

Fig. 41. CE formation from aldehydes: (a) pathways from the aldehyde fuel (CEs in insert are those quantified for n-hexanal by [293], only reactions leading to CEs
are displayed), (b) experimental (of [293]) and simulated (Milano model [569]) temperature dependence of lactone mole fraction (sum of both lactone isomers)
during the JSR oxidation of n-hexanal – reproduced from Ref. [569].

proceeds  through  energetically  competitive  channels  suggesting  that
they could be formed and should be looked for in future experiments.

4.4. Conclusion

The review on CE formation during the low-temperature oxidation of
a large range of fuels presented in Part 4 has allowed us to emphasize the
enormous  progress  made  since  1994  in  establishing  quantitative
experimental data for these products. JSRs and RCMs coupled with GC
have been the most commonly used tools for these measurements, sur-
passing,  except  when  hydroperoxides  were  to  be  considered,  MS  for
discriminating the generally large number of obtained isomers. While

CEs  were  frequently  detected  from  RCM  experiments  fueled  with  hy-
drocarbons, they were, except for THF, rarely mentioned in studies of
oxygenated  fuels  in  compression  devices.  In  JSRs,  CEs  were  experi-
mentally quantified not only from alkanes, but also from a wide range of
unsaturated, cyclic or oxygenated fuels. CEs were mainly observed from
fuels displaying a significant low-temperature reactivity and a notable
 ̇
O epoxidation (oxirane derivative for-
NTC zone. However, due to HO
mation), CEs are also formed in the oxidation of dienes, such as 1,3-hex-
adiene  or  cyclo-1,3-hexadiene,  or  from  2-methyl-1-butanol,  which  do
not react via the peroxy radical pathway. Concerning biofuel molecules,
CE are notable primary products of the oxidation of methyl esters, al-
dehydes  and  linear  ethers.  Surprisingly,  attempts  to  find  fuel-specific

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101961

L.-S. Tran et al.

CEs, which would still contain the alcohol group, in the low-temperature
oxidation  of  alcohols  have  not  been  successful.  The  currently  experi-
mentally  detected  CEs  in  alcohol  oxidation  originate  from  secondary
chemistry.  Both,  for  hydrocarbon  and  oxygenated  fuels,  significantly
more  CE  formation  data  are  available  for  linear  molecules  than  for
branched ones. Only a limited numbers of studies exist that deal with
fuels containing more than 8 carbon atoms.

This review shows that CEs are usually present in relatively small
amounts. The maximum total YCE of ~29 ± 2.9% reported for n-hexane
JSR oxidation [419] is an exception, but generally the YCE is below 10%
for  most  studied cases. This can be explained by  the  fact that CE are
faster consumed through H-abstraction reactions than most fuel mole-
cules due to the low C–H bond strength in α-position to the ether oxygen,
as will be discussed in Part 5. Flow rate analyses below 800 K mostly
show a dominant contribution of fuel consumption via CE formation in
competition with KHP production. Therefore, the measurement and the
prediction of the distribution of CE isomers is of crucial importance for
the accurate simulation of fuel auto-ignition.

The possible formation of several types of CEs, which are postulated
by models, needs to be more thoroughly investigated. This is the case of
hydroperoxyCEs, especially oxirane derivatives, or of hydroxyCEs which
are predicted to be formed in notable amounts during the oxidation of
alkanes  and  of  alkenes,  respectively.  Regular  MS  analysis  cannot
discriminate  hydroperoxyCEs  from  KHPs,  or  hydroxyCEs  from  alke-
nylhydroperoxides.  It  is  also  difficult  to  identify  the  unique  products
from  hydroperoxyCEs  because  the  most  important  consumption
pathway for hydroperoxyCE consumption could be the O(cid:0) OH scission
followed  by  β-scission  leading  to  the  formation of  an  aldehyde and  a
radical  (hydroperoxyCE→OH+aldehyde+radical).  However,  the  same
aldehydes can be also formed from the corresponding KHPs.

Although the CE formation reactions in low-temperature oxidation of
alkanes have been systematically studied at several levels of theory and
it is agreed that the rate expressions depend both on the nature of the
radical site and that of the hydroperoxy group carrying carbon site, there
is  still  severe  uncertainty  on  the  exact  values  of  the  rate  coefficients.
Comparisons of various proposed rate rules show substantial variations
in the pre-exponential factors and in the reaction barriers, leading - as
can be seen in Fig. 31 - to uncertainties of one order of magnitude or
more. In order to avoid commonly practiced adjustments of these rate
expressions in model development, new studies at high levels of theory
are needed to propose improved rate expressions with high accuracy.
This need is even greater when fuels other than alkanes are concerned.
The  progress  in  the  theoretical  calculations  related  to  low-
temperature  oxidation  channels  has  allowed  a  noticeable  refinement
of the CE related rate constants, however the performances of the recent
models in predicting the reviewed experimental data concerning CEs are
still significantly poorer than for other products (e.g. alkenes or alde-
hydes).  Moreover,  because  these  are  steady-state  measurements,  the
mole fractions reported for CEs in the studies listed in Part 4 reflect a
balance  between  formation  and  consumption  rates.  A  good  under-
standing of CE consumption reactions is crucial for an accurate assess-
ment  for  their  formation  kinetics.  Therefore,  Part  5  reports  on  the
studies related to CE consumption.

5. Kinetics of the degradation of cyclic ethers

Whether formed in low-temperature oxidation or used as biofuels, a
good  understanding  of  the  chemistry  leading  to  CE  consumption  is
essential  and  needs  to  be  incorporated  into  sophisticated  combustion
models for fuels and biofuels. In this part, experimental, theoretical and
kinetic modeling studies related to the degradation chemistry of CEs are
reviewed. A recent paper by Leitner et al. [8] reviewed different aspects
of the combustion chemistry of potential biofuels (see Table 1 in Part 1),
e.g. IDTs or pollutant formation in flames, with the objective to identify
appropriate candidates. The aim of Part 5 is broader and provides a more
comprehensive analysis of the consumption chemistry of all CE families.

5.1. General overview of cyclic ether reaction kinetics

The basic reactions of CEs are discussed in this part. Given that un-
saturated CEs and in particular aromatic ones differ substantially in their
reactivity  from  saturated  CEs,  both  groups  are  discussed  separately
starting with saturated CEs.

5.1.1. Saturated cyclic ethers

Saturated CEs either decompose via unimolecular reactions such as
ring-opening caused by bond scissions similar to those of cycloalkanes,
or  via bimolecular H-abstraction  reactions forming the  corresponding
CE  radicals,  which  might  react  by  β-scission  –  possibly  proceeded  by
isomerization  steps  –,  or  bimolecularly,  e.g.,  by  adding  to  molecular
oxygen. For the sake of keeping this part short, all these reactions will be
discussed only briefly using examples rather than attempting to provide
a complete account of all relevant studies.

 ̇
OH  and  HO

5.1.1.1. H-abstraction  reactions. In  the  low-temperature  oxidation
regime below 900 K, in which CE yields can reach high levels, CEs are
mainly  consumed  by  H-abstraction  reactions.  At  the  lowest  tempera-
 ̇
tures  the  H-abstraction  reactions  by
O  radicals  dominate.
 ̇
OH  as  an  abstracting  radical  results  from  (a)  low
The  importance  of
activation energies and (b) the unique role of this radical in the chain
propagating  and  branching  chemistry  of  low-temperature  oxidation.
 ̇
O radicals are also primary products formed in rather high concen-
HO
 ̇
trations, which explains that H-abstraction reactions by HO
O are rele-
vant. For example, according to the THF model by Fenard et al. [283], in
 ̇
a JSR at atmospheric pressure and 600 K 90% of THF is consumed by
OH
 ̇
radicals  and  about  10%  by  HO
O  radicals.  At  higher  temperatures,  H
 ̇
atoms,
CH3  and  other  radicals  become  more  abundant  and  their
H-abstraction reactions gain importance.

Even though H-abstraction reactions from CEs appear in every newer
kinetic model dealing with low-temperature oxidation chemistry, these
reactions  are  not  as  thoroughly  studied  as  one  would  think.  Most
experimental  studies  date  back  to  before  2000,  e.g.  [591–601],  while
rather  few  recent  experimental  studies  are  known  [602–607].  A  few
examples of theoretical studies of specific molecules are H-abstractions
from substituted THF by, e.g., Simmie [90], Chakravarty and Fernandes
[608]  and  Ill ́es  et  al.  [607],  from  THP  by  Tran  et  al.  [196],  from  1,
4-dioxane and 1,3,5-trioxane by Saheb and Bahadori [609], and from
lactones by Barnes et al. [604] and De Bruycker et al. [259].

Often in kinetic modeling the rate coefficients of these reactions are
estimated with generic rate rules [195,466,498,508,610]. Even in recent
models, the rules used are surprisingly simple, e.g. Bugler et al. [466]
assign the same rate coefficients to H-abstraction reactions from ethyl-
 ̇
OH radical. Other models account for
oxirane by H-atom, O-atom and
chemical and structural differences, e.g. C–H bond strength variations in
CE (discussed later), which are caused by the presence of the ether ox-
ygen.  C-H  moieties  in  an  α-position  to  the  ether  oxygen  atom  are
particularly weak due to resonance stabilization of the corresponding
radical  by  the  oxygen,  while  C-H  sites  farther  away  are  “regular”,
meaning that those sites in CE have bond strengths comparable to those
of their cycloalkane counterparts (see later). Simmie [90], studying re-
actions of THF, 2-MTHF and 2,5-DMTHF, found a good correlation be-
tween  activation  energies  for  H-abstractions  by  H-atoms  and  CH3
radicals  and  the  enthalpies  of  reaction  (Evans-Polanyi  relationship),
which provides an easy way to incorporate the reactivity differences into
rate expressions.

The ring size also affects the C–H stability because the ring strains of
the parent and radical differ and this difference translates to variations
in  the  H-abstraction  rate  coefficients.  Furthermore,  the  ether  oxygen
atom may act as acceptor of a hydrogen bond facilitating formation of a
pre-complex prior to the abstraction process. For example, Rotavera and
Taatjes [16] showed that at low-temperature the H-abstraction reaction
 ̇
OH radical from THF is faster than that from cyclopentane, which
by

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101962

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 42. CE formation during ether JSR oxidation: (a) diethyl ether: temperature dependence of the YCE  of 2-methyl-1,3-dioxolane and that of 2-MTHF during n-
pentane oxidation in JSR at 5 bar (drawn from data taken in [453]). The relative uncertainties of the YCE are 15%; (b) diisopropyl ether: experimental MS signal and
simulations of corresponding CE mole fractions (Reproduced from Ref. [585] with permission of Elsevier).

was explained by the formation of such a complex.

Some CE radicals produced by H-abstraction reactions are inherently
unstable and rapidly decompose to open-chain isomers or bimolecular
products. This fact was used by Cord et al. [384] and Bugler et al. [466]
to reduce the model by lumping the H-abstraction with the decompo-
sition step to a single reaction. For example (X=abstracting species),

 ̇
X + Ethyloxirane → HX+CH2O+C=C
C (Bugler et al. [466])
 ̇
X + Ethyloxirane → HX+C=C=O+C
C (Cord et al. [384])
In addition to the different products assumed in both models for this
specific reaction, lumping may lead to a general problem of “mechanism
truncation error” as the group of Rotavera pointed out [395,511]. This is
particularly true if larger CE radicals with less ring strain are produced,
e.g.  THF  radicals,  but  e.g.  Lopez  et  al.  [611]  even  treat  H-abstraction
from  the  smallest  CE,  oxirane,  as  a  two-step  process  with subsequent
chemistry  of  the  oxiranyl  radical.  The  latter  implementation  of
H-abstraction reactions from CEs allows for the possibility that the CE
radical might be able to add to oxygen at high oxygen concentrations.
Surprisingly,  several  recent  kinetic  model,  e.g.  [384,466]  contain
lumped H-abstraction reactions even for large CEs such as THF, meaning
that no THF-yl radical is considered (THF-yl includes both the THF-yl-2
and THF-yl-3 radicals). The discussion of THF chemistry (given in Part
5.1.1.4)  demonstrates  the  importance  of  THF-yl  radical  oxidation
chemistry and therefore the need to include CE radical species into ki-
netic  models.  At  this  stage,  it  should  only  be  mentioned  that  un-
certainties in H-abstraction reactions from THF are considered a likely
cause  for  the  failure  to  correctly  predict  β-KHP  yields  in  the
low-temperature THF oxidation [612].

In  summary,  H-abstraction  reactions  from  CE  are  currently  not  as
well  understood  as  necessary  to  reliably  describe  CE  consumption
reactions.

5.1.1.2. Unimolecular reactions of saturated cyclic ethers. Experiments by
[594,610,613–616] and theoretical results by, e.g., [617–619] show that
unimolecular reactions may contribute substantially to CE decomposi-
tion. For example, in oxirane pyrolysis and combustion, acetaldehyde
has been detected in high amounts. Joshi et al. [617] proposed the PES
shown in Fig. 43a for this reaction.

The  isomerization  starts  with  C–O  bond  scission  followed  by  an
intramolecular  H  atom  transfer.  Subsequent  isomerization,  bond  scis-
sion  and  elimination  steps  lead  to  experimentally  observed  products.
Caused by the high 59 kcal/mol barrier, the initial reaction step pro-
duces  chemically  activated acetaldehyde, which  may  be stabilized by

 ̇
CH3  and  H

collisions  or  directly  decompose  to  bimolecular  products.  The  Master
equation analysis results for 2 atm in the bath of Ar, shown in Fig. 43b,
clearly demonstrate the importance of the chemically activated channel.
Even at temperatures below 625 K (1000K/T = 1.6) the formation of the
 ̇
CO  dominates  the  acetaldehyde  production  and
radicals
higher temperatures substantially increase the importance of the radical
formation  channel. It  should  be noted  that Joshi  et  al.  [617]  also  re-
ported  on  the  rate  expression  for  a  H  atom  catalyzed  decomposition
mechanism. This reaction has, according to a rate analysis at shock tube
conditions,  some  impact  on  the  predictions,  but  the  unimolecular
chemistry is more important.

While  not  considered  in  oxirane  decomposition,  Dubnikova  and
Lifshitz [620] suggested C–C bond scission to be responsible for methyl
vinyl ether formation from methyloxirane. The barrier for this reaction
is with about 59 kcal/mol higher than those of the two possible C–O
bond scissions (54–55 kcal/mol). The latter reactions were interpreted
as  concerted  reactions  in  which  the  biradical  transition  state  directly
connects  methyloxirane  to  the  isomerization  products  (acetone  and
propanal).  The methyloxirane study  by  Dubnikova  and  Lifshitz [620]
also considered carbene chemistry but found it not to be competitive.

Shiroudi et al. [619] calculated concerted decomposition pathways
for oxetane and the methyl and 2,2-dimethyl substituted analogs, which
however lead to bimolecular products instead of isomers. They found
that the barrier decreases by about 4 kcal/mol for each methyl substi-
tution. The total barriers are with 53 to 61 kcal/mol similar to those
found for (substituted) oxiranes.

Verdicchio et al. [618], using a modified CBS-QB3 methods adapted
to  describe  bi-radical  species  and  CASPT2  calculations  to  verify  the
reliability of their study, argued that in THF decomposition next to the
biradical mechanism a carbene mechanism also plays a role. This leads
to a highly complex decomposition chemistry as shown in the reaction
path  analysis  for  1200  K  pyrolysis  in  Fig.  44.  The  carbene  pathway
distinguishes  CE  decomposition  from  that  of  cycloalkanes  because  it
relies on the free electrons located on the oxygen atom in the ring.

Related  to  the  carbene  pathway  are  pericyclic  ring-opening  re-
actions, which have been studied by Lizardo-Huerta et al. [621]. The
barriers for pericyclic reactions involving the side chain in α-position are
low  making  these  reactions  competitive  at  low  temperatures.  For
example, De Bruycker et al. [259] observed that GVL decomposition is
initiated by isomerization to pentenoic acid. An example of this pathway
is presented in Fig. 45 for two lactones (GVL and ε-caprolactone). Ver-
dicchio [618] report on an H2  elimination path from THF, which also

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101963

L.-S. Tran et al.

proceeds through a concerted reaction.

Lizardo-Huerta et al. [621] investigated concerted reactions in THP
and concluded that those should be of similar importance as in THF, for
which 20% of the total unimolecular decomposition flux is attributed to
concerted pathways. According to Lizardo-Huerta [621], 4-penten-1-ol
is  the  main  product  in  THP  decomposition  and  alkyl  substitution  in
the α-position increases the dominance of the alcohol formation channel
over the alternative H2 elimination pathway.

In  summary,  CE  including  substituted  derivatives  display  a  rich
unimolecular decomposition chemistry ranging from simple bond scis-
sion reactions similar to those found in cycloalkanes to concerted peri-
cyclic reactions that involve lone pair electrons of the ether oxygen in
the  transition  state.  Since  different  pathways  compete,  the  detailed
features of the PES of a CE are important and unimolecular CE reactions
are  best  evaluated  individually  using  high  level  QM  calculations  and
kinetic theory.

5.1.1.3. Unimolecular  reactions  of radicals  of  saturated  cyclic ethers. As
mentioned in Part 5.1.1.1, CE radicals may either rapidly decompose or,
if long-lived, serve as target for oxygen addition. Nevertheless, even if
the  CE  radical  is  not  stable,  its  decomposition  chemistry  needs  to  be
understood in order to reliably assign the decomposition products as a
function of time (see the above discussion in Part 5.1.1.1 about differ-
ences in the Cord and Bugler mechanisms). Here only some studies will
be highlighted without the claim of being comprehensive. The fate of the
oxiranyl  radical  has  been  analyzed  by  Joshi  et  al.  [617]  and  later  by
Wang  and  Bozzelli  [622].  The  PES  reported  by  Wang  and  Bozzelli  is
reproduced in Fig. 46. It nicely demonstrates that the barrier for oxiranyl
(named y(cjco) in Fig. 46) decomposition is with about 15 kcal/mol very
small and thus the thermal energy available at low-temperature oxida-
tion is sufficient for this radical to quickly decompose. The comparison
between  Joshi  et  al.  and  Wang  and  Bozzelli  provides  an  idea  of  the
uncertainty of the barrier energies but also demonstrates that despite
differences in the details, the barriers for bimolecular product formation
are  all  lower  than  that  of  the  initial  ring-opening  step.  The  highest
barriers  for  the  two  product  channels  are  quite  similar  (e.g.,  43.18
kcal/mol  versus  46.54  kcal/mol  using  the  Wang  and  Bozzelli  data),
which  means  that  both  channels  should  contribute.  This  raises  the
question if Bugler’s [466] and Cord’s [384] treatment of H-abstractions
for oxiranes considering solely one product channel is adequate. Finally,
the PES features suggest that pressure-dependence of the product dis-
tribution needs to be taken into account as has been done by both, Joshi
et al. [617] and Wang and Bozzelli [622].

To the best of our knowledge, the oxetanyl radicals have not been
 ̇
studied but given the high ring strain, ring-opening to C2H4 and H
CO is
likely  the  only  important  pathway.  This  is  reflected  in  most  kinetic
models. However, Dagaut et al. [623] consider in their 1997 model also
reactions  of  oxetanyl  with  methyl  radicals  to  produce  ethylene  and
acetaldehyde  or  propene  and  formaldehyde,  using  estimated  rate
expressions.

The situation is more complex when it comes to radicals of THF and
substituted  THFs.  Fig.  47  clearly  shows  that  the  barriers  for  the
decomposition  of  THF-yl-2  are  higher  than  those  of  oxiranyl,  which
causes THF-yl-2 to be rather long-lived and to be able to participate in
oxygen  addition  reactions  and  to  start  low-temperature  oxidation
chemistry  [283,612,624].  Since  THF-yl-2  is  preferentially  formed  in
H-abstraction reactions due to the weaker C–H bond, oxidation products
originate mainly from this radical. The detection of significant amounts
of  α-KHP  confirms  this  interpretation  [624,625].  THF-yl-3  (PES  not
shown) is even more stable with respect to ring-opening which allows H
elimination producing 2,5-DHF to become competitive with the second
bimolecular decomposition channel, the formation of allyl and formal-
dehyde [90,283]. However, according to the available models [283], at
low  temperatures  this  radical  is  formed  in  lower  yields  compared  to
THF-yl-2,  and  consequently low-temperature  oxidation  products  from

this radical, e.g. β-KHP, are detected in lower concentrations [625]. Note
that,  as  demonstrated  by  Giri  et  al.  [606],  the  formation  of  THF-yl-3
becomes  important  at  higher  temperatures  because  the  branching
ratio  for  H-abstractions  from  THF  by  OH  leading  to  THF-yl-2  and
THF-yl-3 (i.e. THF-yl-2:THF-yl-3) was found to be 68.8:31.2 (at 800 K)
and 42.8:57.2 (at 1350 K).

Interestingly,  according  to  Fenard  et  al.,  the  increased  stability  of
THF radicals allows also abstraction reactions with oxygen to play a role
and these reactions are found to be the most effective way to form 2,3-
DHF. The oxidation chemistry of THF will be discussed more thoroughly
in Part 5.2.1.1.

Methyl (or more general alkyl) substitution alters the ring-opening
chemistry of THF radicals in several ways [90]: (1) a larger number of
products can be formed, (2) the barriers are reduced because the methyl
group  stabilizes  the  transition  state  via  hyperconjugation,  (3)
ring-opening  can  be  initiated  by  the  side  chain  radical  (furylmethyl
radical),  (4)  alkyl  side  chains  also  provide  the  possibility  for  ring
enlargement as has been shown by Tran et al. [251] in the case of tet-
rahydrofurfuryl alcohol.

Regarding  radicals  of  THP,  the  few  THP  models  [196,626,627]
consider mainly ring-opening reactions as well as H elimination to form
dihydropyran. Since three THP radicals exist, a large variety of reactions
are  possible,  however,  H-abstraction  reactions  preferentially  produce
the α-radical  (i.e. which  has the  radical site  on the  carbon atom  con-
nected to the ether oxygen) and those reactions dominate. Based on the
analysis by Rotavera et al. [398], this α-radical is especially prone to
ring-opening due to its very low C–O bond energy (3.7 kcal/mol). So far,
only  high-temperature  THP  models  have  been  developed,  however,
some THP radicals should be stable enough to allow oxygen addition.
While substituted THF radicals can undergo ring enlargement reactions
(ring-opening  followed  by  closing  to  a  THP  ring),  the  opposite,  ring
contraction, is possible for THP radicals.

5.1.1.4. O2  addition  to  cyclic  ether  radicals. As  mentioned  earlier,  the
barriers for ring-opening of oxiranyl and oxetanyl radicals are low and
thus  decomposition is fast.  O2  addition reaction  is too slow to  play a
notable role. The situation changes if radicals of substituted CE are taken
into account, which carry the radical site on the substituent group. These
radicals may undergo low-temperature oxidation chemistry as, e.g., the
PESs for 2,3-dimethyloxiranyl and 2-ethyloxirane-3-yl show in Fig. 48.
The  reaction  steps  are  essentially  the  same  as  in  alkane  oxidation,
however the ring structure affects some reaction products. For example,
 ̇
O  forming  Q ̇OOH
in  Fig.  48a,  intramolecular  H-abstraction  of  the  RO
leads simultaneously to ring-opening (keto radical) if the abstracted H
atom  originates  from  the  ring.  The  PES  in  Fig.  48a  is  certainly  not
 ̇
OH but
complete as it does not contain a pathway to keto oxirane and
only considers formation of the epoxyTHF. Similarly, Fig. 48b demon-
strates only energetically accessible reaction pathways that start with
ring-opening followed in a later step by ring closure, which effectively
reproduces the oxirane structure lost in the initial ring-opening step. A
main point of this PES is to show that similar products can be formed
from the two CE isomer radicals.

Given that the ring strain is much lower in THF-yl radicals compared
to oxiranyl and oxetanyl radicals, the oxidation of THF at low temper-
ature allows typical second oxygen addition chemistry similar to that of
alkane oxidation to be important. This can be seen from the partial THF-
yl-2  PES  reported  by  Lockwood  and  Labbe  [612],  which  is  shown  in
 ̇
Fig. 49. Intramolecular H-abstraction by RO
O forms the corresponding
Q ̇OOH radical. Since the ring radical is relatively stable, addition of a
second O2 molecule favorably competes with ring-opening which paves
the way for KHP formation. It should be noted that this PES misses CE
 ̇
forming, ring-opening, and HO
O elimination channels since the focus of
this particular study was on KHP chemistry. A more complete PES for
this reaction can be found in the studies by Antonov et al. [624] and
Fenard et al. [283].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101964

L.-S. Tran et al.

 ̇
O and

For  THP, only little  is  known about its  low-temperature oxidation
 ̇
O) has been detected [628].
chemistry, but the THP-peroxy radical (RO
 ̇
OH
Chen et al. [629] report on Cl-initiated oxidation of THP and detect
 ̇
and HO
O radicals, which further indicates that the oxidation of THP at
low temperatures follows the typical reaction sequences. The observed
 ̇
OH radicals points to an important role of
fast formation of HO
 ̇
direct decomposition of the chemically activated RO
O. This is supported
 ̇
O  elimination  from  the  most  likely
by  the  low  barrier  found  for  HO
 ̇
formed α-RO
O (see structure in Fig. 50) [398,629]. Another important
 ̇
feature is the low C–O bond energy of the α-RO
O radical which enables
ring-opening  to  compete  at  elevated  temperatures.  The  ring-opening
reaction of the α-Q ̇OOH radical (see structure in Fig. 50) forming pen-
 ̇
OH (reaction 1 in Fig. 50) is used to explain the increasing
tanedial and
 ̇
OH  yield  with  increasing  temperature  [629],  but  Davis  et  al.  [397]
provide  evidence  that  other  ring-opening  channels  (reactions  2-5  in
Fig. 50) also play a role.

In summary, THF and THP undergo characteristic low-temperature
oxidation  chemistries  due  to  special  features  of  the  corresponding
 ̇
PESs  of the  fuel radical and RO
O. The high ring strain  prevents such
chemistry  for  unsubstituted  oxiranes  and  oxetanes,  while  side  groups
enable low-temperature oxidation chemistry.

5.1.2. Unsaturated cyclic ethers

The most important representatives of non-aromatic unsaturated CEs
are 2,3-DHF and 2,5-DHF and their pyran analogs. Besides typical H-
abstraction  and  radical  addition  to  the  double  bond,  which  resemble
reactions  discussed  in  Part  5.1.1  or  in  Part  4.2,  unimolecular  rear-
rangement  of  2,3-DHF  to  either  cyclopropanecarboxaldehyde  or  pro-
penylaldehyde  plays  an  important  role  [630].  The  barriers  for  these
reactions are above 50 kcal/mol, meaning that these reactions will only
be important at temperatures above 1000 K. A similar rearrangement
mechanism was also identified for 5-methyl-2,3-DHF. In contrast, for 2,
5-DHF  and  2-methyl-2,5-DHF,  the  concerted  H2  elimination  pathway
forming  (2-methyl)  furan  dominates.  Since  such  a  pathway  is  not
available  for  2,3-DHF,  both  DHF  isomers  display  distinctly  different
pyrolysis  product  spectra  observed  in  shock  tube  experiments  [631,
632]. According to Fan et al. [633], the decomposition chemistry of 2,
3-DHF and 2,5-DHF at 1600 K is more complicated but dominated by
ring-opening steps. In the high-temperature model for furan, Tian et al.
[226] consider mainly bimolecular reactions of 2,3-DHF.

Dubnikova and Lifshitz [634] identified a low energy H2 elimination

pathway for 2,5-DHF which is also available for 2-methyl-2,5-DHF but
not for 2,3-DHF. 2,3-DHF may eliminate H2 only through a high energy
4-centered transition state or a carbene intermediate, which are both not
competitive with the ring opening reactions mentioned above. Conse-
quently H2 elimination has only be observed experimentally for 2,5-DHF
and its methyl derivative.

Due to the unsaturated 6-membered ring structure, Tran et al. [196]
include, next to H-abstraction reactions, retro-Diels-Alder reactions for
the dihydro-pyrans in their THP model, while H2 elimination reactions
were  not  considered.  Since  the  model  reproduced  the  experimental
dihydro-pyran yields around 1000 K quite well, it seems that these re-
actions are of most importance for dihydro-pyrans.

In a recent review, Westbrook and Curran [635] nicely characterized
the specific reactivity of furans, the most prominent example of unsat-
urated  aromatic  CE.  The  special  character  of  unsubstituted  furan  is
easily recognized by inspecting its PES [228,636,637] shown in Fig. 51a.
The unimolecular decomposition of furan mechanism is initiated by
intramolecular H migration forming one of two possible carbenes. These
intermediates upon β-scission produce stable molecular products, except
for very high temperatures at which bond scission to propargyl (HC–––
C-
 ̇
 ̇
CH2) and H
CO is feasible [637]. In substituted furans, the migrating H
atom  can  be  replaced  by  a  group  such  as  formyl,  which  provides  a
mechanism for isomerization (see e.g. [423]). Fig. 51b clearly shows the
dominance of this carbene ring-opening mechanism. The extraordinarily
strong  C–H  bonds  in  furan  (~120.5  kcal/mol)  [231,637]  prevents
H-abstraction  reactions  to  play  a  significant  role  except  at  high  tem-
peratures and the aromatic character of furan creates higher barriers for
H atom or radical addition reactions to the ring. However, as will be
discussed later, ring-opening reactions initiated by radical addition to
the furan ring play a role at elevated temperatures.

The carbene mechanism is also important in substituted furans, e.g.
2,5-DMF [639], 2-THFFOH [640] and furfurals [423,640], but the alkyl
side  chain  allows  additional  reaction  channels  such  as  H-abstraction
from the substituent, to compete. In the case of 2,5-DMF, H-abstraction
leads to the (5-methylfuran-2-yl)methyl radical, which PES is shown in
Fig. 52. One important feature of this PES is the rather low barrier (just
above 50 kcal/mol) to enlarge the 5-membered ring to a 6-membered
keto  species  which  may  ultimately  produce  phenol  or  cyclo-
pentadienyl and CO. This explains the tendency of 2,5-DMF to produce
 ̇
larger  aromatic  species  [275,641].  H-atom  addition  followed  by
CH3
elimination explains the production of furan and 2-MF from 2,5-DMF or

Fig. 43. Oxirane unimolecular decomposition: left panel - PES determined at the G3B3 level of theory, right panel - branching ratios computed in Ar bath gas at 2 atm.
Reproduced from Ref. [617] with permission of ACS.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101965

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 44. Reaction path analysis for THF pyrolysis at 1200 K, 3 bar and a residence time of 2 ms corresponding to 0.65% THF conversion [618]. The numbers near the
arrows  indicate  relative  fluxes.  The  initial  consumption  fluxes  of  THF  are  normalized  by  the sum  of  only  unimolecular decomposition  fluxes.  Reproduced  from
Ref. [618] with permission of Elsevier.

Fig.  45. Formation  of  unsaturated  acids  from  lactones,  GVL  (A)  and  ε-caprolactone  (B),  through  unimolecular  reactions.  Reproduced  from  Ref.  [259]  with
permission of Elsevier.

in general from substituted furans.

In summary, unsaturated CEs are characterized by specific decom-
position chemistries, which require the study of the corresponding PESs
and  detailed  kinetic  analyses.  Rate  rules  are  not  applicable  for  these
molecules  [635]  but  for  the  most  prominent  members  of  this  family,
furan,  2-MF  and  2,5-DMF,  numerous  theoretical  studies  are  available
and well-tested models exist.

5.2. Experimental and modelling studies on the combustion chemistry of
saturated cyclic ethers

Table  16  lists  about  90  experimental  studies  related  to  the  con-
sumption of saturated CEs, which will be discussed in detail in this part.
Each study contains different datasets that include several data points.
These studies were mainly performed using RCMs, JSRs and FRs, in the
same way as the low-temperature experiments described in Part 4, but
also  in  ST,  constant  volume  bomb  (CVB)  and  PLF,  which  are  more
suitable for high-temperature work. The listed studies report oxidation
and  pyrolysis  chemistry  concerning  global  combustion  parameters
(about  40  studies),  e.g.  laminar  burning  velocity  (LBV)  or  IDT,  and

chemical species formation (about 50 studies), with a high interest in
low-temperature chemistry.

The  gas-phase  reactions  of  saturated  CEs  have  been  studied  from
1990,  e.g.  for  oxirane  and  THF.  Several  CEs  have  been  investigated
intensively  and  for  those,  comprehensive  databases  containing  mea-
surements over large ranges of temperatures, pressures, and equivalence
ratios  are  available.  This  is  the  case  for  THF  with  about  20  reported
studies at temperatures from 400 K to 2300 K (because of its different
nature, the initial temperatures of LBV or engine experiments are not
considered), pressures from 0.01 to 40 bar, equivalence ratios from 0.36
to ∞ and for 2-MTHF with 16 reported studies at temperature from 639
to 2240 K, pressure from 0.04 to 40 bar, φ from 0.5 to ∞. Investigations
of  other  CEs  began  only  recently,  e.g.  alkyl-substituted  oxiranes  and
alkyl-substituted THFs. No flame speciation data is available for oxirane
derivatives  except  for  methyloxirane,  oxetane  derivatives,  and  alkyl-
substituted  THFs  heavier  than  2-MTHF.  Studies  involving  diffusion
flames are also unavailable. Part 5.2.1 describes the available studies on
unsubstituted saturated CEs, starting with THF, and Part 5.2.2 presents
those related to substituted ones.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101966

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 46. Ab initio calculated PES for unimolecular isomerization and decomposition pathways of the oxiranyl radical (named y(cjco) in the figure). Reproduced from
[622] with permission of John Wiley and Sons.

5.2.1. Non-substituted saturated cyclic ethers

Among  non-substituted  CEs,  oxirane,  THF,  and  THP  have  been
frequently  investigated,  while  only  a  limited  number  of  studies  are
known for oxetane [623], as is shown in Table 16. A few studies were
also found for CEs containing 2 O-atoms in the ring, e.g. 1,3-dioxolane
and 1,4-dioxane. The experimental studies for THF will be detailed in
Part  5.2.1.1  and  those  of  other  non-substituted  saturated  CEs  will  be
discussed  in  Part  5.2.1.2.  Finally,  the  chemistry  of  these  CEs  will  be
compared  in  Part  5.2.1.3  and  a  description  of  their  detailed  kinetic
models follows in Part 5.2.1.4.

5.2.1.1. Tetrahydrofuran. THF  is  the  core  structure  of  the  tetrahy-
drofuranic  biofuels,  such  as  itself,  2-MTHF,  2,5-DMTHF,  2-THFFOH,
etc., as discussed in Part 1. Numerous experimental datasets are avail-
able for THF, including measurements of its global parameters (LBV and
IDT) and detailed product detections and quantifications.

Laminar burning velocities of THF were recently measured by [195,
652] using CVB or PLF at 1-4 bar and a range of equivalence ratios of
0.55-1.6.  The  results  obtained  with  different  experimental  methods
show  good  consistency.  As  usual  for  CEs,  the  peak  LBV  for  THF  is
observed around φ=1.1 and it decreases with increasing initial pressure.
At 1 bar, 298K, and φ = 1.1, the LBV of THF was determined to be 43 ±
1.7 cm/s [195,652].

The ignition behavior of THF was investigated from 640 K to 1800 K
in  RCMs  by  [282,654,655]  and
in  STs  by  [195,281,653].
High-temperature  ignition  delay  times  follow  classical  Arrhenius
behavior as is shown in the ST work of Uygun et al. [281] (see Fig. 16 of
Part  3,  above  1000  K)  and  of  Dagaut  et  al.  [653].  The  latter  authors
reported a decrease of reactivity with increasing φ  and an increase of
reactivity with increasing pressure. A study in the high-pressure shock
tube  of Aachen  at  20 and  40  bar  was  able  to investigate  the  ignition
behavior  below  1000  K  and  to  demonstrate  a  clear  inflection  in  the
Arrhenius slope [281] (see Fig. 53a). This agrees with the observation by

Vanhove et al. [282] from their RCM experiments that two-stage igni-
tion (cool flame) was visible up to 810 K as is illustrated in Fig. 53b.

Product  speciation  data  were  measured  during  THF  pyrolysis  and
oxidation in different reactor types, as well as in two PLFs, as is shown in
Table 16. 35 years after the early studies of Walter group [682,683],
Lifshitz et al. [613] suggested two initiation steps for THF pyrolysis, with
the first one (THF→C2H4  + CH3CHO) being four times faster than the
second one (THF→C3H6+CH2O) based on new pyrolysis results obtained
behind reflected shock wave in a single-pulse ST with GC analysis. The
experimental data of [613] were later used by Verdicchio et al. [618] to
compare  with  their  model  developed  using  quantum-mechanical  cal-
culations,  showing  the  importance  of  both,  carbene  and  biradical  re-
actions that are discussed in Part 5.1.

Data  were  reported  on  THF  oxidation  products  above  800  K  by
Dagaut et al. [653] using a JSR (800–1100 K, 10 bar) with GC, as well as
by  Kasper  et  al.  [656]  and  by  Tran  et  al.  [195]  using  PLFs  with
EI/PI-MBMS and GC. These data suggest that THF decomposition occurs
mainly through a ring cleavage (after H-abstractions) into ethylene and
oxygenated  intermediates,  which  finally  yield  carbon  monoxide.
Hydrogen  release  of  the  initial  radicals,  i.e.  THF-yl-2  and  THF-yl-3,
result  in  the  formation  of  2,3-DHF  and  2,5-DHF.  Both  products  were
observed in trace amounts in JSR [653] but in more notable quantities in
PLFs  [195,656].  In  the  PLF,  mole  fraction  profiles  of  more  than  60
chemical species with molar masses ranging from 2 (H2) to 86 (2-MTHF)
were measured as a function of the height above the burner. C2H4 was
identified as the most abundant intermediate.

Product yields during THF oxidation below 800 K were first reported
by Molera et al. [657] and by Leppard [82] in a static reactor and a CFR
engine, respectively. Besides CO, formaldehyde and acetaldehyde, the
intermediate  species  2,3-DHF,  tetrahydrofuran-3-one,  succinic  dia-
ldehyde  (butanedial),  and  succinic  acid  were  detected  in  significant
concentrations. The formation of the three latter species was explained
by O2 addition to the THF-yl-2 or THF-yl-3 radicals [82,657].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101967

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 47. PES of THF-yl-2 (values are 0 K energies in kcal/mol) calculated by [195]. Reproduced from Ref. [195] with permission of Elsevier.

[82], butanedial was also detected under RCM conditions (7.7 bar, 710
K)  and  explained  to  be  produced  through  the  route  of  the  first  O2
addition to the THF-yl-2 radical. Vanhove et al. [282] also quantified
several other C2+ oxygenated species, e.g. oxirane, acrolein, propanal,
and 1,4-dioxene establishing a database used by Fenard et al. [283] for
testing their model.

Three  recent  studies  focusing  mainly  on  hydroperoxide  formation
have presented product speciations of THF oxidation in JSR and FR. In
Antonov et al. [624], transient intermediates and products were probed
using SVUV-MBMS during THF oxidation initiated by chlorine radical
attack  in  a  flow  reactor  (0.01-2.7  bar,  400-700  K).  The  experimental
data  were  interpreted  based  upon  the  calculations  of  the  PES  of
THF-yl + O2  and  Q ̇OOH + O2.  The  main  features  of  these  PES  were
confirmed by Fenard et al. [283] as presented in Part 5.1. The experi-
ments revealed a key reaction sequence consisting in the conversion of
 ̇
O) to hydroperoxy-THF-yl radicals (Q ̇OOH), followed
THF-yl peroxy (RO
by a second O2  addition and subsequent decomposition to dihydrofur-
 ̇
anyl hydroperoxide + HO
O or to γ-butyrolactone hydroperoxide (a KHP
obtained from THF) +  ̇
OH. THF has later been used as a prototype fuel
for studying hydroperoxide formation from cyclic bio-molecules. Han-
sen et al. [625] used a JSR (0.9 bar, 500-700 K) with SVUV-MBMS di-
agnostics  and  presented  the  partially  isomer-resolved  detection  and
quantification of the KHPs obtained during THF oxidation. Fig. 54 pre-
sents the experimentally observed PIE curve at m/z 118 corresponding
to KHPs (C4H6O4) together with theoretically predicted ionization en-
(cid:0) 6 -
ergies. Quantification was attempted (peak mole fractions of 8 × 10
(cid:0) 4) with uncertainties optimistically estimated within a factor of 2
6 × 10
despite possible uncertainties due to possible KHP fragmentation after
ionization.  Even  though  Hansen  et  al.  [625]  were  unable  to  separate
KHP-ββ’  from  KHP-βα  experimentally,  the  observed  KHPs  seem  to  be

Fig. 48. PES of β-cis-2,3-dimethyloxiranyl (R) + O2 (a) and 2-ethyloxirane-3-yl
(R) + O2  (b)  determined  at  ccCA-PS3  level  of  theory.  Reproduced  from  Refs.
[395,511] with permission of John Wiley and Sons.

Vanhove  et  al.  [282]  reported  GC  measurements  during  THF
oxidation in a JSR from 500 K to 1100 K and in a RCM at 710 K. These
datasets confirmed the presence of the NTC behavior in lean and stoi-
chiometric mixtures. The main products observed below 800 K in the
JSR  are CO,  CH4,  C2H4,  formaldehyde, acetaldehyde,  2,3-DHF and  2,
5-DHF,  which  is  consistent  with  the  observations  made  in  earlier
studies [82,657]. No bicyclic ethers were detected. Similarly to Leppard

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101968

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 49. PES of THF-2-peroxy radical (noted ROO-α in the figure) (values are 0 K, energies in kcal/mol relative to ROO-α) from Lockwood and Labbe [612] (in bold),
Fenard et al. [283] (in parentheses), and Antonov et al. [624] (in brackets). Reproduced from [612] with permission of Elsevier.

non-substituted saturated CE, for which the largest number of studies
can be found, the degradation chemistries of oxirane, oxetane and THP
were also investigated.

Oxirane:
Although  oxirane  has  never  been  proposed  as  a  biofuel  it  was
detected as an intermediate during the oxidation of many hydrocarbons
and oxygenated reactants (see Part 4). Most of the experimental studies
concerning the reactivity of this CE were performed before 1996 (see
Table  16).  No  published  study  is  available  on  oxirane  chemistry  in
flames.

Concerning ignition behavior, Burden and Burgoyne [684] showed that
cool  flames  can  be  initiated  in  oxirane-air  mixtures  at  atmospheric
pressure in a silica vessel. An increase of the oxirane proportion sub-
stantially  lowered  the  minimum  pressure  for  cool-flame  initiation
(Fig. 56).

Later, IDTs of oxirane were measured in STs by Burcat [643], Wür-
mel et al. [647], Kang et al. [644,645], and Lifshitz et al. [646]. The
experiments of [645] show the activation energy in Ar to be almost half
of  that  measured  in  N2,  due  to  the  higher  heat  capacity  of  N2  (7.8
cal/mol/K at 1000 K) compared to Ar (4.9 cal/mol/K at 1000 K) causing
the temperature increase with N2 to be smaller than with Ar. The IDTs of
oxirane are markedly reduced compared to those of its isomer acetal-
dehyde [645,647].

Oxirane pyrolysis was studied by Lifshitz and Ben-Hamou [594] in a
ST  (1.5-10  -bar,  830–1200  K)  and  by  Baldwin  et  al.  [616]  in  a  FR
(0.08–0.7 bar, 753 K). CO, CH4, C2H6, and acetaldehyde were the major
products. The former study [594] suggested that the main initiation step
in  the  pyrolysis  of  oxirane  is  its  isomerization  to  yield  acetaldehyde,
which  decomposes  to  form  smaller  products.  This  reaction  was  later
theoretically investigated [617] showing that it proceeds through a C–O
 ̇
rupture to form the
O biradical, followed by 1,2-H shift in the
biradical  to  form  chemically  activated  CH3CHO,  which  can  either  be
stabilized by collisions or directly dissociate to radical products [617,

 ̇
CH2CH2

Fig.  50. Some
from [397,629].

 ̇
OH  formation  paths  in  THP  oxidation  mechanism.  Redrawn

predominantly KHP-βα (see Fig. 54 for the KHP structures) as recently
suggested by the theoretical study of Lockwood and Labbe [612].

Very recently, Belhadj et al. [590] investigated THF oxidation in a
JSR under fuel-lean conditions (φ = 0.5), 10 bar and 550–620 K, using
high-resolution MS (orbitrap) and liquid chromatography. They detec-
ted KHPs (C4H6O4) and other highly oxygenated molecules (e.g. C4H4O5,
C4H8O5, C4H6O6, and C4H8O7), which were assumed to result from the
addition of up to three O2 molecules to radicals of the fuel. Fig. 55 shows
the  scaled  signal  profiles  of  selected  products,  as  they  were  not
quantified.

5.2.1.2. Other  non-substituted  saturated  cyclic  ethers. While THF  is the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101969

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 51. (a) PES of unimolecular dissociation of furan taken from [228]; 2-furyl is furan-2-yl, 3-furyl furan-3-yl. (b) Reaction flux analysis for furan decomposition at
1575 K using the model by Cheng at al. [638]. Reproduced from [228,638] with permission of Elsevier.

Fig. 52. PES of the unimolecular decomposition of the (5-methylfuran-2-yl)methyl radical (R1C6H7O) calculated by Sirjean et al. [642]. Values are 0 K, energies in
kcal/mol relative to R1C6H7O. Reproduced from [642] with permission of Elsevier.

685], as shown in Fig. 43 (Part 5.1). The oxirane-acetaldehyde isomer-
ization was found to play also a very important role under ST ignition
[644,647] or JSR oxidation [610] conditions.

Concerning oxidation product quantification, an early study was per-
formed by Burgoyne and Kapur in 1951 [686] in a silica vessel at tem-
peratures of 693 K and 571 K, being, respectively, above and below the
optimum conditions for cool-flame formation. They measured the pro-
files of reactants, CO, CO2, CH2O, the sum of acids, and the sum of other
aldehydes  as  a  function  of  time.  Later,  Baldwin  et  al.  [616]  studied
oxirane oxidation at 753 K in a slowly reacting mixture of H2 + O2 and
 ̇
confirmed that
OH attack was more important than H attack. In 1996,
following  their  pioneering  work  concerning  hydrocarbon  oxidation,
which is described in Part 4, the group of Cathonnet in Orl ́eans [610]
studied oxirane oxidation in a JSR (1–10 bar, 800–1150 K). Using GC
analysis, they showed that this CE rapidly produces CO, H2, CH2O, and
CH3CHO. Fig. 57a presents an example of the mole fraction profiles of
the  detected  species.  The  peak  mole  fraction  of  CH3CHO,  the  experi-
mentally  detected  most  abundant  oxygenated  intermediate,  occurs
around 900 K. During its JSR oxidation studied by [610], oxirane was

found to be consumed largely (> 60%) via unimolecular reactions, e.g.
the isomerization to yield acetaldehyde.

Oxetane:
While, as mentioned in Part 5.1, several theoretical studies addressed
the  kinetics  of  oxetane  decomposition  [615,619,687,688],  only  one
experimental  study  was  found  concerning  its  oxidation  [623]  (see
Table 16) above 800 K.

Ignition delay times of oxetane were measured in a ST (1050-1780 K,
1.7–5.3 bar) by Dagaut et al. [623] in 1997. They express the ignition
delay time in terms of the concentrations of each component in the gas
τ = 10-13.5  exp(13389/T5)[oxetane]-0.36[O2]-0.59[Ar]0.088
phase  as
(units: s, mole, cm3, K). The negative order for the fuel is similar to that
found  for  oxirane  (-0.4)  [645].  Such  a  negative  order  is  usually  not
observed for hydrocarbons [623] and larger CE as the values for for THF
(0.3) [653] and ~0 for THP [627] show.

The mole fraction profiles of the species formed during the oxidation of
oxetane in JSR were measured at 1 bar and 10 bar over the temperature
range 800-1150 K by Dagaut et al. [623]. CO, CO2, CH4, CH2O, C2H6,
C2H4,  C2H2,  CH3CHO,  C3H8,  C3H6,  propyne,  and  1,3-C4H6  were

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101970

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 16
The main experimental studies for the combustion chemistry of saturated CEs from 1980. The studies are sorted by the experimental target, i.e. LBV, IDT, speciation
data (spec. data). “–” indicates that the information is not available.

Fuel

Exp. Target

Reactor

Operating conditions
T (K)

P (bar)

Oxirane

IDT

ST

Methyloxirane

2,3-Dimethyloxirane

Spec. data

LBV
IDT

Spec. data

IDT
Spec. data

ST
JSR
FR

CVB
ST

RCM
ST

PLF

ST
ST
FRphotolysis

1067-1328
875-1513
910-1200
1050-1400
830-1200
800-1150
753

298d
960-1300
962-1127
870-980
850-1250
900-1450
up to 1600

980-1250
900-1150
650-800

Ethyloxirane

IDT
Spec. data

ST
FRphotolysis

980-1250
650-800

5-15
–a
2.5-7
2-5
1.5-10
1-10
0.08-0.7

1
2.5-7
10-40
10-20
2
40
1

2.5-7
2
0.01

2.5-7
0.01

φ

0.4-3.2
0.7-1.7
0.5-1
0.5-2
∞

0.5-2
∞,
0.2-3.2b

0.7-2.1
0.5-1
0.5-2
0.5-2
∞
∞

1.0-1.6

1-2
∞
– n

1-2
– n

Fuel % (diluent)

Year, first author, ref.

3-9 (N2)
2.3-14.3 (Ar)
1-4 (Ar)
0.5-2 (Ar)
0.25-1 (Ar),
0.15 (N2)
1.7-4 (N2)
1c (N2)

3.6-10 (N2)
2-4 (Ar)
2.6-9.5 (IMf)
1.7-5 (IMf)
0.1-1 (Ar)
0.5 (Ar)
2.8-3.9 (Ar)

1.45-2.9 (Ar)
1 (Ar)
– (He) n

1.45-2.9 (Ar)
– (He) n

1980 Burcat [643]
1993, 1996, Kang [644,645]
1994, Lifshitz [646]
1996, Würmel [647]
1983 Lifshitz [594]
1996 Dagaut [610]
1984 Baldwin [616]

2010 Burluka [648]
1994 Lifshitz [646]
2021, Ramalingam [649]
2021 Ramalingam [649]
1994 Lifshitz [614]
2021 Ramalingam [649]
2021 Knyazkov [650]

1994 Lifshitz [646]
1995 Lifshitz [651]
2021 Doner [511]

1994 Lifshitz [646]
2021 Christianson [395]

Oxetane

THF

2-MTHF

IDT
Spec. data

LBV

IDT

Spec. data

LBV

IDT

Spec. data

3-MTHF

IDT

2,5-DMTHF

LBV
IDT

ST
JSR

PLF
CVB
ST

RCM

ST
PLF

JSR

Static reactor
CFR engine
RCM
FRphotolysis

PLF
CVB

ST

RCM

ST
FR
PLF

CFR engine
RCM

ST
RCM

CVB
ST
RCM

1050-1780
800-1150

1.7-5.3
1-10

0.5-2
0.5-2

0.5-2 (Ar)
0.1 (N2)

1997 Dagaut [623]
1997 Dagaut [623]

298-398d
373-453d
1000-1800
691-1100
1300-1700
640-900
640-770
650-900
1070-1530
up to 2300
up to 2300
800-1100
500-1100
500-700
550-620
493
400h, 827i
710
400-700

298-398d
373-453d
423d
1050-1800
753-1349
1034-1515
640-770
640-900
639-878
1325-1648
900-1100
up to 2100
up to 2240
up to 1634
400h
719

715-1250
615-900
630-715

373-453d
860-1320
660-880

1
1-4
2-5
20-40
8.1-9.3
5-10
20
18
2-10
0.02-0.03
0.07
10
1.07
0.9
10
0.2
0.8h, 12i
7.7
0.01-2.7

1
1-4
1-10
1.2-10.1
10-20
3-12.1
20
3-21
10-40
3.3-11
1.7
0.04
0.07
0.05
0.8h
7.6

10-40
10-40
20

1-4
10-40
10-20

0.55-1.6
0.7-1.6
0.5-2
1
0.5-2
1
1
1
∞

1.0-1.75
0.7-1.3
0.5-1
0.5-2
0.36
0.5
2.75
0.95-1
1
– n

0.6-1.6
0.7-1.6
0.7-1.5
0.5-2
0.5-2
0.5-3
1
1
0.5-2
∞
∞

1.7
0.7-1.3
1
0.95-1
1

0.5-2
0.5-2
1

0.7-1.6
1
1

2.1-5.8 (N2)
2.2-5.8 (N2)
0.5-2 (Ar)
3.6 (N2)
0.25-1 (Ar)
3.7 (IMe)
3.68 (IMf)
1 (IMf)
0.25-1 (Ar)
11.5-18 (Ar)
2.7-4.9 (Ar)
0.1 (N2)
1 (He)
1 (Ar)
0.5 (N2)
33.3g
3.7 (N2)
3.7 (IMe)
– (He) n

2015 Tran [195]
2020 Wang [652]
1998 Dagaut [653]
2014 Uygun [281]
2015 Tran [195]
2015 Vanhove [282]
2016 Sudholt [654]
2020 Wu [655]
1986 Lifshitz [613]
2011 Kasper [656]
2015 Tran [195]
1998 Dagaut [653]
2015 Vanhove [282]
2019 Hansen [625]
2021 Belhadj [590]
1988 Molera [657]
1991 Leppard [82]
2015 Vanhove [282]
2016 Antonov [624]

1.79-4.63 (N2)
2.08-4.63 (N2)j
2.08-4.36 (N2, He)
0.25-1 (Ar)
1.46-5.83 (N2)
3 (Ar)
2.91 (IMf)
2.91 (IMe)
1.4-5.83 (IMf)
3 (Ar)
9.1 (N2)
14.5 (Ar)
2.7-5 (Ar)
1.4k (N2)
3 (N2)
2.91 (IMe)

1.5-5.7 (N2)
1.5-5.7 (N2)
2.91 (IMf)

2017 De Bruycker [658]
2018, 2020 Wang [652,659]
2021 Li [660]
2015, 2016 Wang [661,662]
2017 Tripathi [663]
2016, 2019 Jouzdani [664,665]
2016 Sudholt [654]
2017 Fenard [666]
2017 Tripathi [663]
2019 Jouzdani [664]
2017 De Bruycker [658]
2013 Moshammer [667]
2017 De Bruycker [658]
2021 Tran [668]
1991 Leppard [82]
2017 Fenard [666]

2019 Tripathi [669]
2019 Tripathi [669]
2016 Sudholt [654]

1.72-3.85 (N2)
2.41 (N2)
2.41 (IMe)

2020 Wang [652]
2019 Fenard [670]
2019 Fenard [670]

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101971

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 16 (continued )

Fuel

Exp. Target

Reactor

Operating conditions
T (K)

P (bar)

2-ETHF

2-BTHF

Spec. data

IDT

LBV
IDT

RCM
FR

RCM

CVB
ST
RCM

2-THFFOH

Spec. data

PLF

712
948-1198

650-714

448d
705-1210
650-900

up to 1735
up to 1668

GVL

Spec. data

FR
PLF

873-1113
up to 2250

1,3-dioxolane

IDT

Spec. data

ST
RCM
FR
Static reactor
JSR

THP

LBV
IDT

PLF
ST

Spec. data

PLF

CFR engine
JSR
FR

1032-1289
662-911
963-1093
373-575
700-1180

298-398d
1000-1700
1350-1613
up to 2250
up to 2240
358h
800-1100
913-1133
500-700
500-700

10
0.04

20

1-3
20
10.1

0.05
0.05

1.7
0.07

20-40
20-40
1
0.04
10

1
2-5
8.8-9.1
0.03
0.07
0.6h
10
1.7
0.01-2
0.01-2

1,4-dioxane

Spec. data

Static reactor
ST
PLF

473, 783-823
1550-2100
–

0.4, 0.025
0.07-0.16
0.04

φ

1
∞

1

Fuel % (diluent)

2.41 (IMe)
–

2.41 (IMf)

Year, first author, ref.

2019 Fenard [670]
2019 Wang [671]

2016 Sudholt [654]

0.7-1.35
1
0.5-1

1.28-2.43 (N2)
1.82 (N2)
0.9-1.8 (IMf)

2017 Cai [672]
2017 Cai [672]
2017 Cai [672]

1
1

∞

1

1
1
∞
∞

1

0.55-1.5
0.5-2
0.5-2
1.75
1.0-1.3
0.95-1
0.5-2
∞
– n
–n

5, ∞
∞

1.8

1.5l (N2)
0.8k (N2)

9.1 (N2)
1.4m (Ar)

2 (Ar)
3 (IMf)
~1 (H2O)
67 (n)
0.1 (N2)

2-5.5 (N2)
0.5-2 (Ar)
0.5-1 (Ar)
15 (Ar)
3-3.9 (Ar)
3 (N2)
0.1 (N2)
3.9-9.2 (N2)
– (He) n
–(He)n

50, 100
1-4 (Kr)
13.2 (Ar)

2021 Tran [251]
2021 Tran [668]

2015, 2016 De Bruycker [259,673]
2017 Sudholt [674]

2021 Wildenberg [675]
2021 Wildenberg [675]
1987 Cutler [676]
1991 Fern ́andez [677]
2021 Wildenberg [675]

2015 Tran [196]
1997 Dagaut [627]
2015 Tran [196]
2013 Labbe [626]
2015 Tran [196]
1991 Leppard [82]
1997 Dagaut [627]
2015 Tran [196]
2017 Rotavera [398]
2019 Davis [397]

1989, 1991 Battin [678,679]
2011 Yang [680]
2009 Lin [681]

a Initial pressure (P1) of 0.13 bar, but the final pressure (P5) was not provided in the original paper.
b In oxidation, mixtures are made of oxirane, O2, H2 and N2.
c 1% of oxirane in the mixtures of oxirane, O2, H2 and N2.
d Initial temperature.
e Inert mixture of N2, Ar, and CO2
f Inert mixture of N2 and Ar
g Undiluted.
h In the intake manifold.
i Maximum value in the cylinder at a compression ratio of 8.7.
j Data for 2-MTHF and iso-octane mixtures are also available in [659].
k CH4 is added to stabilize the flame.
l 6.25% CH4 is added to stabilize the flame.
m Mixed with acetone in a 2 : 1 ratio, and using the photolysis of acetone
n Mixture of O2, CE, He, and Cl radical produced via photolysis of oxalyl chloride (COCl)2.

detected,  but  no  propanal.  The  lack  of  propanal  indicates  a  possible
difference  in  the  unimolecular  initiation  mechanism  of  oxetane
compared to that of oxirane. Formaldehyde and ethylene (Fig. 57b) were
the major intermediates, which was explained with the reaction oxeta-
ne→CH2O+C2H4.  This  pathway  accounts  for  around  50%  of  oxetane
consumption under the JSR oxidation conditions and it was also found
to  be  very  important  under  thermal  decomposition  conditions  in  the
theoretical study of [619].

THP:
Laminar burning velocities of THP were measured by Tran et al. [196]
at atmospheric pressure. No high-pressure data is reported in the liter-
ature. At 1 bar, 298 K, and φ = 1.1, the LBV is around 44 ± 1.8 cm/s, i.e.
very close to that of THF. No data was found for oxirane and oxetane for

comparison.

High-temperature IDTs were measured in ST by Dagaut et al. [627] in
the 90s (2-5 bar, 1000-1700 K) and by Tran et al. [196] in 2015 over a
complementary pressure range (8.8-9.1 bar).

Speciation data measured in pyrolysis and in flames are available from
studies in FRs and in flames [82,196,626,627] (see Table 16). Tran et al.
[196] measured the species formed during the THP pyrolysis in a FR and
reported the mole fraction profiles of more than twenty products with up
to ten heavy atoms (naphthalene). Several of them were identified as
primary  products  of  THP  thermal  decomposition,  such  as  CO,  C2H4
CH2O, C2H3CHO, C3H6, and 1,3-C4H6. Fig. 58 presents the temperature
dependence  of  the  mole  fractions  of  THP  and  of  two  important  alde-
hydes,  CH2O  and  C2H3CHO.  These  data  were  used  to  test  the  kinetic

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101972

L.-S. Tran et al.

models developed by [196,626,627]. The mole fraction profiles of more
than  thirty  C0-C6  species  were  measured  in  PLFs  fueled  with  THP  by
Labbe  et  al.  [626]  and  Tran  et  al.  [196]  using  PI-MBMS  and  GC,
respectively. CH2O, C2H4, 1,3-C4H6, and C2H3CHO were detected as the
important intermediates.

Concerning products formed during THP oxidation, early studies were
performed in the 90s by Leppard [82] in a CFR engine and by Dagaut
et al. [627] in a JSR (800-1100 K, 10 bar). Similar to what was observed
for pyrolysis and flame, these oxidation studies showed that CO, C2H4,
CH2O,  and  C3H6  were  formed  in  high  concentrations.  Leppard  [82]
detected C2H3CHO, dihydropyrans, tetrahydro-4H-pyran-4-one, and 1,
5-pentanedial in non-negligible amounts under the CFR engine condi-
tions. The presence of the three latter species indicates an effective role
of THP low-temperature oxidation chemistry under these conditions.

Following a previous study of their group on the yields of conjugate
alkene  plus  HO2  formation  [398],  Davis  et  al.  [397]  studied  the
Cl-initiated oxidation of THP and of its cycloalkane counterpart, cyclo-
hexane, in a FR (500-700 K, 0.01 and 2 bar) using multiplexed PIMS. For
both  fuels,  they  observed  time-resolved  ion  signals  corresponding  to
fuel-specific  cyclic  KHP,  at  m/z  132  (C5H8O4)  for  THP  and  m/z  130
(C6H10O3) for cyclohexane. These  KHPs were produced in lower con-
centration from THP than from cyclohexane, as inferred from ion signal
intensity. This depletion was explained by the ease of ring-opening of
the THP related Q ̇OOH radicals yielding 1,5-pentanedial, which leads to
a reduced importance of second O2 addition reactions necessary for KHP
formation in THP.

1,3-Dioxolane (C3H6O2):
The IDTs of 1,3-dioxolane were recently measured in a ST and in a
RCM  [675]  over  the  temperature  range  630-1300  K.  As  is  shown  in
Fig. 59, the group of Heufer in Aachen was able to measure IDTs at 20
and  40  bar  using  both  types  of  devices.  A  very  weak  NTC  zone  was
observed under the RCM conditions.

Regarding product formation, the earliest studies [676,677,689,690]
indicate H2, CO, CO2, CH2O, CH4, C2H4, and C2H6 as the main products
of  1,3-dioxolane  pyrolysis  or  photodecomposition.  Wildenberg  et  al.

[675] measured these species plus water in abundant amounts during
the oxidation of this CE in a JSR at 10 bar above 700 K, with no reactivity
observed below. Note, however, that a study of Molera et al. [691] in
1971 detected some specific low-temperature species, e.g. 1,3-dioxola-
n-2-one, 1,3-dioxolan-4-one, 1,3-dioxolan-2-hydroperoxides in a static
reactor at temperatures below 613 K with initial fuel mole fractions up
to 50%.

1,4-Dioxane (C4H8O2):
The  studies  for  1,4-dioxane  focused  mainly  on  product  formation.
Battin et al. [678,679] investigated the pyrolysis and oxidation of this
CE in a static reactor. They detected CO, H2, C2H4, and CH2O as the main
pyrolysis products. These species (plus CO2 and H2O) were also detected
in  abundance  under  oxidation  conditions.  More  recently,  Yang  et  al.
[680] at Argonne National Laboratory investigated the pyrolysis of this
CE in a ST and confirmed the results from [678]. Under PLF conditions
with MS analysis, Lin et al. [681] measured 20 C1-C4 intermediates, six
of those being radicals, and C2H2, C2H4, and CH2O are again the most
abundant ones.

5.2.1.3. Comparison of the behavior of the non-substituted saturated cyclic
ethers. The influence of the ring-size in non-substituted CEs containing
one O-atom is discussed here. The chemical structure, the Bond Disso-
ciation Energies (BDEs) and the ring strain  energies of these CEs and
their cycloalkane counterparts are presented in Table 17. The C–H BDE
at the C2 position decreases when going from oxirane to THF (103.6 to
92.3 kcal/mol calculated at the G4 level of theory) and then increases
again from THF to THP (92.3 to 94.7 kcal/mol); indicating a clear ring
size  effect.  This  trend  is  also  seen  in  the  cycloalkane  counterparts.
Furthermore, the C–H BDE at the C2 position is about 4-5 kcal/mol lower
than those at other positions in the same CE or those of the cycloalkane
counterparts, indicating a strong effect of the ether O-atom on the C–H
BDE.

As is shown in Table 17, the ring strain energy increases from THP
(~0-1.2  kcal/mol)  to  oxirane  (~26.3–26.8  kcal/mol);  they  are  only
slightly lower than those of their cycloalkane counterparts.

Fig. 53. THF auto-ignition at low-temperature: (a) ignition delay times in a ST (THF/air mixtures), (b) normalized pressure profiles during auto-ignition at different
core gas temperatures (stoichiometric THF/O2/inert mixture). Reproduced from Refs. [281] and [282] with permission of Elsevier and of American Chemical Society,
respectively.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101973

L.-S. Tran et al.

the IDT ranking might be found in the key chemical pathways, as dis-
played in Fig. 61. In oxirane and oxetane, fuel unimolecular initiation
plays an important role. The unimolecular dissociation of oxirane leads
 ̇
CO  radicals  [617],  while  C2H4  and
to  the  formation  of  methyl  and  H
 ̇
CH2O are obtained from oxetane decomposition [619]. H
CO radical is a
source of H-atom, which promotes the H+O2 branching step (the most
promoting  reaction  in  IDT  studies).  The  unimolecular  dissociation
leading to two radicals, with one rapidly giving H-atom, explains the
lowest IDTs observed for oxirane. Looking at the β- or α-scission prod-
ucts of the dominant CE radical formed through H-abstraction, those are
CO  from  oxetane,  C2H4 +  ̇
 ̇
C2H4 + H
CH2CHO  from  THF  (see  flow  rate
 ̇
analysis in Fig. 15 of Ref. [195]) and 2 C2H4 +H
CO from THP (see flow
 ̇
CH2CHO radical is not a direct
rate analysis in Fig. 16 of Ref. [196]). The
 ̇
CO radical; it can yield H-atom and ketene, but
source of H-atom as the H
 ̇
 ̇
also CO and
CH3 radical and can combine with the
CH3 radical to give
 ̇
propanal. The CEs, which their radicals produce the H
CO radical (oxe-
tane  and  THP)  have  similar  IDTs,  which  are  significantly  lower  than
those of THF. In conclusion, although some first explanations about the
relative reactivity of these saturated CEs could be offered based on the
literature  knowledge,  more  comparative  investigations  for  these  CEs
will be useful.

5.2.1.4. Detailed kinetic models of non-substituted saturated cyclic ethers.
Table  18  summarizes  the  main  detailed  kinetic  models  for  the  non-
substituted saturated CEs.

Five kinetic models were developed for oxirane with four in the 90s
[610,644,647,701] and one in 2005 [617]. After the first proposition of
Borisov et al. [701] based on literature or evaluated rate constants, the
model by Kang et al. [644] was developed for oxirane oxidation with the
part  related  to  fuel  decomposition  calculated  using  ab  initio  methods
(HF/6-31G*). By determining transition states, four pathways to form
acetaldehyde (1), vinyl alcohol (2), formaldehyde and carbene (3) and
methoxy  carbene  (4)  were  confirmed.  The  first  path  is  energetically
favorable  as  an  initiation  step.  The  model  by  Würmel  et  al.  [647]
developed in the same year was quite similar to that proposed by Kang
et al. [644], but with rate constants exclusively taken from the literature,
e.g. from [594]. Note that these models capture the ST high-temperature
IDT  of  [644,645,647]  (see  conditions  in  Table  18)  well.  The  more
detailed model by Dagaut et al. [610] was developed by expanding that
of Lifshitz and Ben-Hamou [594], with oxirane unimolecular initiation
pathways adjusted to account for pressure dependence. The predictions
of this model agreed reasonably well with the JSR experiments >800 K
and the high-temperature IDT data of Burcat [643], showing neverthe-
less the need to better estimate the rate constants for oxirane decom-
position  at  high  temperatures.  Later,  Joshi  et  al.  [617]  proposed  a
kinetic  model  for  oxirane  pyrolysis  by  theoretically  examining  the
unimolecular  decomposition  of  oxirane  and  the  fate  of  the  oxiranyl
radical  (see  Figs.  43  and  46  in  Part  5.1).  Compared  to  Lifshitz  and
Ben-Hamou
the
computed
oxirane-acetaldehyde isomerization was found to be in close agreement
for T > 1000 K, but lower by a factor of 2 at 800 K. The model was tested
using the pyrolysis species profiles measured in ST by [594]. None of the
models mentioned above consider low-temperature chemistry for oxir-
ane oxidation.

constant

[594],

rate

the

for

Regarding oxetane, the only available model is the oxidation model
developed by Dagaut et al. [623] based on the oxirane model described
above  [610].  This  model  well  predicts  data  for  ST  ignition  and  JSR
oxidation  (Table  18).  The  typical  reaction  classes  for  oxetane  were
implemented using mostly estimated rate constants, e.g. unimolecular
initiation of  the fuel to yield C2H4  and CH2O, H-abstractions to yield
oxetanyl radicals with their further β-scission decompositions.

Three main models are dedicated to THF. First, Dagaut et al. [653]
developed a THF kinetic model starting from their oxirane and oxetane
models  [610,623].  This  model  includes  both  unimolecular  initiation
steps  of  THF  suggested  by  Lifshitz  et  al.  [613]  (THF→C2H4+C2H4O,

Fig.  54. Experimental  PIE  curve  of  m/z  118  (C4H6O4)  (symbols)  obtained
during THF oxidation in a JSR from 8.5 to 10.0 eV (left panel) and 9.5 to 11.0
eV  (right panel). The  experimentally  observed  ionization  thresholds  are  indi-
cated with white boxes and are compared with theoretically predicted ioniza-
tion energies (marked in gray) of the six conceivable KHP isomers. Reproduced
from Ref. [625] with permission of American Chemical Society.

The differences in the chemical structures induce differences in the
combustion  chemistry/properties  of  these  CEs.  Leppard  showed  that
THF  has a significantly lower RON compared to cyclopentane (73 vs.
102),  indicating that THF is more reactive under auto-ignition condi-
tions [82]. Moreover, as described earlier, negative power dependences
to fuel concentration were observed for the IDT of oxirane and oxetane
[623,645]  indicating  a  promoting  effect  of  fuel  concentration  on  the
reactivity, while non-negative ones were seen for THF and THP [627,
653].  Due  to  their  high  ring  strain  energies,  oxirane  and  oxetane are
mainly consumed by unimolecular initiation reactions under both py-
rolysis  and  high-temperature  oxidation  conditions  [594,610,623,644,
647], whereas THF and THP mostly react via H-abstractions by small
 ̇
radicals (H-atom,
OH, etc.) [195,196,283,627,653]. Based on JSR ex-
periments (800-1100 K, φ = 1, 10 bar, residence time of 0.5 s), Dagaut
et al. [653] concluded that the fuel reactivity in their JSR increased from
smaller to larger rings, i.e. oxirane < oxetane < THF < THP (the most
reactive). In contrast, they found that the fuel ignition ability follows the
order oxirane > oxetane > THP >THF based on IDTs (1100-1700 K, 1%
fuel/4.75%O2/Ar,  3.5  bar)  as  shown  in  Fig.  60.  The  authors  (Dagaut
et  al.  [653])  explained  this  with  the  role  of  unimolecular  de-
compositions, which are important under the studied ignition conditions
but less important under the JSR oxidation conditions. Under the latter
conditions,  the  reactivity  increases  with  increasing  the  number  of
abstractable H-atoms in the fuels. IDTs are longer for THF than for THP,
which is consistent with the ranking observed by Tran et al. [196] and
with that observed for cyclopentane and cyclohexane [698]. Compared
to cyclopropane, Lifshitz et al. [646] observed that oxirane has much
lower  IDTs  (by  an  order  of  magnitude  in  the  temperature  range  of
1200-1500 K), thus higher reactivity, which seems to be consistent with
the lower C-H BDE of oxirane as is shown in Table 17 and with the fact
that  the  overall  thermal  decomposition  rate  of  oxirane  [617]  is  3-10
times  higher  than  those  of  cyclopropane  [699].  To  the  best  of  our
knowledge, there is no comparative study between oxetane and cyclo-
butane concerning their IDTs or unimolecular decomposition reactions.
Dagaut et al. [653] explained the easier ignition of small CEs based
on  the  order  of  ring  strain  energy  that  could  strongly  influence  fuel
unimolecular  initiation  steps.  However,  the  study  on  the  ignition  of
cyclopropane  and  cyclobutane  (1200-1600  K,  φ = 1) by  Slutsky  et  al.
[700] does not find this ranking: they found cyclopropane to be more
difficult to ignite than cyclobutane. A more convincing explanation of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101974

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 55. Profiles of selected species during THF oxidation in a JSR (φ = 0.5, 0.5% THF, 10 bar, residence time of 2 s): experimental signal profiles (dots) [590] scaled
to the maximum computed mole fraction using the model of Fenard et al. [283]. (lines). Reproduced from Ref. [590] with permission of American Chemical Society.

Fig.  56. Ignition  temperature-pressure  limits  for  oxirane-oxygen  mixtures  in  a  quartz  explosion  vessel.  (a)  Equimolecular  fuel-O2  mixture.  (b)  Effect  of  fuel-O2
mixture composition on the cool flame pressure-temperature limit. Curves: 1, oxirane + O2; 2, oxirane + 2 × O2; 3, 2 × oxirane + O2; 4, 4 × oxirane + O2. Reproduced
from Ref. [684] with permission of the Royal Society.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101975

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 57. Mole fraction profiles of species produced during the oxidation of oxirane (a) and oxetane (b) in a JSR (10 bar, φ = 2, τ = 1 s, 0.1-0.15% fuel). Symbols:
experiment, lines with small symbols: model (in (a): O2, +; CO, o; CO2, *; oxirane, Δ; CH3CHO, □; H2, ◊; in (b): O2, +; CO, o; CO2, *; CH2O, × ; oxetane, ●; C2H4, □;
H2, ◊. Reproduced from Refs. [610,623] with permission of Elsevier.

THF→C3H6+CH2O). The rate coefficients for H-abstractions from THF
and the reactions of the derived radicals were mostly estimated. The first
 ̇
O2  addition  was  globalized  considering
OH,  C2H4,  and  CHOCHO  as
products  and  no  second  O2  addition  chemistry  was  considered.
Although, the model predicted IDTs in ST and JSR species profiles fairly
well, the authors pointed out the need for more accurate rate coefficients
for the β-scissions of the THF-yl radicals at temperatures above 800 K.
Around 17 years later, the Nancy group developed a new model for the
high-temperature THF oxidation [195] by combining reactions gener-
ated automatically by EXGAS with those calculated with CBS-QB3. The
unimolecular  initiations  of  THF,  H-abstractions  from  THF  and  β-scis-
sions  of  the  fuel  radicals  were  theoretically  calculated  by  Verdicchio
et  al.  [618]  and  by  Tran  et  al.  [195],  respectively.  A  PES  example  is
shown in Fig. 47. The model reproduced the high-temperature IDTs in
ST,  LBVs  and  species  profiles  in  PLFs  well,  although  a  slight  over-
prediction of LBVs was observed. In 2018, Fenard et al. [283] proposed
the first detailed kinetic model for the low-temperature oxidation of THF
with the high-temperature part taken mainly from [195]. The thermo-
chemical and kinetic data of important reactions of the low-temperature
part, especially those involved in the first O2  addition pathways, were
derived from ab initio calculations at the CBS-QB3 level of theory (see
PES in Fig. 49 for a comparison of results from different studies). The
model predicted literature data measured in RCM, ST (IDTs), JSR and
PLFs (species profiles) reasonably well despite a noted underprediction
for the JSR mole fraction profiles of CO, CO2  and those of some oxy-
genates  below  800  K.  This  model  was  recently  used  by  [590]  for

studying KHP formation, by [655] for studying low-temperature IDTs,
and by [702,703] for developing reduced models. A recent theoretical
study by Lockwood and Labbe [612] provided further insights into the
second O2 addition pathways including KHP formation.

 ̇
OH, H

The three detailed models developed for THP (Table 18) apply only
to high-temperature chemistry. The first one was developed by Dagaut
et  al.  [627]  with  the  rate  coefficients  for  unimolecular  initiations
assumed as those proposed by [613] for THF. Similar to the THF model,
the  first  O2  addition  in  the  THP  model  was  written  as  a  globalized
 ̇
CO, allyl, and CH2O, but neglecting the second
pathway yielding
O2  addition  chemistry.  The  model  predictions  showed  fairly  good
agreement  with  IDTs  measured  in  a  ST  and  with  JSR  species  profiles
[627]. However, the authors pointed out the need of more accurate rate
 ̇
constants  for  the  H-abstractions  from  THP  by
OH  and  for  the
high-temperature  decomposition  of  the  THP-yl  radicals  (including
THP-yl-2,  THP-yl-3,  THP-yl-4,  see  structures  in  Fig.  62).  Later,  Labbe
et al. [626] proposed a model with the rate coefficients of unimolecular
initiations taken from [627] and those of other reactions mainly based
on  analogies  with  cyclohexane  [704].  The  rate  coefficients  of  H-ab-
 ̇
CH3  radicals and  the fall-off for
stractions from THP by  H-atoms  and
THP-yl  decompositions  were  theoretically  calculated.  Simulations  of
species profiles in a fuel-rich PLFs (Table 18) showed good agreement
with experimental data in terms of peak magnitudes, shapes, and posi-
tions  of  the  mole  fraction  profiles  of  major  species  and  several  in-
termediates. However, CH2O mole fractions were over-predicted by a
 ̇
CO  ones  under-predicted  by  a  factor  of  4.  This
factor  of  2.5  and  H

Fig. 58. Mole fraction profiles of THP, CH2O, and C2H3CHO measured during FR pyrolysis at 1.7 bar. Symbols: experiments [196]; lines: simulations with the models
of Tran et al. [196], Labbe et al. [626], Dagaut et al. [627]. “PM without reactions 1-5”: Tran et al. model without the five unimolecular initiations involving C–C and
C–O (see text in Part 5.2.1.4). Reproduced from Ref. [196] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101976

L.-S. Tran et al.

in

mentioned

H-abstractions followed by ring-opening of the formed fuel radicals. The
model  by  [196]  showed  that  THP  pyrolysis  is  very  sensitive  to  the
unimolecular initiations involving C–C and C–O bond fissions (reactions
1-5
(1)
Fig.
THP → CH2=CHCH2CH2CH2OH,  (2)  THP → CH3CH2CH2CH2CHO,  (3)
THP → CH3CH2CH2OCH=CH2,  (4)  THP → CH2=CHCH2CH2OCH3,  (5)
THP → 1-C4H8 + CH2O. However, once the radical pool is established,
the product distribution and fuel consumption are mainly controlled by
H-abstraction  reactions  and  not  by  the  initial  bond  scission  reactions
[196].

including

58),

A model was proposed for each of the two CEs containing two O-
atoms in the ring, i.e. 1,3-dioxolane and 1,4-dioxane (Table 18). Wild-
enberg et al. [675] very recently developed a kinetic model for the low-
and high-temperature oxidation of 1,3-dioxolane with rate coefficients
calculated theoretically for the β-scission reactions of the fuel radicals
(1,3-dioxolan-2-yl and 1,3-dioxolan-4-yl) and estimated rate expression
for  other  reactions  using  analogies,  e.g.  to  2-MTHF  [658],  diethox-
y/dimethoxy  methane  [705,706],  1,4-dioxane  [596],  diethyl  ether
[707]. The model predictions agree well with high-pressure IDTs and
species  profiles.  The  authors  pointed  out  that  the  1,3-dioxolan-2-yl
radical  and  the  derived  Q ̇OOH  radical  react  faster  by  β-scission  than
by addition to O2, which explains the weak NTC behavior observed.

Yang et al. [680] proposed a model for the pyrolysis of 1,4-dioxane
including  unimolecular  initiation  pathways  that  were  theoretically
investigated  by  these  authors.  The  model  predictions  compared  well
with the ST pyrolysis species profiles measured in the same study. The
authors pointed out that, in analogy to the THP chemistry proposed by
Tran et al. [196], the dissociation/isomerization of 1,4-dioxane forms
ethylene  glycol  vinyl  ether  and  2-ethoxyacetaldehyde,  which  rapidly
dissociate to smaller species.

5.2.2. Substituted saturated cyclic ethers

As  shown  by  Table  16,  the  investigated  substituted  saturated  CEs
include  oxirane  rings  substituted  by  alkyl  chains,  and  THF  rings
substituted by alkyl chains or an oxygenated group. A few studies were
performed by Zalotai et al. [708,709] for the decomposition of meth-
yloxetanes, but with the aim to determine reaction rates, thus they are
not listed in Table 16. Except those by Zalotai et al. [708,709], no data
can be found for substituted oxetanes and substituted THPs. Moreover,
no  experimental  study  is  available  on  the  consumption  chemistry  of

Fig. 59. Simulated (lines) and measured (symbols) ignition delay times at 20
and  40  bar  (2%  and  3.2%  fuel  in  ST  and  RCM  experiments,  respectively).
Reproduced from Ref. [675] with permission of Elsevier.

prompted Labbe et al. [626] to suggest that the decomposition chemistry
of THP is more complex than thought. Later, Tran et al. [196] developed
a  model using EXGAS generation with key  kinetic parameters for the
primary  mechanism  updated  using  quantum-chemical  calculation
(CBS-QB3) and analogies with structurally similar species from cyclo-
hexane. Fig. 62 summarizes the important primary reaction pathways
and the methods used for determining their rate coefficients.

One  of  the  important  differences  between  this  last  model  and  the
previous ones [626,627] is the description of the initial unimolecular
ring-opening reactions. Dagaut et al. and Labbe et al. [626,627] adopted
the reaction steps proposed by Lifshitz et al. [613] for THF, in which the
diradicals  formed  in  the  ring-opening  bond  scission  step  dominantly
undergo  subsequent  β-scission  reactions  to  create  smaller  species.  In
contrast, the model of Tran et al. [196] contains diradical chemistry that
favors intramolecular H transfer over β-scissions. This model in general
accurately predicted LBVs and IDTs measured in a ST, and species pro-
files  measured  in  FRs  and  PLFs.  Under  flame  conditions,  the
above-mentioned  models  showed  that  THP  was  largely  consumed  by

Table 17
Structures and ring strain energies of non-substituted saturated CEs and their cycloalkane counterparts. Italic numbers on CE structure: atom position. Other numbers
on species structure: C(cid:0) H BDE, in kcal/mol; those of CEs were calculated in the present work, at CBS-QB3 and at G4 (in parentheses); those of cycloalkanes were
calculated at G3 by [692] and at G4 (in parentheses) by [693].

CEs

Oxirane

Oxetane

THF

THP

Ring strain energy (kcal/mol)

Cycloalkanes

Ring strain energy (kcal/mol)

26.80 [141,187,200]
26.52 [694]
26.3-26.4 [695]

25.70 [141,187,200]
25.30 [694]
24.7-24.9 [695]

5.90 [141,200]
5.96 [187]
5.4-5.7 [695]

0.50 [141,200]
0.70 [187]
0 [696]
0-1.2 [695]

Cyclopropane

Cyclobutane

Cyclopentane

Cyclohexane

27.60 [141,187,200]
27.5-27.7 [696]

26.20 [141,187,200]
26.80 [697]
25.8-26.5 [696]

6.30 [141,187,200]
7.50 [697]
5.9-6.4 [696]

0 (chair) [141,200,696]
0.08 (chair) [187]
1.0 (chair) [697]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101977

L.-S. Tran et al.

observe NTC behavior for this fuel.

High-temperature  (> 900  K)  product  formation  was  investigated  for
methyloxirane  by  Lifshitz  et  al.  [614]  and  Ramalingam  et  al.  [649]
under ST pyrolysis conditions, and by Knyazkov et al. [650] in a PLF.
The pyrolysis of 2,3-dimethyloxirane was studied by Flowers and Parker
[711] in a static vessel and by Lifshitz and Tamburu [651] in a ST. The
major  products  measured  during  the  pyrolysis  of  both  fuels  are  CO,
C2H4,  C2H6, and  CH4. The fuel isomers,  i.e. propanal and acetone for
methyloxirane,  and  butanone  and  2-methylpropanal  for  2,3-dimethy-
loxirane,  are  early  abundant  products  indicating  the  importance  of
isomerization in the initiation steps of both fuels. This is similar to what
was observed for oxirane as discussed above. Using MBMS, Knyazkov
et al. [650] only reported the formation of C1-C2  oxygenated products
and thus no fuel isomers.

The product formation  in low-temperature (< 800  K) was only  very
recently investigated for 2,3-dimethyloxirane and ethyloxirane by the
group of Rotavera at the University of Georgia [395,511] focusing on the
competition between the unimolecular decomposition reactions of fuel
radicals  and  their  reactions  with  O2.  Products  were  probed  using
SVUV-MBMS  during  the  Cl-initiated  oxidation  of  both  fuels  in  a  FR.
Several  species  were  identified  as  being  formed  by  the  unimolecular
decomposition of fuel radicals, such as C2H4, CH2O, ketene, and acro-
lein. Interestingly, reaction pathways prototypical for low-temperature
chemistry  of  alkanes  were  experimentally  observed  for  ethyloxirane
oxidation  but  not
in  which  oxirane
for  2,3-dimethyloxirane,
ring-opening dominated. In ethyloxirane oxidation, a conjugated alkene
(ethenyloxirane)  produced  through  2-ethyloxirane-3-yl + O2  combina-
 ̇
tion followed by HO
O-elimination was detected, whereas no conjugated
alkene isomer was detected for 2,3-dimethyloxirane. As indicated by the
PIE  spectra  in  Fig.  63a,  during  the  oxidation  of  2,3-dimethyloxirane,
vinyl acetate and diacetyl were detected but no CE typically involved
 ̇
OH-elimination from Q ̇OOH radical decomposition even though
in an
Fig.  48  shows  that  pathways  to  CE  exist,  whereas  two  CE  isomers
(3-THFone and bioxirane) were detected during ethyloxirane oxidation
(see Fig. 63b). Note that as displayed in Fig. 48, the radicals obtained by
 ̇
the  isomerizations  of  the  RO
O  radicals  are  resonance-stabilized
KHP-type  radicals,  which  from  alkanes  would  be  obtained  by  H-ab-
stractions  from  KHPs.  The  formation  of  ketones  and  bicylic  ethers  as
shown  in  Fig.  63  indicates  that  the  2,3-dimethyloxirane/ethyloxirane
consumption reactions are more complex than currently considered in
chemical kinetics mechanisms and that reactions of substituted oxiranes
may  contribute  to  the  radical  pool  more  than  what  is  currently
considered.

5.2.2.2. THF substituted by alkyl chains. Among the THFs substituted by
alkyl  chains,  2-MTHF  is  the  most  often  investigated  fuel,  with  data

Fig. 60. Comparison of the IDTs of non-substituted saturated CEs measured in
ST.  Symbols:  experiments  with  constant  initial  O2  mole  fractions.  Lines:
trendlines. Reproduced from Ref. [653] with permission of Taylor & Francis.

other substituted saturated CEs listed in Part 4.

5.2.2.1. Oxirane  rings  substituted  by  alkyl  chains. The data concerning
2,3-dimethyloxirane and ethyloxirane are more limited than those about
methyloxirane (Table 16).

Flame velocities  were measured by  Burluka et  al. [648]  in CVB for
methyloxirane and its isomers, propanal and acetone. The following LBV
order was observed: methyloxirane (~70 ± 1.5 cm/s at φ = 1.1, 298 K,
1 bar) > acetone (~47 ± 1.5 cm/s) > propanal (~37 ± 1.5 cm/s). No
other  LBV  data  were  published  after  1980  for  oxirane  derivatives.
However,  Gibbs  and  Calcote  [710]  showed  in  1959  using  a  Bunsen
burner  that methyloxirane  had  LBVs  ~45%  lower  than  oxirane,  indi-
cating an important effect of the lateral methyl group.

The earliest ignition study on the three substituted oxiranes (meth-
yloxirane,  2,3-dimethyloxirane,  ethyloxirane)  was  performed  by  the
group of Lifshitz [646] in a ST at 900-1300 K (see Table 20). The IDTs
can  be  ordered  as  follows:  2,3-dimethyloxirane  ≈ ethyloxirane  >
methyloxirane  ≈ oxirane.  Similar  to  what  was  observed  earlier  for
oxirane, the IDTs of the substituted oxiranes display a negative power
dependence on fuel concentration, indicating a promoting effect by the
fuel. Very recently, Ramalingam et al. [649] measured IDTs of methyl-
oxirane in a RCM and a ST (870–1127 K, 10–40 bar). The authors did not

Fig. 61. Scheme of the major reactions providing a possible explanation for the IDT ranking of CE IDTs.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101978

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 18
◦
Main detailed kinetic models for the combustion of non-substituted saturated CEs. For each CE, models are sorted by year of publication. Spe. N
N

: reaction number (forward). * The conditions have been presented in previous rows of this table.

◦

: species number. Reac.

Year & Ref.

◦
Spe. N

◦
Reac. N

Validation conditions (unit: T / K, P / bar)

CE

Oxirane

1990, Borisov et al. [701]

1996, Kang et al. [644]
1996, Würmel et al. [647]
1996, Dagaut et al. [610]

2005, Joshi et al. [617]

Oxetane

1997, Dagaut et al. [623]

THF

1998, Dagaut et al. [653]

2015, Tran et al. [195]

2018, Fenard et al. [283]

THP

1997, Dagaut et al. [627]

2013, Labbe et al. [626]

2015, Tran et al. [196]

15

30
30
67

45

63

71

255

467

72

125

273

14

88
60
452

332

423

484

1723

2390

507

1046

2031

1,3-Dioxolane

2021, Wildenberg et al. [675]

601

3165

-IDT in ST and static reactor (T = 770-1170, P = 0.3-1.5)
-ST pyrolysis species (T = 900-1000, P = 0.25-1)
-IDT in ST (T = 950-1220, P = 0.13a, φ = 0.5-2.0) [644,645]
-IDT in ST (T = 1050-1400, P = 1.9-5, φ = 0.5-2.0) [647]
-JSR species (T = 800-1150, P = 1-10.1, φ = 0.5-2) [610]
-IDT in ST (T = 1052-1315, P = 5.1, φ = 0.4-3.2) [643]
-ST pyrolysis species (T = 830-1200, P = 1.5-10.1) [594]

-IDT in ST (T = 1050-1780, P = 2-5.1, φ = 0.5-2) [623]
-JSR species (T = 800-1150, P = 1-10.1, φ = 0.5-2) [623]

-IDT in ST (T = 1000-1800, P = 2-5, φ = 0.5-2) [653]
-JSR species (T = 800-1100, P = 10, φ = 0.5-1) [653]

-IDT in ST (T = 1300-1700, P = 8.1-9.3, φ = 0.5-2) [195]
-LBV (Tinitial = 298-398, P = 1, φ = 0.55-1.6) [195]
-Species in PLF (P = 0.07, φ = 0.7-1.3) [195]

-IDT in RCM (T = 640-900, P = 5-10, φ = 1) [282]
-IDT in ST (T = 830-1100, P = 20-40, φ = 1) [281]
-JSR species (T = 500-1100, P = 1.1, φ = 0.5-2) [282] & [653]*
-RCM species (T = 711, P = 7.7) [282]
-Species in PLF [195]*

-IDT in ST (T = 1000-1700, P = 2-50, φ = 0.5-2) [627]
-JSR species (T = 800-1100, P = 10, φ = 0.5-2) [627]

-PLF species (P = 0.03, φ = 1.75) [626]

-LBV (Tinitial = 298-398, P = 1, φ = 0.55-1.5) [196]
-IDT in ST (T = 1350-1613, P = 8.9-9.1, φ = 0.5-2) [196]
-FR pyrolysis species (T = 913-1133, P = 1.7) [196] & [626]*

-IDT in ST (T = 1032-1289, P = 20-40, φ = 1) [675]
-IDT in RCM (T = 662-911, P = 20-40, φ = 1) [675]
-JSR species (T = 700-1180, P = 10, φ = 1) [675]

1,4-Dioxane

2011, Yang et al. [680]

–

83

-ST pyrolysis species (T = 1550-2100, P = 0.07-0.16) [680]

a Initial pressure (P1) of 0.13 bar, but final pressure (P5) was not provided in the original paper.

reported for LBVs, IDTs, and species profiles, as shown in Table 16.

Laminar burning velocities of 2-MTHF were measured using PLF [658]
and CVB [652,659,660] up to 10 bar. Those of 2,5-DMTHF and 2-BTHF
were also investigated in CVB [652,672]. No LBV data has been reported
for other alkyl substituted THFs. Wang et al. [652] observed LBV in the
following  order  2,5-DMTHF  (e.g.  47.65  ± 2.2  cm/s  at  φ = 1.1,
Tinitial=373 K) < 2-MTHF (53.32 ± 1.89 cm/s) < THF (59.06 ± 1.79
cm/s).  De  Bruycker  et  al.  [658]  obtained  the  same  ranking  between
2-MTHF and THF. While it is clear that methyl substitutions in THF fuels
reduce LBVs, the explanation for this is less obvious. A variety of factors
including adiabatic temperature, thermal diffusivities, and kinetics were
considered to explain this ranking [652]. From a kinetic point of view,
increasing the number of methyl substitutions increases the possibilities
of formation of methyl radicals that remove H-atoms from the system
through recombinations producing CH4, thus reducing LBVs [658].

High-temperature  IDTs  of  2-MTHF  were  measured  in  STs  by  Wang
et al. [661,662] and Jouzdani et al. [664,665]. Tripathi et al. [663,669],
Fenard et al. [670], and Cai et al. [672] reported IDTs obtained in STs for
2-MTHF,  2,5-DMTHF,  and  2-BTHF,  respectively.  In  the  temperature
range above 1000 K, the IDTs of these CEs exhibit overall an Arrhenius
behavior.

Concerning low-temperature auto-ignition behavior as described in Part
1 (Fig. 7), the group of Pitsch in Aachen [87] studied the DCN of a series
of  THF  derivatives  and  found  the  following  order:  2-BTHF(45.5)  >
2-ETHF  (28.1)  > 2-MTHF  (22.0)  ≈ THF  (21.9).  Thus,  increasing  the
length of the alkane side chain facilitated, as expected, auto-ignition. In

other studies, Sudholt et al. [654,663,669,672] and the group of Van-
hove in Lille [666,670] reported IDTs measurements in RCM for these
CEs, as well as for 2,5-DMTHF and 3-MTHF. Sudholt et al. [654] showed
that for temperatures below 715 K the IDTs of the four THF derivatives
presented in Fig. 64 followed an Arrhenius behavior with similar overall
activation  energies  and  suggested  that  the  rate  determining  reaction
steps  for  the  ignition  of  these  molecules  are  similar.  Note  that  in  the
temperature range 750-850 K, Fenard et al. [666,670] noticed a devia-
tion from Arrhenius behavior for the IDTs of 2-MTHF and 2,5-DMTHF,
although  not  yet  a  NTC  zone.  Fig.  64  also  shows  that  3-MTHF  is  the
easiest  to  ignite  CE  (shortest  IDT),  followed  by  2-ETHF~THF,  with
2-MTHF  being  the  least  ignitable  one  (longest  IDT).  The  ranking  be-
tween 2-MTHF and THF is consistent with that reported under engine
conditions by Leppard [82]. The considerable difference in IDTs (e.g. a
factor of 2.6 at 700 K) between 2-MTHF and 3-MTHF indicates a strong
influence  of  the  substituent  position.  An  explanation  for  this  trend  is
given in Part 5.2.2.4.

High-temperature  (> 900  K)  products,  as  summarized  in  Table  16,
were  measured  for  2-MTHF  (FR  and  ST  pyrolysis  [658,664]  and  PLF
[658,667,668]) and for 2,5-DMTHF (FR pyrolysis [671]). No speciation
data  was  found  for  any  other  molecules  of  this  class.  In  the  2-MTHF
pyrolysis  study  of  De  Bruycker  et  al.  [658]  16  species  were  detected
among which 4-penten-1-ol was formed in significant amounts (~2000
ppm).  The  formation  of  this  2-MTHF  isomer  was  explained  with  a
concerted  ring-opening  reaction  mechanism,  which  dominated  over
alternative ring-opening pathways.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101979

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 62. Important reaction pathways and respective methods used for rate coefficient  determinations in  the high-temperature THP  combustion model by Tran
et al. [196].

Under flame conditions, a wide range of products (~50 hydrocar-
bons and oxygenated species from C0-C7) was experimentally detected
[658,667,668].  2-MTHF  is  classically  consumed  mainly  by  H-abstrac-
tions and decompositions of the resulting fuel radicals into small species
by  β-scissions.  These  species,  such  as  2-oxo-ethyl  and  2-oxo-propyl
radicals,  may  combine  with  hydrogen  atoms  and  carbon-centered

radicals to form several of the detected oxygenated products.

Concerning  low-temperature  oxidation  (<  800  K)  products,  a  few
studies were performed, again only for 2-MTHF (in CFR engine [82] and
RCM [666]) and 2,5-DMTHF (in RCM [670]). Under engine conditions,
Leppard  [82]  indicated  that  in  2-MTHF  oxidation  the  same  general
organic  classes  were  formed  as  in  THF  oxidation:  unsaturated  cyclic

Fig. 63. PIE spectrum of m/z 86 signal from Cl-initiated oxidation of cis-2,3-dimethyloxirane (a) and ethyloxirane (b) in a FR. Reproduced from Refs. [395,511] with
permission of John Wiley and Sons.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101980

L.-S. Tran et al.

by the authors. A comparison of 2-THFFOH to 2-MTHF [668] demon-
strates that the difference in their chemical structures does no have a
notable  impact  on  the  mole  fractions  of  CO,  CO2,  H2O,  and  H2,  but
significant differences exist for the yields of intermediate species. The
doped 2-THFFOH flame produces more aldehydes, alcohols, and ethers
but forms clearly less ketones and hydrocarbons.

5.2.2.4. Detailed  kinetic  models  of  substituted  saturated  cyclic  ethers.
Table  19  summarizes  the  main  detailed  kinetic  models  for  the
substituted saturated CEs listed in Table 16. No models were found for
ethyloxirane  and  2-ETHF.  The  model  (56  species,  183  reactions)
developed by Wu et al. [702] for the oxidation of THF, 2-MTHF, and
2-BTHF is not listed in Table 19 because it is a reduced model based on
the detailed models of Fenard et al. [283] (THF), Tripathi et al. [663]
(2-MTHF), and Cai et al. [672] (2-BTHF).

For oxirane derivatives, Lifshitz and Tamburu [614,651] proposed the
first kinetic model for the thermal decomposition of methyloxirane and
2,3-dimethyloxirane with the rate coefficients for unimolecular initia-
tion reactions of the fuel mainly derived from their experiments [614,
651] and those of [711,713]. These models successfully reproduced the
production rates and distribution of pyrolysis products measured in ST
experiments (Table 19).

Later,  Burluka  et  al.  [648]  developed  a  model

the
high-temperature  oxidation  of  methyloxirane  combining  pyrolysis  re-
actions  largely  adopted  from  Lifshitz  and  Tamburu  [614]  with  a
mechanism  for  small  hydrocarbons  [714]  and  estimated  kinetics  of
oxygenated species. The model predicted the LBVs of fuel-rich mixtures
well but it significantly underpredicted those of fuel-lean and stoichio-
metric  flames.  The  authors  suggested  to
improve  the  ketene
sub-mechanism.

for

The Heufer group in  Aachen [649] recently proposed  a model for
methyloxirane oxidation based on the Aramco Mech 3.0 model [496]
that is more complete than earlier ones [614,648]. The reaction rates of
fuel isomerizations to propanal, propanone, and methyl vinyl ether were
obtained through fits to earlier data of [620,713]. Other unimolecular
initiation  reactions  were  adopted  from  Lifshitz  and  Tamburu  [614].
H-abstraction  reactions  from  the  fuel  and  fuel  radical  decomposition
kinetics were mainly estimated by analogy to other molecules such as
oxirane,  iso-butane,  and  the  methoxymethyl  radical.  The  model  was
tested  against  several  data  sets  (Table  19)  and  was  able  to  predict
high-pressure IDTs and the profiles of pyrolysis product detected in a ST
(up to 40 bar). Interestingly, despite the absence of a low-temperature

Fig. 65. GVL thermal decomposition in a FR: product selectivity as a function
of residence time at 913 K, 4PA is 4-pentenoic acid). Lines indicate the observed
trend. Reproduced from Ref. [673] with permission of Elsevier.

Fig. 64. IDTs of THF, 2-MTHF, 3-MTHF, 2-ETHF measured in RCM at φ=1 and
20 bar. Reproduced from Refs. [654] with permission of Elsevier.

ethers,  cyclic  ketones,  and  bifunctional  carbonyls.  For  instance,  2,
3-DHF,  tetrahydrofuran-3-one,  and  butanedial  were  detected  in  THF
oxidation,  while  5-methyl-2,3-DHF,  2-methyltetrahydrofuran-3-one,
and  4-oxo-pentenal  were  identified  in  2-MTHF  oxidation.  The  latter
three components simply differ from the former three by an additional
CH3  moiety.  Fenard  et  al.  [666]  also  detected  5-methyl-2,3-DHF  and
2-methyltetrahydrofuran-3-one  in  RCM.  4-Oxo-pentenal  (bifunctional
carbonyl) was not reported, possibly due to the GC column used, instead
its isomers (allyl acetate and 1-propen-2-ol acetate) were observed.

2,5-DMTHF, with two CH3  moieties attached to the ring, produces
fuel-specific  intermediates  different  from  those  of  THF.  However,  as
shown in Fenard et al. [670], the reactions of this CE followed again the
same pattern as that of THF with just adding two more CH3 groups to the
measured products. For example, 2,5-dimethylfuran was detected as the
major unsaturated cyclic ether, and hexa-2,5-dione was identified as the
important bifunctional carbonyl species. 2,5-Dimethyloxolan-3-one (an
expected important cyclic ketone) was not reported, again possibly due
to the GC column used by [670], suggesting that further measurements
of  fuel-specific  species  of  2,5-DMTHF  low-temperature  oxidation  are
needed.

5.2.2.3. THF substituted by an oxygenated group. CEs substituted with a
carbonyl  (e.g.  γ-valerolactone,  GVL)  or  an  alcohol  (e.g.  2-THFFOH)
function were recently investigated by studies [251,259,673,674] that
exclusively focused on species detection (Table 16).

Concerning GVL, its pyrolysis was studied by De Bruycker et al. [259,
673] in a FR. Among the 16 quantified species, 4-pentenoic acid (4PA), a
GVL  isomer,  appears  as  an  important  oxygenated  intermediate  in  the
early stages of the pyrolysis as shown in Fig. 65. This indicates that the
isomerization  process  is  important  for  initiating  GVL  decomposition.
The formation of unsaturated acids was also found for heavier lactones
by  Bailey  and  Bird  [712].  Under  GVL/CH4  flame  conditions,  Sudholt
et  al.  [674]  measured  a  wide  range  of  species  (40  species)  with  the
smaller  ones  such  as  formaldehyde,  ethane,  ethylene,  and  acetylene
being produced with the largest amounts.

The flame chemistry of 2-THFFOH was recently investigated by Tran
et al. [251,668]. More than 40 products were quantified in a CH4 flame
doped with 10-20% 2-THFFOH. Many of them, i.e. ethylene, formalde-
hyde, acrolein, allyl alcohol, 2,3-DHF, 3,4-dihydro-2H-pyran, 4-pente-
nal, and tetrahydrofuran-2-carbaldehyde were identified as important
2-THFFOH-specific  decomposition  products.  The  presence  of  an
alcohol function favors the formation of allyl alcohol and acrolein. The
detection  of  3,4-dihydro-2H-pyran  confirmed  the  possibility  of  ring
enlargement in agreement with the theoretical calculations performed

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101981

L.-S. Tran et al.

oxidation reaction subset for the fuel radicals, the model also reproduces
IDTs measured in a RCM (870–980 K) quite well. The authors pointed
out  that  the  conversion  of  methyloxirane  to  propanal  is  governed  by
isomerization  channels  even  below  1000  K.  This  behavior  is  quite
similar to the oxirane kinetic behavior discussed above. Note that the
dominance of isomerization channels even at low-temperature has not
yet been validated for more heavily substituted oxirane derivatives, for
which no model is yet available.

Concerning THF  rings substituted  by alkyl chains, four main  detailed
models are known for 2-MTHF and one model was proposed for each of
the other CEs (3-MTHF, 2,5-DMTHF, 2-BTHF) (Table 19). Moshammer
et  al.  [667]  and  De  Bruycker  et  al.  [658]  proposed  models  for  the
high-temperature oxidation of 2-MTHF. Both models reproduce flame
speciation  data well. The latter model also successfully predicts  LBVs
and pyrolysis species profiles. The description of primary 2-MTHF re-
actions,  especially  the  decomposition  of  2-MTHF  derived  radicals,  is
more detailed in the model by De Bruycker et al. than in that by Mos-
hammer et al. [667], since it also considered concerted ring-opening and

favored intramolecular H transfer in diradical and carbene chemistry,
for  which  rate  coefficients  were  calculated  at  the  CBS-QB3  level  of
theory. Furthermore, the model by De Bruycker et al. included reaction
channels  that  aimed  to  explain  experimentally  detected  oxygenated
species, such as large aldehydes and ketones, as well as 4-penten-1-ol.
These molecules were not considered by Moshammer et al.

Tripathi et al. [663] in Aachen and Fenard et al. [666] in Lille pro-
posed models for the low- and high-temperature chemistry of 2-MTHF.
The  Aachen  model  [663]  adopted  the  high-temperature  sub-model
 ̇
from Moshammer et al. [667] with updates for H-abstractions by
OH
 ̇
and  HO
O  mainly  taken  from  analogy  to  THF.  The  low-temperature
sub-model contained 20 reaction classes and was developed systemati-
cally on the basis of rate rules and reaction classes [457,510] with up-
dates  based  on  the  2-BTHF  model  of  Cai  et  al.  [672].  A  very  similar
methodology  was  used  in  the  development  of  the  Lille  model  [666],
which also adopted the high-temperature sub-model from Moshammer
et al. [667] with updates using new rate constants for H-abstractions by
 ̇
 ̇
O based on the theoretical calculations of [608] and by O2  and
HO
OH

Table 19
◦
Main detailed kinetic models for the combustion of substituted saturated CEs. For each CE, the models are sorted by year of publication. Spe. N
N

: reaction number (forward). * The conditions have been presented in previous rows of this table.

◦

: species number. Reac.

CE

Year & Ref.

◦
Spe. N

◦
Reac. N

Validation conditions (unit: T / K, P / bar)

Methyloxirane

1994, Lifshitz et al. [614]

2010, Burluka et al. [648]

2021, Ramalingam et al.
[649]

37

127

573

68

1200

3077

-ST pyrolysis species (T = 850-1250, P = 2) [614]

-LBV (Tinitial = 298, P = 1, φ = 0.7-2.1) [648]

-LBV of [648]*
-IDT in ST (T = 962-1127, P = 10-40, φ = 0.5-2) [649] & (T = 960-1300, P = 2.5-7, φ = 0.5-1)
[646]
-IDT in RCM (T = 870-980, P = 10-20, φ = 0.5-2) [649]
-ST pyrolysis species (T = 900-1450, P = 40) [649] & [614]*

2,3-

1995, Lifshitz et al. [651]

41

65

-ST pyrolysis species (T = 900-1150, P = 2) [651]

Dimethyloxirane

2-MTHF

2013, Moshammer et al. [667]

185

2017, De Bruycker et al. [658]

412

1412

2481

2017, Tripathi et al. [663]

250

1247

2017, Fenard et al. [666]

507

2425

3-MTHF

2019, Tripathi et al. [669]

2,5-DMTHF

2019, Fenard et al. [670]

664

3197

2-BTHF

2017, Cai et al. [672]

419

1588

-PLF species (P = 0.04, φ = 1.7) [667]

-LBV (Tinitial = 298-398, P = 1, φ = 0.6-1.6) [658]
-FR pyrolysis species (T = 900-1100, P = 1.7) [658]
-PLF species (P = 0.07, φ = 0.7-1.3) [658] & [667]*

-IDT in RCM (T = 639-878, P = 10-40, φ = 0.5-2) [663]
-IDT in ST (T = 753-1349, P = 10-20, φ = 0.5-2) [663]
-IDT in ST (T = 1050-1800, P = 10.1, φ = 1) [661]
-PLF species of [667]*

-IDT in RCM (T = 640-900, P = 30-21, φ = 1) [666]
-IDT in ST (T = 1050-1800, P = 1.2-10.1, φ = 0.5-2) [661]
-RCM species (T = 719, P = 7.6, φ = 1) [666]
-PLF species of [667]*

-IDT in ST (T = 715-1250, P = 10-40, φ = 0.5-2) [669]
-IDT in RCM (T = 615-900, P = 10-40, φ = 0.5-2) [654,669]

-IDT in ST (T = 860-1320, P = 10-40, φ = 1) [670]
-IDT in RCM (T = 660-880, P = 10-20, φ = 1) [670]
-RCM species (T = 712, P = 10, φ = 1) [670]

-LBV (Tinitial = 448, P = 1-3, φ = 0.7-1.35) [672]
-IDT in ST (T = 705-1210, P = 20, φ = 1) [672]
-IDT in RCM (T = 650-900, P = 10.1, φ = 0.5-1) [672]

2-THFFOH

2021, Tran et al. [251]

479

2914

-PLF species (P = 0.05, φ = 1) [251]

GVL

2016, De Bruycker et al. [259]

520

2017, Sudholt et al. [674]

347

3589

1336

-FR pyrolysis species (T = 900-1100, P = 1.7) [259]

-PLF species (P = 0.07, φ = 1) [674]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101982

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 66. Ignition of 2-MTHF and 3-MTHF: (a) Experimental (symbols, measured in ST and RCM) and simulated (lines) IDTs; (b) Comparison of the low-temperature
reaction pathways of both fuels. Reproduced from Ref. [669] with permission of Elsevier.

from  analogy  with  methylcyclohexane  [533].  The  low-temperature
sub-model was newly developed using rate coefficients from rate rules
[470] and analogy to cycloalkanes [533]. The two 2-MTHF models [663,
666] were tested against low- and high-temperature IDTs and species
profiles (Table  19) and their predictions agreed overall well with the
data. The authors demonstrated the importance of the H-abstractions by
 ̇
OH radicals and the need for theoretical studies of the corresponding
rate coefficients in order to further improve the model performance.

Detailed  models  including  low-  and  high-temperature  chemistry
were also developed in Aachen [669,672] for 3-MTHF and 2-BTHF. The
high-temperature  part  was  developed  based  on  the  current  under-
standing of combustion chemistry for a variety  of structurally similar
molecules, e.g. THF and its derivatives, while the low-temperature part
was developed using an approach based  on rate rules [446,457,510].
The predictions of both models were compared to IDTs measured in a ST
and a RCM, and those of 2-BTHF model were also compared to LBVs
(Table 19). It was observed that the models generally reproduced the
experimental  data  fairly  well.  The  3-MTHF  model  [669]  predicts  for
3-MTHF a considerably higher low-temperature reactivity compared to
2-MTHF, in agreement with experimental observations (Fig. 66a). The
model  demonstrated  that  3-MTHF  oxidation  had  more  reaction  path-
ways that create low-temperature branching (Fig. 66b).

Extending their THF [283] and 2-MTHF [666] models, the group of
Vanhove  in  Lille  simulated  2,5-DMTHF  oxidation  at  low-  and
high-temperatures based on their experimental data for IDTs and species
profiles obtained in a ST and a RCM. Their modelling analyses demon-
strated the promoting influence of methyl radicals on IDTs above 1200 K
due to the easy C–C bond dissociation of 2,5-DMTHF producing methyl
radical that is thus abundant. At lower temperatures, the reactivity is
dominated by the classic branching pathways involving cyclic KHPs. 2,
5-DMTHF was found to be consumed largely by H-abstractions at C2 and
C5  positions  because  of  their  low  C–H  BDEs  (see  CE  structure  in
Table 17), especially at low temperatures they accounted for more than
80% of 2,5-DMTHF consumption.

Concerning THF rings substituted by an oxygenated group, a model can
be  found for  2-THFFOH [251] and  two  models are available for  GVL
[673,674]. Tran et al. [251] recently proposed a detailed kinetic model
for 2-THFFOH high-temperature oxidation with the rate coefficients of
important primary mechanism reactions derived from CBS-QB3 calcu-
lations. The model predicted experimental PLF species profiles reason-
ably  well  and  showed  that  2-THFFOH  is  mainly  consumed  by
H-abstraction  reactions,  which  is  in  agreement  with  other  THF  de-
rivatives. Interestingly, the derived oxygenated species with cis config-
uration  were  found  to  be  thermodynamically  more  stable  than  their
from  usual
trans  configuration,  which  differs
corresponding

observations for hydrocarbons. For example, the standard enthalpy of
formation  of  (oxolan-2-ylidene)methanol  (2-THFCHOH)  is  -61.0  and
-64.7 kcal/mol for the trans- and cis-conformers, respectively, which was
explained by Tran et al. [251] as due to the intramolecular hydrogen
bond formed by the cis-isomer.

The group of Van Geem in Ghent [259] proposed a model for the
thermal decomposition of GVL. The model considers the formation of
4PA via the concerted ring-opening of GVL. The reaction rates of this
reaction and those of H-additions, H-abstractions, as well as fuel radical
decomposition reactions were calculated at the CBS-QB3 level of theory.
Model predictions were in good agreement with the FR pyrolysis species
profiles and confirmed the importance of the isomerization of GVL to
4PA, which is similar to the formation mechanism of 4-penten-1-ol from
 ̇
CH3 and
2-MTHF as presented above. 4PA is then mainly consumed by
H-additions releasing other carboxylic acids. Later, Sudholt et al. [674]
in Aachen developed a model for GVL high-temperature oxidation by
extending the pyrolysis sub-mechanism of [259]. The oxidation reaction
part was established mainly based on the concept of reaction classes and
rate  rules  [446,457]  with  some  updates  using  analogies  to  1-  and
2-butanol  [715]  and  2-MTHF  [667].  The  model  was  tested  against
species profiles from a PLF study and showed good agreement with the
species data in the pre-heat and reaction zones of the flame until the fuel
is depleted. At larger heights above the burner, deviations between the
model and the measurements were observed.

5.3. Experimental and modelling studies on the chemistry of unsaturated
cyclic ethers

Unsaturated  CEs  have  received  similar  interest  from  the  scientific
community as the saturated ones. Table 20 listed over 80 experimental
studies related to the pyrolysis and combustion of unsaturated CEs. Each
study contains different datasets that include several data points. These
studies  were  performed  experimental  setups similar  to  those used  for
saturated  CEs.  There  are  more  studies  (we  found  about  30  of  them)
concerning  the  pyrolysis  of  unsaturated  CEs  than  for  saturated  ones,
because some unsaturated CEs are considered as model components in
biomass pyrolysis studies. In contrast, far less studies were performed on
the oxidation of unsaturated CEs below 1000 K (about 20 studies) than
of saturated ones (about 40 studies) because they do not play a role in
low-temperature oxidation. The largest number of studies concerns 2,5-
DMF, with about 25 studies at temperatures ranging from 500 to 2500 K
(because of its different nature, the initial temperatures of LBV or engine
(cid:0) 6 bar to 80 bar, φ from
experiments are not considered), P from 1.3 × 10
0.03 to ∞. Apart from furfural, studies on other oxygen-substituted fu-
rans (e.g. 2-FFOH, 2-AF, 2-MOF) are still very limited with only pyrolysis

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101983

L.-S. Tran et al.

data for the last two ones. Only very few studies involve diffusion flames
and these only address soot formation. These studies are not listed in
Table  20  because  they  are  not  dedicated  to  the  investigation  of  the
primary chemistry of CE during pyrolysis, oxidation or combustion.

The review paper by Xu et al. [716] very comprehensively analyzed
the  kinetic  studies  concerning  furan,  2-MF  and  2,5-DMF  published
before  2016.  Therefore,  even  though  for  sake  of  consistency  with
Table 16 all the studies found in the literature are presented in Table 20,
they are discussed in less detail in Part 5.3 than what has been done for
saturated CEs in Part 5.2.

Part 5.3.1 describes the results concerning furan, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF,
a group of three CEs often investigated together, briefly summarizing the
data obtained before the review of [716] and with more emphasis on the
work performed afterward. Then, the influence of the degree of unsa-
turation  in  furan  derivatives  and  that  of  C1+ alkylic  substitutions  are
discussed in Part 5.3.2 while the impact of oxygenated substituents are
discussed in Part 5.3.3. To conclude, the performance of the recent ki-
netics models concerning unsaturated CEs are discussed in Part 5.3.4.

5.3.1. Furan, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF

The aromatic character of furan and alkyl furans has been noticed,
among others, by Simmie and Curran [231] and by Sendt et al. [636].
The BDEs of the ring C–H in furan, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF are all close to 120
kcal/mol, while the corresponding BDE in benzene is only 112 kcal/mol.
Therefore, H-abstraction reactions from furan, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF ring
are very unlikely. The lack of a methyl group explains that the lowest
reactivity is observed for unsubstituted furan, as shown by the DCN and
IDT measurements and by the flow reactor studies described hereafter.
The flame velocity of furan has only recently been measured in 2021.
Tanoue et al. [717] reported data for φ=0.8, 1 and 1.4 at atmospheric
pressure. At 363 K and φ= 1, the LBV of furan is ~21% higher than that
of  2-MF  measured  by  Ma  et  al.  [729].  The  LBV  of  2-MF  reported  by
Zhongyang et al. [730] is even lower than that by Ma et al. [729]. The
Nancy  group  also  reported  LBV  data  for  some  furans  and  THFs.  For
example, at 1 bar, 298K, and φ = 1.1, the LBV is found to be around 46
± 1.1  cm/s  for  2-MF  [728]  and  39  ± 1  cm/s  for  2,5-DMF  [746],
compared to 43 ± 1.7 cm/s for THF [195]. Tanoue et al. [717] showed a
notable impact of pressure between 1 and 5 bar at 363 K, in agreement
with  Wu  et  al.  [744],  who  observed  a  significant  negative  pressure
dependence for 2,5-DMF at 393 K.

Concerning ignition behavior, Fig. 7 in Part 1 indicates the following
order for the DCNs reported by Sudholt et al. [87]: 2,5-DMF (10.9) >
2-MF  (8.9)  > furan  (7.0).  Measurements  in  STs  (see  studies  listed  in
Table 20) show that the IDTs of the three compounds follow Arrhenius
behavior. IDTs decrease with increasing pressure and with decreasing
equivalence ratio. The highest values are found for furan, while those of
2-MF and 2,5-DMF are lower and close together. At the time of the re-
view of Xu et al. [716], ignition studies in RCM for unsaturated CEs were
missing. They became available with the work for 2-MF and 2,5-DMF by
Xu et al. [733] (the team at Xi’an Jiaotong University who noticed the
lack  of  RCM  data  in  their  review  [716]),  and  that  for  furan  and  C1+
alkylated furan by Sudholt et al. in Aachen [654]. Furthermore, IDTs of
2-MF  and  2-MF/n-heptane  mixtures  were measured  by  Tripathi et  al.
 ̇
[735], who showed that both fuels compete for
OH radical consumption.
Finally, Wu et al. [655] studied the unsaturation effect as described in
Part 5.3.2. As is shown in Fig. 67a, the IDTs of furan, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF
in RCM follow also Arrhenius behavior. The IDT of 2-MF is about a factor
5 lower than that of furan at 970 K, but very close to that of 2,5-DMF
indicating  similar  reaction  channels  during  ignition  of  these  CEs.  Ac-
cording to the flow rate analysis by Xu et al. [733], the low-temperature
IDT chemistry of 2-MF and 2,5-DMF does not proceed through the O2
addition pathways as proposed by Simmie et al. [639] but instead the
radicals obtained from H-abstraction on a methyl group react by com-
 ̇
bination/decomposition  reactions  with  HO
O  radicals  in  a
similar way as toluene [765] yielding ultimately furfural and 5-methyl-
furfural, respectively, as proposed by Somers et al. [746,766].

 ̇
O  or  CH3O

Product quantifications during the pyrolysis of furan, 2-MF, 2,5-DMF
have been the topic of a large number of studies in STs and FRs, as is
shown in Table 20. This was complemented by a significant theoretical
effort as is described in Part 5.1.2. Again, these studies started with those
performed in a single-pulse ST with GC analysis by the group of Lifshitz
[721,736,748],  who  first  proposed  rate  constants  for  the  initial
decomposition  steps  of  these  three  molecules.  The  understanding  of
these reactions steadily progressed until the most recent studies were
made by the group of Olzmann in Karlsruhe in ST behind reflected shock
wave with spectroscopic monitoring of H-atoms [724] and MS species
detection (IE = 50 eV) [297]. According to [636,638,724], the thermal
decomposition  of  furan  proceeds  through  two  parallel  channels,  (i)  a
molecular  elimination  step  to  form  acetylene + ketene  and  (ii)  a
ring-opening reaction via 1,2-hydrogen migration and C(cid:0) O bond fission
to finally yield CO + propyne. For substituted furans H-ejection from the
methyl
to
ring-opening/H-shift reaction pathways. The major products obtained
during the thermal decomposition in ST around 1400 K were CO, CH4,
C2H2, C2H6, C2H4, C3H4 isomers and benzene from 2-MF [297] and CO,
CH4, C2H2, C2H4, C2H6, and cyclopentadiene from 2,5-DMF as agreed by
[641] and [748]. The last studies also detected 1,3-C4H6  and 2-MF in
their GC analyses from single-pulse ST. It is now agreed that 2,5-DMF
can produce cyclopentadiene  as first shown by the PES  calculated by
Sirjean et al. [642] for (5-methylfuran-2-yl)methyl radical (R1C6H7O)
decomposition displayed in Fig. 52 in Part 5.1.2. In their FR study below
1100  K  using  GC-2D,  Djokic  et  al.  [641]  reported  C2-C4  product  for-
mation,  as  well  as  that  of  phenol  at  low  conversion,  and  of  benzene,
toluene, indene and naphthalene at higher conversion. Phenol can be
formed  from  cyclohexadienone,  also a  potential  product  according  to
the PES calculated by Sirjean et al. [642].

groups  needs

considered

addition

to  be

in

Quantification of oxidation products were performed in a JSR for 2-MF
and 2,5-DMF and in a FR for the three CEs, which are mostly not reactive
below 700 K in contrast to THF. Apart from furfural studies (see Part
5.3.3), the only two JSR studies concerning unsaturated CEs were per-
formed by the groups of Dagaut [746] (for 2,5-DMF) and Wei [739] (for
2-MF). Fig. 68a displays an exemplary 2,5-DMF conversion profile. The
formation  of  H2,  H2O,  CO,  CO2,  C1-C2  hydrocarbons,  formaldehyde,
methyl vinyl ketone, 2-ethyl-5-methylfuran, 5-methylfurfural and 2-MF
was  reported  (see  Fig.  68b  for  the  last four  species).  FR  studies  were
carried out for 2-MF and 2,5-DMF by the group of Alzueta in Zaragoza
[740,752,753]  and  for  the  three  molecules  by  the  group  of  Koh-
se-H ̈oinghaus in Bielefeld [726]. Fig. 68c taken from the work in Bie-
lefeld  illustrates  well  the  temperature  shift  for  the  start  of  reactivity
between the three molecules with furan beginning to react at the highest
temperature  and  2,5-DMF  at  the  lowest.  Fig.  68c  also  shows  that  a
decreasing of φ  has a more pronounced effect on fuel reactivity of 2,
5-DMF than on that of the other two molecules. This trend that seems
to be due to the number of lateral methyl groups in the fuel molecule.
The strong impact of φ on 2,5-DMF oxidation was confirmed by the work
performed in Zaragoza [752], in which φ  was varied from 0.03-3.33.
The Zaragoza study also observed a notable promoting impact of pres-
sure  on  the  fuel  reactivity.  As  can  be  seen  in  Fig.  68  for  φ = 1,  the
oxidation of 2,5-DMF in the JSR/FR studies at Orl ́eans at 10 bar and at
Bielefeld at 1 bar, both operating at similar residence times, starts at the
same  temperature  close  to  820  K,  hence  a  pressure  effect  is  not
observable.  In  line  with  the  reactions  underlined  by  Xu  et  al.  [733],
significant yields of furfural and 5-methylfurfural were reported by Tran
et  al.  [726]  for  the  FR  oxidation  of  2-MF  and  2,5-DMF,  respectively.
These results are consistent with the observations by [746] for 2,5-DMF
oxidation  (Fig.  68b).  Acrolein  and  methyl  vinyl  ketone  have  been
detected  in  large  amounts  in  the  oxidation  of  the  three  furanic  fuels
[726,746].

Product quantifications in flames fueled by furan, 2-MF, 2,5-DMF (see
8 studies listed in Table 20) are described in detail in the review paper of
Leitner et al. [8]. Fig. 69 displays product quantification by EI-MS in
Bielefeld  and  GC  in  Nancy  highlighting  the  good  agreement  between

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101984

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 20
Main experimental studies on the pyrolysis and combustion of unsaturated CEs from 1980. The entries are sorted according to the experimental target, i.e. LBV, IDT,
speciation data (spec. data). Entries within each target are sorted by the reactor type. “–” indicates that the information is not available. Italic numbers on 2,3-DHF
structure are labels of the atom position, which are used in the main text.

Fuel

Exp. Target

Reactor

Furan

LBV

CVB

T (K)

363a

P (bar)

1-5

Operating conditions

φ

Fuel % (diluent)

Year, first author, ref.

0.8-1.4

3.6-6.2 (N2)

2021, Tanoue [717]

IDT

ST

1320-1880

1.2-10.5

0.5-2

0.25-1 (Ar)

2012, Wei [718]

977-1570

1-12

0.5-2.0

2.28-8.54 (Ar)

2014, Eldeeb [719]

1150-2010

1.2-16

RCM

870-950

20

1.0

1.0

850-1050

18-33

0.5-2.0

Spec. data

ST

1050-1460

2.6-3.6

1100-1700

20.3

500-3000

0.1-0.8

1200-1900

0.7-1.6

1050-1920

1

∞

∞

∞

∞

∞

0.5 (Ar)

4.46 (b)

1 (Ar)

1 (Ar)

2015, Xu [720]

2016, Sudholt [654]

2020, Wu [655]

1986, Lifshitz [721]

0.2-2 (Ar)

1991, Organ [722]

2-100 (Kr, Ne)
(cid:0) 4, 9 × 10

5 × 10

(cid:0) 4 (Ar)

1 (Ne)

1998, Fulle [723]

2018, Weber [724]

2019, Weiser [297]

PLF

FR

up to 1888

0.05

1.4-2.2

14-19 (Ar)

2011, Tian [226]

up to 2600

0.02-0.04

1.0-1.7

9-14 (Ar)

2014, Liu [273]

1050-1270

1.3 × 10

(cid:0) 6

1250-1700

1-2

∞

∞

–

1985, Grela [725]

0.7-0.07 (He)

2009, Vasiliou [637]

2,3-DHF

IDT

ST

1100-1635

1.2-10.1

0.5-2.0

0.5 (Ar)

730-1170

1

0.5-2.0

0.93 (Ar)

1100-1600

0.04

∞

5 (Ar)

2017, Tran [726]

2017, Cheng [638]

2016, Fan [633]

2020, Wu [655]

1989, Lifshitz [631]

2016, Fan [633,727]

850-1050

18-33

0.5-2.0

900-1300

0.6

∞

1100-1650

1.2-10.1

0.5-2.0

1 (b)

0.5 (Ar)

0.5 (Ar)

980-1080

1.6-6.5

∞

0.25-1 (Ar)

1986, Lifshitz [632]

298-398a

1

0.55-1.65

1.91-5.52 (N2)

2013, Somers [728]

Spec. data

2,5-DHF

IDT

Spec. data

2-MF

LBV

RCM

ST

ST

ST

PLF

CVB

IDT

ST

1200-1800

1

333-393a

360a

1

1-2

0.6-1.4

0.7-1.4

0.5-2

2.08-4.73c (N2)

2.40-4.73 (N2)

1 (Ar)

2014, Ma [729]

2018, Zhongyang [730]

2013, Somers [728]

1120-1700

1.3-10.7

0.25-2.0

0.25-3.38 (Ar)

2013, Wei [731]

820-1215

40

1.0

3.32 (N2)

2014, Uygun [281]

977-1570

1-12

0.5-2.0

1-6.54 (Ar)

2014, 2015, Eldeeb [719,732]

1150-2010

1.2-16

RCM

830-910

20

1.0

1.0

0.5 (Ar)

3.38 (b)

2015, Xu [720]

2016, Sudholt [654]

737-1143

16-30

0.5-2.0

1 (Ar)

2016, 2017, Xu [733,734]

Spec. data

ST

1100-1400

1.7-2.9

861-912

20

1200-1900

0.7-1.6

1050-1920

1

1.0

∞

∞

∞

PLF

–

0.04

0.8-1.5

3.38d (Ar)

0.5 (Ar)

4 × 10

(cid:0) 4, 1 × 10

(cid:0) 3 (Ar)

1 (Ne)

21 (Ar)

up to 2500

0.02-0.04

1.0-1.7

7-11 (Ar)

up to 2000

0.04

0.8-1.5

6.2 (Ar)

2018, Tripathi [735]

1997, Lifshitz [736]

2018, Weber [724]

2019, Weiser [297]

2012, Wei [737]

2014, Tran [274]

2017, Cheng [738]

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101985

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 20 (continued )

Fuel

Exp. Target

Reactor

Operating conditions

Year, first author, ref.

T (K)

P (bar)

φ

Fuel % (diluent)

JSR

FR

600-925

1

0.5-2.0

1.5 (Ar)

1050-1270

1.3 × 10

(cid:0) 6

∞

–

2021, Wang [739]

1985, Grela [725]

0.02-3.33

0.01 (e)

2016, Alexandrino [740]

2,5-DMF

LBV

CVB

393a

800-1400

730-1170

1

1

900-1530

0.04-1

1

1

1-7.5

1

323-373a

373-473a

298-358a

1300-1831

1-4

820-1941

977-1570

1-80

1-12

1150-2010

1.2-16

IDT

PLF

ST

RCM

737-1143

16-30

Spec. data

ST

1070-1370

2-3.7

1191-1328

2.3

1200-1900

0.7-1.6

1050-1920

1

PLF

–

0.04

0.5-2.0

∞

0.9-1.5

0.6-2.0

0.7-1.5

0.6-1.6

0.5-1.5

0.5-2

0.5-2.0

0.5-2.0

0.5-2.0

∞

∞

∞

∞

2

1 (Ar)

2 (Ar)

2.45-4.08 (f)

1.67-5.37 (N2)

1.95-4.08 (N2)

1.67-4.34 (N2)

0.25-1 (Ar)

2017, Tran [726]

2017, Cheng [741]

2009, Wu [742]

2010, Tian [270]

2011, 2012 Wu [743–745]

2013, Somers [746]

2013, Sirjean [747]

0.75-2.66 (N2/Ar)

2013, Somers [746]

0.76-5.32 (N2/Ar)

2014, 2015, Eldeeb [719,732]

0.5 (Ar)

0.5-2 (b)

0.5 (Ar)

3 (Ar)

2015, Xu [720]

2016, Xu [733]

1998, Lifshitz [748]

2013, Somers [746]

3.4 × 10

(cid:0) 1, 4.4 × 10

(cid:0) 4 (Ar)

2018, Weber [724]

1 (Ne)

–

JSR

FR

up to 2500

0.02-0.04

1.0-1.7

5.9-9.2 (Ar)

up to 2000

0.04

530-1190

10

1050-1270

1.3 × 10

(cid:0) 6

873-1098

1.7

780-1470

0.04-1

1.0-1.5

0.5-2

∞

∞

∞

5.17 (Ar)

0.1 (N2)

–

9 (N2)

2 (Ar)

2019, Weiser [297]

2009, Wu [749]

2014, Togb ́e [275]

2015, Liu [750]

2013, Somers [746]

1985, Grela [725]

2013, Djokic [641]

2014, Cheng [751]

500–1400

1-40

0.03-3.33, ∞

0.01-0.45g (N2)

2014, 2015, Alexandrino [752,753]

2-EF

LBV

CVB

IDT

Spec. data

2-BF

IDT

ST

RCM

JSR

FR

RCM

730-1170

373-433a

1

1-4

1050-1290

5-12

780-870

20

766-1013

16-30

600-900

1

846-1319

0.04-1

730-870

20

0.5-2.0

0.7-1.4

1.0

1.0

0.5-2.0

0.5-2.0

∞

1.0

1.5 (Ar)

2017, Tran [726]

1.95-3.77 (N2)

2021, Xu [754]

2.72 (Ar)

2.72 (b)

1-2.7 (b)

1 (Ar)

1 (Arh)

1.96 (b)

2015, Eldeeb [732]

2016, Sudholt [654]

2017, Xu [734]

2022, Li [755]

2021, Song [756]

2016, Sudholt [654]

Furfural

LBV

Conical flame

473a

1

0.6-1.8

2.49-7.11 (N2)

2021, Jin [757]

Spec. data

JSR

1200-1800

0.1-0.2

1023-1073

1

900-1100

1.07

650-950

1040

1

–

929-1365

0.04-1

FR

Spec. data

FR

923-1223

0.04

∞

∞

∞

0.4-2

∞

∞

∞

0.2-0.6 (He/Ar)

2013, Vasiliou [758]

1 (Ar)

0.5 (He)

0.5 (Ar)

–

1 (Ar)

0.5 (Hei)

2019, Li [759]

2019, Vermeire [423]

2021, Jin [757]

1986, Grela [760,761]

2021, Wang [762]

2021, Vermeire [640]

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101986

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 20 (continued )

Fuel

Exp. Target

Reactor

Operating conditions

Year, first author, ref.

T (K)

P (bar)

φ

Fuel % (diluent)

2-FFOH

5-Methyl furfural

Spec. data

FR

973-1273

0.04

2-AF

Spec. data

JSR

770-1130

1

2-MOF

Spec. data

FR

879-1107

1

∞

∞

∞

0.5 (Hei)

2021, Vermeire [640]

0.3 (Ar)

2022, He [763]

1 (Ar)

2019, Yan [764]

a Initial temperature
b Mixture of N2 and Ar
c Data for 2-MF and iso-octane mixtures are also available in [729].
d Data of 2-MF and n-heptane mixtures are also available in [735]
e Mixture of N2 and H2O. Data with NO addition are also available in [740]
f 2-MF in air (thus N2 was the diluent), and 2-MF in air plus additional N2 or plus CO2.
g Mixtures with NO were also used.
h Ar plus 1% Kr
i 2% NO was also added used as a reference for quantification of the PICS

both techniques. Significant yields of C1-C2 aldehydes are observed, with
furan  producing  notably  the  highest  amount  of  acetaldehyde.  The
reason for the latter trend is not clearly explained, leaving an interesting
topic for future work. Fig. 69 also clearly demonstrates that all three CEs
yield high amounts of acetylene but that 2,5-DMF leads to the highest
formation of cyclopentadiene, benzene, and phenol, in agreement with
PLF  studies  using  SVUV-PIMS  [750]  and  with  the  pyrolysis  study  by
[641].

The  large production  of  possible  soot  precursors in  2,5-DMF  com-
bustion raises concerns about its potentially high tendency to form soot
particulates. Conturso et al. [767] reported that the addition of 2,5-DMF
in ethylene PLF reduces significantly the amount of large particles and
the  total  mass  of  particles  emitted,  but  not  the  number  of  particles
smaller than 10 nm. Using an ethylene diffusion flame, Sirignano et al.
[267]  reported  the  lowest  impact  on  particle  production  for  furan
whereas 2,5-DMF and 2-MF showed a higher propensity. Interestingly,
2-MF had a larger tendency to produce particles than 2,5-DMF.

5.3.2.

Influence of the degree of unsaturation and of C1+ alkyl substitutions
A comparison between the studies on furan, 2,3-DHF, 2,5-DHF, and
THF provides hints about the influence of the degree of unsaturation and
double bond location on their combustion. The DCN measurements of
Sudholt et al. [87] showed the following order of DCN: THF (21.9) > 2,
3-DHF  (20.0)  > 2,5-DHF  (15.6)  > furan  (7.0)  (see  Fig.  7  of  Part  1).
Quantitative  species yields can be found for ST measurements  by the
Lifshitz group [631,632], and for IDTs measured in two STs [633,727]
and a RCM [655].

Product quantifications during pyrolysis in STs indicate that the major
fate  of  2,3-DHF  is  unimolecular  isomerization  yielding  cyclopropane
carboxaldehyde (c-C3H5CHO) [631] and that of 2,5-DHF is dehydroge-
nation to furan [632].

Ignition  studies  in  a  ST  [633]  indicated  slightly  longer  IDTs  for  2,
5-DHF  than  for  2,3-DHF  in  agreement  with  DCN  measurements.  As
shown in Fig. 67a, the IDTs of 2,3-DHF measured in RCM [655] follow a
classical Arrhenius behavior above 850 K, with values close to those of
THF, i.e. more than one magnitude order shorter than those of furan.
However,  in  contrast  to  THF,  no  sign  of  low-temperature  oxidation
chemistry was reported for 2,3-DHF. No IDTs are reported for 2,5-DHF
in a RCM.

In  2,3-DHF,  the  C3–H  BDE  (allylic  H-atom,  see  carbon  position  in
Table 20) is 11.4 kcal/mol lower than that of the C2–H in THF, but the
obtained resonance stabilized dihydrofuranyl radical has no low energy
consumption path other than that losing another H-atom to yield furan
[655].  Therefore,  the  main  2,3-DHF  degradation  pathway  in  RCM  is
 ̇
assumed to be through epoxidation with HO
O radicals (similar to what
is observed for alkenes (see Part 4.3.3) yielding 2,6-dioxabicyclo[3.1.0]
hexane,  which  after  H-abstraction  from  either  CH2  moiety  produces
 ̇
acrolein and a H
CO radical [655]. Under ST conditions [633], molecular
ring-opening  isomerization  of  2,3-DHF  producing  cyclopropane  car-
boxaldehyde,  and  furthermore  crotonaldehyde,  dominates.  2,5-DHF
mostly dehydrogenates to furan explaining its lower reactivity [633].

Apart from two very recent 2-EF studies in a JSR and a FR [755,756],
studies on C1+ alkyl substituted furans only consider global combustion
parameters, e.g. LBVs [754], ignition behavior in a ST [732] and in two
RCM studies [654,734]. In addition to DCN measurements [87] showing
the following order: THF (21.9) > 2-BF (13.2) > 2-EF (10.2) > furan
(7.0) (see Fig. 7 of Chapter 1), the team of Aachen reported IDTs in a
RCM [654] for 2-MF, 2-EF and 2-BF as shown in Fig. 67b. This figure
indicates  similar  IDT  values  for  2-EF  and  2-BF  above  830  K  with  a
notably higher reactivity than that of 2-MF. At the lowest temperatures,
IDTs  of  2-BF  deviate  from  the  Arrhenius  behavior  suggesting  the
occurrence of low-temperature chemistry involving the alkyl chain. The
results of Xu et al. [734] for 2-EF oxidation are in good agreement with
those of Sudholt et al. [654] and explain the higher reactivity of 2-EF
compared  to  that  of  2-MF  by  the  significant  role  of  the  reaction
pathway yielding 2-vinylfuran, which resembles the formation of sty-
rene  from  ethylbenzene  [765].  2-Vinylfuran  was  identified  to  be
amongst the most important key products of 2-EF pyrolysis [756] and
oxidation [755].

5.3.3.

Influence of oxygenated substituents

Only a limited number of furan derivatives including an oxygenated
substituent were studied as is shown in Table 20. The previous reviews
on furan derivatives [8,716] did not consider these compounds.

While a single study was found for any other CE, furfural was more
intensively investigated with measurements of LBVs [757] and JSR/FR
species  profiles  [423,757–762,768].  In  their  early  studies  of  furfural
pyrolysis using MS, Grela and Colussi [760,761] detected a species at

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101987

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 67. Auto-ignition of furan derivatives in RCMs: IDTs (φ=1) of (a) furan [655], 2-MF, 2,5-DMF [733], 2-EF [734], 2,3-DHF and THF [655] at 16-18 bar plotted by
[655] and (b) furan, 2-MF, 2-EF and 2-BF at 20 bar [654]. Reproduced from Refs. [654,655] with permission of Elsevier.

Fig. 68. Species mole fractions as a function of reactor temperature. (a,b) in 2,5-DMF oxidation (τ = 0.7 s, P = 10 bar, φ = 1) in a JSR [746]: fuel 2,5-DMF (2,5DMF),
H2, CH4 and C2+ oxygenated products (methyl vinyl ketone (MVK), 2-ethyl-5-methylfuran (5M2EF), 5-methylfurfural (5M2CHOF)); (c) oxidation (τ~0.5-0.8 s, P = 1
bar) in a FR [726]: the fuels are furan, 2-MF (MF) and 2,5-DMF (DMF). Symbols are experiments and lines simulations with the respective kinetic model of the study.
Reproduced from Refs. [726,746] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101988

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 69. Selected product quantitation in PLF of furan, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF under the same initial conditions and using GC and MBMS [103,273–275]. In the EI-MBMS
data, the overall formula is presented and the cross section of the most abundant isomer measured by GC was used for calibration. In the GC data only the most
abundant isomer is shown; the isomeric composition is available in their original papers. Acrolein and anisole were expected in GC, but cannot be detected since the
first was hidden by furan and the second was lost in the transfer line.

m/z 68 (C4H4O), which was assigned to be vinylketene, and proposed
that furfural decomposed into vinylketene + CO through ring-opening
followed by H-atom transfer in the resulting biradical. Later, Li et al.
[759] identified vinylketene and also furan as the species detected at
m/z  68  using  PI-MBMS  at  NSRL  in  Hefei.  Recently,  using  the  latter
technique,  Wang  et  al.  [762]  showed  that  furan  was  produced  in
amounts  more  than  100  times  larger  than  those  of  vinylketene.  The
experimental and numerical studies of Vasiliou et al. [758], Vermeire
et  al.  [423],  and  Jin  et  al.  [757]  showed  that  the  most  plausible
decomposition pathway of furfural was by ring-opening isomerization
with  the  formation  of  formylvinylketene  (m/z  96,  the  same  mass  as
furfural), which decomposed into furan or 2-pyrone (m/z 96). The latter
species was experimentally measured using GC with even higher mole
fractions  than  furan  (see  Fig.  70)  [423].  Note  however  that  under
oxidation conditions, furfural was found to be consumed exclusively via
radical chemistry (OH- and H-additions or H-abstractions) [757].

As shown in Fig. 71a, Wang et al. [762] observed a generally higher
reactivity of furfural and 2-MOF (methyl furan-2-carboxylate) compared
to  the  three  unsaturated  CEs  discussed  in  Section  5.3.1,  which  is
consistent  with  previous  studies  for  furan  and  furfural  [762,768].
Fig.  71b  shows  that  the  thermal  decomposition  pathways  of  furan

derivatives  strongly  depend  on  the  type  of  functional  groups  on  the
furan ring. The dominant decomposition pathways include carbene in-
termediates  (furan),  radical  chemistry  (2,5-DMF  and  2-MOF)  and
H-transfer followed by ring-opening (furfural) [762].

Recently, the group of Van Geem in Ghent investigated experimen-
tally  and  theoretically  the  influence  of  the  functional  groups  on  the
molecular and radical decomposition chemistry during the pyrolysis of
2-FFOH and 5-methylfufural in a FR [640]. The authors found that the
–CHO  functional  group  of  5-methylfufural  accelerated  the  molecular
ring-opening  isomerization  reaction  and  mostly  suppressed  carbene
formation channels, which is somewhat consistent with previous studies
on  furfural  [423,762].  The  weaker  C–H  (79  kcal/mol)  and  C–O  (77
kcal/mol) bonds in 2-FFOH and C–H bond (84 kcal/mol) in 5-methylfur-
fural compared to furan (lowest C–H DBE: 119 kcal/mol) and furfural
(lowest  C–H  DBE:  91  kcal/mol)  respectively  resulted  in  a  higher
importance of radical chemistry, which was proven by the detection of
the fuel radicals using PI-MBMS at NSRL in Hefei [640].

5.3.4. Performance of kinetic models

Table 21 summarizes the main detailed kinetic models developed for
the combustion of the furan derivatives listed in Table 20. Note that no

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101989

L.-S. Tran et al.

 ̇
demonstrated  that
OH-additions  on the  double  bonds  of  furan,  2-MF,
and 2,5-DMF forming acrolein and methyl vinyl ketone were very sig-
nificant  in  the  range  of  temperatures  lower  than  1000  K,  which
explained why these products were measured in large amounts as dis-
cussed  in  Part  3.3.1.  Currently,  this  model  and  the  above-mentioned
models of the Galway group are the most used models in the combus-
tion community for furan derivatives. One year later, the Aachen group
proposed  [735]  a  kinetic  model  for  the  oxidation  of  2-MF  with  the
high-temperature part mainly adopted from Galway [746,766] and the
low/intermediate  temperature  part  from  the  latest  model  of  Nancy
[726],  but  adding  some  new  reaction  classes  in  the  low-temperature
2-MF sub-model, such as O2  addition reactions to the adducts formed
 ̇
OH addition to the double bonds of 2-MF using kinetic data from
in the
Davis  and  Sarathy  [772].  They  also  considered  the  co-oxidation  re-
actions between 2-MF and n-heptane allowing to consider fuel mixtures.
The model by Tripathi et al. [735] was tested using a large number of
data  (T  from  730  K  to  2400  K)  as  is  summarized  in  Table  21.  Very
recently, Wang et al. [739] established a new model for 2-MF oxidation
and validated it against the species profiles obtained in their JSR and in
FR by Tran et al. [726] as well as IDT data from various studies of the
literature.  The  model  was  developed  mainly  based  on  recent  de-
velopments of Somers et al. [766], Davis and Sarathy [772], and Tran
et  al.  [726],  which  are  discussed  above.  Note  that  all  of  the  above
described models for furan, 2-MF, and 2,5-DMF do not contain second
O2 addition chemistry because such chemistry is insignificant for these
CEs.

5.3.4.2. Other  furan  derivatives. Models  concerning  other  furan  de-
rivatives, e.g. DHFs, 2-EF, furfural, 2-AF, and 2-MOF were proposed only
from 2016 onwards.

Concerning 2,3- and 2,5-DHFs, Fan et al. [633] developed and tested a
first detailed model starting from the THF model of Tran et al. [195] and
considering new reactions for DHF uni molecular initiations. The model
well  reproduced  IDTs  measured  in  a  ST  [633]  and  pyrolysis  species
distributions [631,632]. More recently, Wu et al. [655] proposed a 2,
3-DHF  model  based  on  the  THF  model  of  Fenard  et  al.  [283]  and
using rate coefficients estimated from those of THF and from Fan et al.
[633]. This 2,3-DHF model considers only a one-step lumped reaction of
 ̇
dihydrofuranyl  radicals  with  O2  forming
OH,  formyl,  and  3-oxopro-
p-1-en-1-yl  radicals  with  the  rate  coefficients  adjusted  to  get  a  better
agreement  between  the  model  predictions  and  the  experimental  IDTs
measured in a RCM.

Concerning  2-EF,  three  kinetic  models  were  found,  which  were
developed by Xu et al. [734], Song et al. [756], and Li et al. [755] using
the 2,5-DMF model of Somers et al. [746], which already contains some
2-EF  reactions.  As  the  2-EF  sub-model  of  Somers  et  al.  [746]  was
incomplete, Xu et al. [734] added reactions that are important under
 ̇
their RCM conditions, such as reactions between fuel radicals with HO
O
or O2. Later, Song et al. [756] performed quantum chemistry calcula-
tions  and  added  important  thermal  decomposition  reactions  of  2-EF,
such  as  unimolecular  initiations  via  C-C  bond  scissions  and  carbene
chemistry. These models were tested using IDTs measured in a RCM and
pyrolysis species measured in a FR, respectively. The model predictions
 ̇
showed  that  2-EF  was  consumed  mainly  via
OH-additions  on  double
bonds  under  RCM  conditions  and  rather  by  C–C  bond  scission  of  the
lateral C2H5 group, H-additions, and H-abstractions under FR pyrolysis
conditions.  The  model  predicted  that  2-EF  is  the  most  reactive  fuel
among 2-EF, 2-MF, and 2,5-DMF, which is consistent with the experi-
mental trend shown in Fig. 67a [734], and that 2-EF produces the lowest
concentrations  of  aromatic  compounds  [756].  Very  recently,  Li  et  al.
[755] expanded the model of Song et al. [756] by adding oxidation re-
actions with rate coefficients being obtained by new theoretical calcu-
lations or by analogy to similar reactions of 2-MF and ethylbenzene. The
model reproduces very well the JSR species data obtained in the same
study and the FR pyrolysis species profiles of [756] as well as the IDTs

Fig. 70. Furfural pyrolysis (1.07 bar): fuel and the two key products, furan and
2-pyrone redrawn from the data of [423].

models  are  available  for  2-BF,  2-FFOH,  and  5-methylfurfural.  Only
detailed models that contain a primary mechanism for furan derivatives,
the development of which requested significant effort (more than only
adjusting a few reactions or reusing available sub-models) are listed in
Table 21. The models developed by Tay et al. [769,770] for furan, 2-MF,
and 2,5-DMF or by Zhou et al. [771] for 2,5-DMF are not listed here
because they were reduced from the detailed models of Somers et al.
[728,746,766]. The models developed before 2016 for furan, 2-MF, and
2,5-DMF, which were already comprehensively analyzed in the review
by Xu et al. [716], are presented in Table 21 for the sake of compre-
hensiveness, but only briefly described in the text hereafter. More details
will be given for the newer models and those for other CEs.

5.3.4.1. Furan,  2-MF,  2,5-DMF. Before  2016,  several  detailed  kinetic
models were developed, such as those by Organ and Mackie [722], Sendt
et  al.  [636],  Lifshitz  et  al.  [736,748],  Somers  et  al.  [728,746,766]  in
Galway,  and  by  the  Nancy  group  [226,274,275,747,750].  The  early
models  for  furan  pyrolysis  [636,722]  used  rate  coefficients  of  unim-
olecular initiations based on either ST experiments or ab initio calcula-
tions  and  considered  biradical  chemistry  [722]  or  carbene  chemistry
[636], respectively, as described in Part 5.1.2. These models were tested
against the ST pyrolysis species profiles of [722]. Similarly, the early
developments  by  the  Lifshitz  group  [736,748]  were  dedicated  to  py-
rolysis for 2-MF and 2,5-DMF using the kinetic data for unimolecular
initiations based on ST experiments. Later, the Galway group proposed
comprehensive models for the pyrolysis and oxidation of 2-MF and 2,
5-DMF  using  theoretically  calculated  rate  coefficients  [728,746,766].
These  models  were  tested  using  numerous  experimental  datasets
including IDTs in STs, LBVs, and species profiles measured in STs, PLFs,
JSRs, and FRs as is summarized in Table 21. In parallel, the Nancy group
proposed kinetic models for the oxidation of these three furans using
kinetic data from theoretical calculations for the key primary reactions
[226,273–275,747]. The models were tested using PLF species profiles
measured at Hefei, Nancy, and Bielefeld, and IDTs and pyrolysis prod-
ucts measured in STs (Table 21).

After  2016,  together  with  the  groups  in  Bielefeld  and  Ghent,  the
Nancy group continued to work on a model for these CEs by including
important reactions for low/intermediate temperature oxidation [726].
This model distinguished itself from other literature models by including
 ̇
O- and O2-additions to
for the first time detailed reaction subsets for HO
the important resonance-stabilized fuel radicals, (furan-2-yl)methyl and
(5-methylfuran-2-yl)methyl,  with  kinetic  data  computed  using
high-level  theoretical  calculations. The  model was  used to  simulate a
large number of experimental datasets measured in FRs,  JSRs, RCMs,
STs, and PLFs at temperatures from 730 to 2600 K (Table 21). The model

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101990

L.-S. Tran et al.

Fig. 71. Pyrolysis of substituted furans in a FR: (a) fuel conversion profiles (P = 0.04 bar), (b) major kinetic pathways. Adapted from Ref. [762] with permission of
Elsevier. The bond with the lowest BDE (kcal/mol) in each fuel is highlighted in red.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101991

L.-S. Tran et al.

obtained in RCM of [734].

Concerning  furfural,  two  kinetic  models  are  available,  which  were
very recently developed by Wang et al. [762] and Jin et al. [757] for

pyrolysis and oxidation, respectively. The model by [762] was devel-
oped based on literature PES [423,758,759] and estimation of kinetic
data. The model by [757] used theoretically calculated kinetic data for

Table 21
Main detailed kinetic models (they required a significant development effort on the primary mechanism) for the combustion of some unsaturated CEs. For each CE, the
◦
models are sorted by year of publication. Spe. N

: reaction number (forward). *Conditions above presented in this table.

◦
: species number. Reac. N

◦
Spe. N

◦
Reac. N

Validation conditions (unit: T / K, P / bar)

CE

Furan

Year & Ref.

1991, Organ and Mackie [722]

2000, Sendt et al. [636]

2011, Tian et al. [226]

2014, Liu et al. [273]

2017, Tran et al. [726]

-

-

-

82

206

1368

305

524

1472

3145

-ST pyrolysis species (T = 1100-1700, P = 20.3) [722]

-ST pyrolysis species of [722]*.

-PLF species (P = 0.05, φ = 1.4-2.2) [226]
-ST pyrolysis species (T = 1533, P = 0.26) [723,722]*

-PLF species (P = 0.02-0.04, φ = 1.0-1.7) [273,226]*

-FR species (T = 730-1170, P = 1, φ = 0.5-2) [726]
-JSR species (T = 1000-1300, P = 1) [768]
-PLF species of [273]*
-IDT in ST (T = 1150-2010, P = 1.2-16, φ = 1) [720]

-IDT in ST (T = 1100-1635, P = 1.2-10.1, φ = 0.5-2) [633]
-ST pyrolysis species (T = 900-1300, P = 0.6) [631]

2,3-DHF

2016, Fan et al. [633]

255

1723

2020, Wu et al. [655]
(used with the furan model of Tran et al. [726])

439

2434

-IDT in RCM (T = 660-880, P = 10-20, φ = 1.0) [655]
-IDT in ST of [633]*

2,5-DHF

2016, Fan et al. [633]

255

1723

-IDT in ST (T = 1100-1650, P = 1.2-10.1, φ = 0.5-2) [633]
-ST pyrolysis species (T = 900-1080, P = 1.6-6.5) [632]

2-MF

1997, Lifshitz et al. [736]

2013, 2014, Somers et al. [728,766]

2014, Tran et al. [274]

2017, Tran et al. [726]

36

567

305

524

100

2889

1472

3145

2018, Tripathi et al. [735]

883

4221

2022, Wang et al. [739]

761

3498

-ST pyrolysis species (T = 1100-1400, P = 1.7-2.9) [736]

-IDT in ST (T = 1120-1800, P = 1-10.7, φ = 0.5-2) [728,731]
-LBV (Tinitial = 298-398, P = 1, φ = 0.55-1.65) [728]
-ST pyrolysis species of [736]*
-PLF species (P = 0.02-0.04, φ = 1.0-1.7 ) [274]

-PLF species (P = 0.02-0.04, φ = 1.0-1.7) [274]

-IDT in RCM (T = 737-1143, P = 16-30, φ = 1) [733]
-IDT in ST (T = 1150-2010, P = 1.2-16, φ = 1) [720]
-FR species (T = 730-1400, P = 1, φ = 0.02-3.33) [726,740]
-PLF species (P = 0.02-0.04, φ = 1.0-1.7) [274]

-IDT in RCM (T = 737-1143, P = 16-30, φ = 1) [654,720,735]
-IDT in ST (T = 820-2010, P = 1-40, φ = 0.25-2) [281,719,720,728,731]
-LBV (Tinitial = 298-398, P = 1, φ = 0.55-1.65) [728,729]
-PLF species (P = 0.02-0.04, φ = 0.8-1.7 ) [274,738]
-FR species (T = 730-1400, P = 1, φ = 0.02-3.33) [726,740]

-JSR species (T = 600-925, P = 1.0, φ = 0.5-2) [739]
-FR species of [726]*
-IDT in ST (T = 909-1820, P = 1-11, φ = 0.5-2) [719,728,731]
-IDT in RCM (T = 737-1143, P = 16-30, φ = 1) [733,735]

2,5-DMF

1998, Lifshitz et al. [748]

2013, Sirjean et al. [747]

50

294

180

1459

-ST pyrolysis species (T = 1070-1370, P = 2-3.7) [748]

-IDT in ST (T = 1300-1831, P = 1-4, φ = 0.5-1.5) [747]
-ST pyrolysis species of [748]*

2013, Somers et al. [746]

545

2768

2014, Togb ́e et al. [275]

2017, Tran et al. [726]

2-EF

2017, Xu et al. [734]

2021, Song et al. [756]

2022, Li et al. [755]

305

524

568

659

723

1472

3145

2902

3147

3300

-IDT in ST (T = 820-1800, P = 1-81.1, φ = 0.5-2) [746],[747]*
-LBV (Tinitial = 298-473, P = 1-7.5, φ = 0.6-1.6) [270,742,746]
-ST pyrolysis species (T = 1200-1350, P = 1-2.5) [746],[748]*
-JSR species (T = 770-1220, P = 10.1, φ = 0.5-2) [746]
-FR pyrolysis species (T = 873-1098, P = 1.7) [641]

-PLF species (P = 0.02-0.04, φ = 1.0-1.7) [275]

-FR species (T = 730-1170, P = 1, φ = 0.5-2) [726]
-JSR species of [746]*
-IDT in ST (T = 1300-1900, P = 1.2-16, φ = 0.5-2) [720,746]*
-PLF species (P = 0.02-0.04, φ = 1.0-1.7) [275]

-IDT in RCM (T = 766-1013, P = 16-30, φ = 0.5-2) [734]

-FR pyrolysis species (T = 846-1319, P = 0.04-1) [756]

-JSR species (T = 600-900, P = 1, φ = 0.5-2) [755]
-IDT in RCM of [734]*
-FR pyrolysis species of [756]*

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101992

L.-S. Tran et al.

Table 21 (continued )

CE

Year & Ref.

◦
Spe. N

◦
Reac. N

Validation conditions (unit: T / K, P / bar)

Furfural

2021, Wang et al. [762]

585

3018

2021, Jin et al. [757]

382

2262

-FR pyrolysis species (T = 929-1365, P = 0.04-1) [762]
-JSR pyrolysis species (T = 900-1100, P = 1.07) [423]

-LBV (Tinitial = 473, P = 1, φ = 0.6-1.8) [757]
-JSR species (T = 650-950, P = 1, φ = 0.4-2) [757]
-JSR pyrolysis species (T = 900-1100, P = 1.07) [423]

2-AF

2022, He et al. [763]

644

3134

-JSR pyrolysis species (T = 770-1130, P = 1) [763]

2-MOF

2019, Yan et al. [764]

601

3086

-FR pyrolysis species (T = 879-1107, P = 1) [764]

important oxidation reactions such as bimolecular initiations with O2 or
H-additions/abstractions  on  double  bonds.  These  models  reproduced
the respective experimental data listed in Table 21 well and they helped
with the interpretation of the experimentally observed trends discussed
in  Section  5.3.3,  e.g.  the  abundance  of  furan  over  vinylketene  or  the
difference  in  the  reactivity  of  furfural  compared  to  other  furan  de-
rivatives.  Both  models  agree  that  furfural  was  consumed  mainly  by
 ̇
OH-additions  and  H-abstractions  under  oxidation  conditions  and  by
isomerization to formylvinylketene under pyrolysis conditions.

Concerning 2-AF and 2-MOF, one model was proposed for the thermal
decomposition each of these CEs by the group of Wei at Guangxi Uni-
versity [763,764] using rate coefficients from new theoretical calcula-
tions  and  analogous  reactions  of  acetone,  methyl  formate,  dimethyl
carbonate, methyl crotonate, furan, 2-MF, and 2,5-DMF. These models
were tested using pyrolysis species measured in a JSR or a FR, respec-
tively, and generally good agreement was observed. Modelling demon-
strated  that  2-AF  consumption  was  mainly  controlled  by  both
unimolecular decomposition and H-addition reactions, and that 2-MOF
was consumed largely via O–CH3 bond scissions, which was consistent
with the calculated BDEs for this CE.

Similarly to the models described in Section 5.3.4.1 for furan, 2-MF,
and 2,5-DMF, the models for 2-EF, furfural, and 3-MOF do not contain
second O2 addition chemistry, which is insignificant for these CEs.

5.4. Conclusion

In order to better understand the consumption chemistry of CEs, Part
5 presented a systematic review of the experimental studies and of the
detailed kinetic models related to the gas-phase pyrolysis and oxidation
of saturated and unsaturated CEs, including substituted ones.

Concerning  the  reviewed  experimental  work,  about  90  and  80

studies were identified for saturated and unsaturated CEs, respectively,
with  saturated  CEs  including  compounds  of  the  families  of  oxirane,
oxetane, THF, THP, dioxolane, and dioxane, and unsaturated CEs con-
sisting exclusively of furanic compounds. Each study contains different
datasets that include several data points. A larger number of pyrolysis
studies can be found for unsaturated (about 30 studies) than for satu-
rated CEs (about 15 studies). On the other hand, the number of oxidation
studies below 1000 K for saturated CEs (about 40 studies) is higher than
for unsaturated CEs (20 studies).

Regarding global combustion property measurements, the LBVs of
CEs in air reach their maximum value at φ = 1.1 and the LBVs decline
with increasing of pressure. Note that the maximum LBV also occurs at
φ~1.1 for most carbon-based fuels [268,773]. No LBV measurements for
CEs were found for pressures >10 bar. Under oxidation conditions above
1000 K, the IDTs of all the listed CEs follow classical Arrhenius behavior,
increase  as  expected  with  increasing  φ  and  decrease  with  increasing
pressure.  Increasing  the  length  of  the  lateral  group  or  adding  an
oxygenated lateral group increases reactivity, while an increased level of
unsaturation  decreases  it.  The  position  of  the  lateral  group  is  also  of
importance, as shown by the higher reactivity of 3-MTHF compared to
2-MTHF. Concerning the oxidation at temperatures below 800 K, cool
flames were only detected for THF derivatives.

Concerning the chemistry of saturated CEs, oxirane, THF, 2-MTHF,
and THP are the most intensively investigated species. Under pyrolysis
conditions, both, carbene and biradical pathways play important roles,
especially for oxetane and oxirane derivatives. The latter react to yield
aldehydes.  THF  and  THP  derivatives  are  mainly  consumed  by  H-ab-
stractions. The reaction sequence of THF derivatives at low temperature
follows  the  usual  mechanism  observed  for  alkanes.  However,  while
cyclic-ether KHPs have been reported in THF oxidation, the formation of
fused  bicyclic  ethers  (as  a  result  of  the  decomposition  of  cyclic-ether

Fig.  72. Number  of  studies,  which  can  be  found  in  the  literature  over  the  years  after  from  1994  to  2021  related  to  CE  formation during  fuel  low-temperature
oxidation (as described in Part 4) and to the consumption of saturated and unsaturated CEs (as described in Part 5).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101993

L.-S. Tran et al.

derivatives  by
involving HO

 ̇
O or CH3O

 ̇
O radicals.

incorporating  intermediate  temperature  reactions

6. Conclusion and perspectives

To complete this paper, Part 6 aims to summarize the main conclu-
sions, which can be drawn from the sum of the studies reviewed in Parts
4 and 5 and to present some emerging directions for research in CE re-
action kinetics. Fig. 72 plots the time evolution of the number of studies
that can be found in the literature related to CEs in the context of both
their  formation  during  fuel  low-temperature  oxidation  and  their  own
reactivity/degradation as fuels or as secondary products of the oxidation
of  other  fuel  components.  Note  that  each  study  contains  different
datasets that include several data points.

Fig. 72 shows that between 1994 and 2001, research mainly focused
on the formation and the reactivity of saturated CEs, which are produced
in competition to KHPs, while relatively few studies can be found on
unsaturated  CEs.  This  activity  completely  stopped  between  2002  and
2007 when the focus switched to chemically activated HOO elimination
and alkene formation. Interest in CEs rose again in 2008. Since then, the
amount of CE formation studies is quite steady and at a slightly higher
level than before 2001. Research on CE reactivity increased significantly
after 2012 and can be divided almost equally in studies on saturated and
on unsaturated CEs.

The text hereafter gives an assessment of the work reviewed in the
previous  parts  and  proposes  a  few  potential  research  directions.  The
mechanisms of formation (as discussed in Part 4) and of consumption (as
discussed in Part 5) of CEs are strongly connected, as is illustrated by
Fig. 73 in the case of alkane low-temperature oxidation. This intercon-
nection  explains  the  need  to  keep  this  review  paper  as  a  single  one
despite its very large number of pages. More specifically, as described in
this  review,  the  CE  yields  in  fuel  low-temperature  oxidation  is  deter-
mined by their rates of formation as part of the fuel oxidation chemistry,
but also by their rates of consumption, which should not be discarded
since H-abstraction reactions from most CEs are relatively fast due to the
weak C–H bound in α-position to the ether O-atom.

After this general chemical statement, let’s examine more closely the
experimental kinetic studies related to CEs, the theoretical calculation
procedures  involved,  and  finally  the  ways  that  CEs  are  considered  in
kinetic models.

6.1. Experimental kinetic studies related to cyclic ethers

On the point of view of the experimental reaction devices used, the
kinetic studies related to CEs were performed using the full set of what is
available in combustion laboratories, as described in Part 3. While CE
formation during fuel oxidation at low-temperature was mostly inves-
tigated  in  JSRs  and  RCMs,  CE  reactivity  was  followed  using  a  wider
variety of devices, including burners and STs. Part 4 shows that JSRs
from  different  laboratories  yield  consistent  data,  which  confirms  that
this  set-up  is  very  well  suited  for  studying  CE  formation  during  low-
temperature oxidation. As is described in Part 5, STs, especially when
used in single pulse mode, have long been useful tools for studying CE
pyrolysis and deriving data on their kinetics of decomposition. Burners
with  stabilized  laminar  flame  at  low  pressures  have  allowed  for  the
quantification  of  the  wide  range  of  products  formed  during  the  com-
bustion of furan derivatives. While their formation levels are significant
amongst the products formed in the low-temperature oxidation of fuel
components under IC engine conditions, CEs are often omitted in the
studies reporting quantitative specifications, especially in RCMs.

Next: Additional CE studies by a larger range of RCM laboratories
would be helpful to increase the data sets and to test for their consis-
tency. Similarly, since only two studies were found using a FR setup,
more studies on CE kinetics with this device should be attempted, even if
their unfavorable surface/volume ratio might favor wall effects, which
could  interfere  with  slow  gas  phase  oxidation  kinetics  at  low

Fig.  73. Remaining  unknowns  related  to  CEs in  the  understanding  of  alkane
low-temperature oxidation. Many aspects of the unimolecular decompositions
of molecules and radicals are not shown. R is a C3+ alkyl radical and, except for
“alkyloxiranes” and “oxiranealkyl”, which only relate to oxiranes substituted by
a C2+ group, both substituted and unsubstituted CEs, are considered.

Q ̇OOH radical) have not been experimentally observed. The formation
of bioxirane was recently reported from ethyloxirane oxidation [395],
however, this is not a fused bicyclic ether. In this case oxidation started
from the oxiranylalkyl radical meaning that the radical site was on the
side chain and subsequently also the hydroperoxy group. For 2,3-dime-
thyloxirane, due to faster oxirane ring-opening, no bicyclic ether was
observed [511].

Concerning the chemistry of unsaturated CEs, most of the available
studies focused on furan, 2-MF, and 2,5-DMF. The carbene mechanism
as well as biradical formation are important under pyrolysis conditions
especially  for  aromatic  furan  derivatives.  However,  the  presence  of  a
long alkyl chain and/or of oxygenated substituents with relatively weak
C–H bonds favors the formation of fuel radicals with their subsequent
chemistry  at  the  expense  of  unimolecular  decomposition  by  ring-
opening.  Unsaturated  CEs  are  also  significantly  consumed  by  H-  and
 ̇
OH-additions to double bonds. Despite a significant effort made to study
the ignition of unsaturated CEs in RCMs, the low-temperature chemistry
via O2 addition steps was pointed out to be insignificant for this type of
CEs. Compared to saturated CEs, furan derivatives, especially 2,5-DMF,
have  a  higher  propensity to  form soot  precursors,  indicating a  strong
influence of the degree  of unsaturation and of the presence of lateral
groups, which need to be investigated more.

Detailed kinetic models are available for 14 of the 16 saturated CEs
listed in Table 16 and for 8 of the 11 unsaturated CEs listed in Table 20.
No models were found for ethyloxirane, 2-ETHF, 2-BF, 2-FFOH, and 5-
methylfurfural.  In  general,  the  models  developed  prior  to  2000  were
mainly  based  on  estimated  kinetic  data,  while  newer  models  used
theoretically calculated rates providing an improved predictive ability.
In recent years, progress has been made in developing models for the
low-temperature oxidation of THF derivatives by refining the rate con-
stants  involved  in  the  O2  addition  sequence,  and  in  those  of  furan

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101994

L.-S. Tran et al.

to separate KHP at m/z 118 (C4H6O4) formed in THF oxidation at 590 K.
Although  the  separation  of  five  species  was  successful,  these  authors
could not identify those.

In  addition,  future  CE  studies  should  take  advantage  of  advanced
multiplexed detection techniques, e.g. combining MS for ion detection
with photo electron detectors, which is known as the PEPICO technique
[392,437–440].

On the point of view of the investigated reactant families, CEs were
detected in the oxidation of linear and cyclic hydrocarbons, as well as of
linear oxygenated fuels. The chemistry of CE formation from aromatic
species was found to be special as it involved a possible bridging be-
tween alkyl chains (e.g. in o-xylene [523] and cymene isomers [779]).
Such cases have not yet been investigated much. The major part of the
studies  dealing  with  CE  pyrolysis  and  oxidation  focus  on  furan  de-
rivatives, but a small number of studies concerning C2-C4 hydrocarbons
including an oxirane ring are also known. Recent work [511] indicates
that the low-temperature oxidation of C4 oxiranes is more complex than
assumed  in  current  models.  Concerning  the  reactivity  of  molecules
including a 5-membered CE, 70% of the studies concern THF, 2-MTHF,
furan,  2-MF  and  2,5-DMF.  Limited  information  (often  only  DCN
numbers [87]) is available for molecules with a C2+ alkyl chain or an
oxygenated substituent.

Next: Overall, more work is needed to address CE formation in the
oxidation of branched and aromatic fuels. More experimental work is
needed  on  substituted  oxetanes  and  THPs,  as  well  as  of  substituted
saturated CEs that cannot be formed by alkane oxidation (e.g. bicyclic
ethers...). Such studies e.g. in JSR would certainly be possible if these
fuels  can  be  purchased  or  easily  synthetized.  In  addition,  studies  of
substituted  oxiranes  might  help  to  characterize  the  chemistry  of
hydroperoxy  oxiranes,  the  formation  of  which  is  found  by  up-to-date
kinetic  models  to  be  significant  [395,511].  Moreover,  additional
studies  on  the  reactivity  of  oxygenated  furan  derivatives,  such  as
2-FFOH  or  5-methyl  furfural,  could  be  of  interest  to  improve  the  un-
derstanding of biomass pyrolysis and combustion [640].

On  the  point  of  view  of  investigated  experimental  parameters, CE

studies were performed under the following conditions:

• Temperature range 400–1200 K for CE formation, 373–2300 K for
the  reactivity  of  saturated  CEs,  500–3000  K  for  the  reactivity  of
unsaturated ones,

• Pressure  range  1–50  bar  for  CE  formation,  0.01–40  bar  for  the
(cid:0) 6-80 bar for the reactivity of

reactivity of saturated CEs, 1.3 × 10
unsaturated ones,

• Equivalence  ratio  range  0.25–4  for  CE  formation,  0.2-∞  for  the
reactivity of saturated CEs, 0.02-∞ for the reactivity of unsaturated
ones.

Amongst the 96 studies on saturated CE consumption, only about 19
were performed at pressure above 10 bar, all but one (a speciation in
CFR engines [82]) concentrate on IDT measurements, and most of them
were done in Aachen. Amongst the 89 studies on unsaturated CE con-
sumption, about 15 were performed at pressure above 10 bar, all but one
(speciation  in  a  FR  [752])  report  on  IDTs.  RCM  studies  reporting  CE
formation  were  mostly  done  for  stoichiometric  mixtures.  Moreover,
while many studies address the pyrolysis of CEs (φ = ∞), less data are
available for CE oxidation in lean mixtures.

Next: If seriously considered as transportation fuels, then studies on
CE reactivity under more realistic conditions relevant to gasoline and
HCCI type engines are needed, especially at high pressures with product
quantification, or under lean to slightly rich conditions.

6.2. Theoretical calculation procedures in cyclic ether kinetic studies

Concerning  theoretical  calculations  about  CE  formation,  extensive
studies on rate rules were performed with the CBS-QB3 method. How-
ever, the level of accuracy of this method has been questioned and newer

Fig. 74. Examples of types of CEs different from those obtained from linear or
branched alkanes that can be produced according to their reactant of origin.

temperatures.  It  would  be  particularly  interesting  to  use  FR  for  in-
vestigations at higher pressures than currently achievable with JSR. For
this to be helpful, it would be useful to first perform parallel JSR and FR
studies at the same conditions in order to provide evidence that both
setups provide consistent data. In addition, more JSR studies on THP and
on CEs substituted by C1+ alkyl chain would be of interest. For critical
CE  identification  problems,  the  use  of  deuterated  (or  general  isotope
labelled) reactants could be considered, if available. Also, photoinitiated
oxidation studies, which have provided valuable mechanistic informa-
tion in the past but mainly focused on time-resolved measurements of
radicals, could be extended towards the quantification of CE yields, e.g.
in cases in which unstable CEs are formed.

On the point of view of used analytical techniques, due to its ability
to separate even chemically similar organic isomers from each other, GC
has long been the technique of choice for CE analysis. When coupled to a
quadrupole MS, CE species can easily be identified while the use of a FID
allows their quantification with high accuracy within a wide range of
concentrations. However, the ability of GCs to discriminate CE isomers
deteriorates  with  increasing  fuel  size  due  to  the  increased  number  of
chemically  similar  isomers.  Drawbacks  of  the  GC  technique  include
possible decomposition of unstable species in the injection and column
sections and the poor time resolution which prevents detection of highly
reactive intermediates.

The latter issue is addressed with MBMS setups which are increas-
ingly used in recent years [292,774–777]. In these devices time-of-flight
MS is generally used, which allows for a full mass spectrum to be taken
within  milliseconds.  When  combined  with  soft  ionization,  e.g.
photo-ionization with tunable narrow bandwidth light, the resulting PES
can be used to identify the detected species. This method is particularly
powerful  when  the  usual  ion  detection  is  completed  by  additional
diagnostics.

Next: Recently, 2D or GC × GC chromatographs using two columns
of  different  affinity  [778]  have  been  used  successfully  to  separate
complex mixtures of species. It would be worth testing if such a setup is
able to discriminate CE isomers formed by heavy fuels. The success of
this technique mainly relies on being able to identify adequate pairs of
columns  for  the  separation.  For  heavy  fuels,  the  use  of  HPLC  (high
pressure  liquid  chromatography)  to  separate  the  CEs  could  also  be
tested. Belhadj [590] applied ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101995

L.-S. Tran et al.

coupled cluster based calculations (e.g. [463]) suggest that the recom-
mended rate expressions overestimate the reactivity. While the structure
of small species may be well defined, larger molecules exist as numerous
conformers and isomers, which are often not taken into account. This
large variety and complexity put limits on the accuracy of theoretical
studies  and  thus  on  the  thermochemical  properties  calculated.  The
description of pressure-dependence also leads to uncertainties caused by
the  energy  transfer  parameters  and  models  used  as  well  as  possible
numerical  errors.  Despite  these  uncertainties,  theoretical  calculations
provide  very  valuable  information  and  the  results  might  be  further
improved by “multiscale informatics” optimization procedures [780].

Next: More work is needed to clarify if the activation energies from
CBS-QB3 results are too low, the pre-exponential factors are too high, or
both.  Systematic  studies  with  a  higher-level  method  are  needed  to
resolve  this  issue.  The  causes  for  deviating  rate  expressions  obtained
with seemingly the same ab initio method need to be analyzed and well-
defined  protocols  to  derive  rate  expressions  but  also  thermodynamic
properties (specifically entropies) would be helpful. The use of mathe-
matical tools considering error propagation and uncertainties will likely
increase to make kinetic models more predictive. Some inconsistencies
revealed in the review between GA predicted and theoretically calcu-
lated thermodynamic data should be addressed.

Concerning CE reactivity at high temperature, the thermal decom-
position of furan and some of its methyl derivatives were investigated
thoroughly  by  high-level  theoretical  methods  and  the  importance  of
pericyclic  reactions  and  carbene  intermediates  was  established.  Simi-
larly,  the  understanding  of  the  unimolecular  decomposition  of
(substituted)  THF  and  their  radicals  has  been  improved  lately  due  to
high-level studies of the corresponding PESs. More uncertainty exists for
oxiranes and oxetanes, partly because the theory level was not very high
and partly because of the multireference character of transition states.
Rate  coefficients  for  unimolecular  CE  decomposition  reactions  are
generally available as a function of pressure. Systematic studies using
isodesmic reactions provided accurate thermodynamic data for the most
important CEs, which allows for the solution of the energy balance in
high-temperature  ignition  tests.  Unknown  thermodynamic  data  can
easily be estimated with web-based GA tools [187,188,781].

Next: Kinetic data for H-abstraction reactions by H- and O-atoms and
 ̇
CH3 radicals, which are surprisingly still lacking, would improve high-
temperature  models  that  often  use  estimates  to  describe  the  CE
decomposition chemistry. It is anticipated that algorithms designed to
automatically explore possible reaction pathways (e.g. KINBOT [186])
will  gain  in  importance  in  the  future  to  address existing  “mechanism
truncation” problems [782].

The  low-temperature  reactivity  of  CEs  is  characterized  by  the
competition of multiple reaction channels proceeding on complex PESs.
These  are  nowadays  routinely  calculated,  often  at  the  CBS-QB3  or
coupled cluster level of theory, and pressure-dependent rate expressions
are  derived.  Compared  to  the  oxidation  of  open-chain  molecules,  O2
addition to CE radicals competes with ring-opening and/or elimination
reactions. In the case of THF, the theoretical treatment provided a ki-
netic  model  that  predicted  the  formation  of  α-KHP  very  well,  which
indicates  the  potential  of  current  theoretical  methods  as  an  accurate
source of thermochemical data. On the other hand, optimization tools
based on “multiscale informatics” have been developed and applied to
the  oxidation  of  substituted  oxiranes,  which  identify  needed  adjust-
ments of theoretical data within their uncertainty limits to improve the
prediction of experimental data.

 ̇
OH and HO

Next: H-abstraction reactions from CEs by

 ̇
O proceeding
through pre-reactive complexes have been identified as being crucial for
predicting  the  oxidation  products  or  intermediates  in  the  low-
temperature  oxidation  of  CEs  with  good  accuracy.  The  occurrence  of
equatorial and axial sites as well as syn- and anti- isomers (optical iso-
mers) present challenges which have only sparingly been addressed in
kinetic  models.  Existing  lumped  reactions  should  be  reevaluated  at  a
higher  level  of  theory  and  replaced  by  elementary  step  reactions  if

needed.  The  identification  of  all  the  important  pathways  on  the  PES
remains a challenge, which new algorithms will help to address in the
future.

6.3. Ways cyclic ethers are considered in kinetic modelling

Concerning  the  consumption  of  furan  derivatives,  thanks  to  the
theoretical  work  here-before  described,  several  models  with  fair  pre-
diction abilities are currently available to simulate IDTs in STs at high
temperatures and/or the formation of species profiles of intermediate
products in PLF for THF, 2-MTHF, furan, 2-MF and 2,5-DMF. In the last
five years, progress has been made to extend these models towards low-
temperature  and  intermediate  temperature  chemistry,  which  enabled
the simulation of experimental data for saturated compounds (from 550
K onwards) and for unsaturated CEs from 730 K with satisfactory pre-
dictions of IDTs in RCMs. Thanks to available JSR data for THF and 2,5-
DMF,  as  well  as  FR  data  for  furan,  2-MF  and  2,5-DMF,  the  newly
developed models enabled detailed comparisons between experiments
and  predictions.  In  recent  years,  attempts  have  been  made  to  model
furfural  pyrolysis  and  combustion  with  data  for  LBV  and  JSR  species
profiles,  but  not  for  IDTs.  The  number  of  models  for  other  furan  de-
rivatives is much more limited.

Next: As soon as new data in a JSR for furan derivatives substituted
by C1+ alkyl chain become available, there will be an incentive to update
current models or develop new ones to predict those data. As mentioned
in Part 5, for five alkyl substituted ethers there are currently no kinetic
models available and should be developed to make use of the available
experimental data. In the context of better using biomass and biofuels,
the interest in modelling the reactions of furan derivatives substituted by
oxygenated substituents will continue to increase.

Concerning  the  simulated  CE  yields  during  fuel  low-temperature
oxidation, Part 4 in this review describes the significant progress made
over the years in predicting CE formation from a wide range of fuels, but
with the highest accuracy achieved for linear alkanes. In contrast, Part 5
shows that the CE consumption chemistry is much more complex than
what  is  prescribed  in  current  chemical  kinetics  mechanisms.  This  is
because the models contain only simplified reactions for the secondary
chemistry of CEs in order to provide a sink for radicals. Often, only one
or two reactions are included and with rather uncertain rate parameters.
Furthermore, some rate expressions are generic and do not reflect the
different reactivities of the abstracting radicals. Other kinetic models use
experimental  rate  expressions  that  date  back  to  the  1970s  to  1990s.
Moreover, modelling of the low-temperature oxidation of CEs is still in
its  infancy.  As  shown  in  Fig.  73,  unknowns  remain  in  the  reaction
pathways related to the consumption of all classes of CEs.

Next:  A  significant  modelling  effort  is  still  needed  concerning  CE
formation  from  branched  alkanes,  e.g.  from  hexane  isomers,  a  chal-
lenging  test  for  detailed  kinetic  models,  and  rate  rules  are  still  to  be
completed. This  is  even more true for  cyclic, aromatic or  oxygenated
fuels.  In  addition,  progress  in  the  understanding  of  CE  consumption
chemistry over a wide temperature range should allow expanding the
related  sub-mechanisms  considering  additional  sources  and  sinks  for
radicals and consequently significantly improving the predictive capa-
bilities of species profiles. Refining the CE secondary mechanism might
increase modelling accuracy as much as considering the 3rd O2 addition.
The list of CEs to be studied does not only include alkyl oxiranes, oxe-
tanes, THF and THP, which can be produced from the oxidation of linear
and branched alkanes, but also all the types of molecules, which can be
produced  from  various  fuels  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  74.  This  model
development  should  be  done  through  the  development  of  rate  rules
specific to CEs and the potential involvement of automatic generation
algorithms.

Author statement

(1)  Authors  make  substantial  contributions  to  the  development  of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101996

L.-S. Tran et al.

ideas, literature review and analysis: LST, OH, HHC, FBL;

(2)  Authors  participate  in  drafting  and/or  critically  revising  the
manuscript and take intellectual responsibility for its content: LST, OH,
HHC, FBL;

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank G. Vanhove, M. Ribaucour, H. Curran, Y.
Fenard, Y. Li, J. Zou, and Z. Wang for their valuable assistance during
the writing of this review. HHC acknowledges funding from the Arag ́on
Government  (Ref.  T22_20R),  co-funded  by  FEDER  2014-2020  "Con-
struyendo Europa desde Arag ́on".

References

[1] Dec JE. Advanced compression-ignition engines—understanding the in-cylinder
processes. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32:2727–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2008.08.008.

[2] Musculus MPB, Miles PC, Pickett LM. Conceptual models for partially premixed
low-temperature diesel combustion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2013;39:246–83.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2012.09.001.

[3] Saxena S, Bedoya ID. Fundamental phenomena affecting low temperature

combustion and HCCI engines, high load limits and strategies for extending these
limits. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2013;39:457–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2013.05.002.

[4] Pollard R. Hydrocarbons. In: Bamford CH, Tipper CFH, editors. Comprehensive
chemical kinetics: gas-phase combustion. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1977. Eds. vol.
17.

[5] Walker RW, Morley C. Basic chemistry of combustion. In: Pilling MJ, editor.

Comprehensive chemical kinetics: low-temperature combustion and autoignition.
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1997. Ed. vol. 35.

[6] Anca-Couce A, Hochenauer C, Scharler R. Bioenergy technologies, uses, market
and future trends with Austria as a case study. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;
135:110237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110237.

[7] Lange JP, van der Heide E, van Buijtenen J, Price R. Furfural - A promising

platform for lignocellulosic biofuels. ChemSusChem 2012;5:150–66. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cssc.201100648.

[8] Leitner W, Klankermayer J, Pischinger S, Pitsch H, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K. Advanced
biofuels and beyond: chemistry solutions for propulsion and production. Angew
Chem Int Ed 2017;56:5412–52. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201607257.
[9] Luterbacher JS, Alonso DM, Dumesic JA. Targeted chemical upgrading of

lignocellulosic biomass to platform molecules. Green Chem 2014;16:4816–38.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C4GC01160K.

[10] Battin-Leclerc F. Detailed chemical kinetic models for the low-temperature

combustion of hydrocarbons with application to gasoline and diesel fuel
surrogates. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2008;34:440–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pecs.2007.10.002.

[11] Curran HJ. Developing detailed chemical kinetic mechanisms for fuel

combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:57–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.06.054.

[12] Westbrook CK, Mehl M, Pitz WJ, Kukkadapu G, Wagnon S, Zhang K. Multi-fuel
surrogate chemical kinetic mechanisms for real world applications. Phys Chem
Chem Phys 2018;20:10588–606. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CP07901J.
[13] Z ́ador J, Taatjes CA, Fernandes RX. Kinetics of elementary reactions in low-

temperature autoignition chemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:371–421.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2010.06.006.

[14] Sarathy SM, Osswald P, Hansen N, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K. Alcohol combustion

chemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;44:40–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2014.04.003.

[15] Glaude PA, Herbinet O, Bax S, Biet J, Warth V, Battin-Leclerc F. Modeling of the
oxidation of methyl esters - Validation for methyl hexanoate, methyl heptanoate,
and methyl decanoate in a jet-stirred reactor. Combust Flame 2010;157:2035–50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.03.012.

[16] Rotavera B, Taatjes CA. Influence of functional groups on low-temperature
combustion chemistry of biofuels. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2021;100925.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100925.

[17] Wang Z, Popolan-Vaida DM, Chen B, Moshammer K, Mohamed SY, Wang H, et al.
Unraveling the structure and chemical mechanisms of highly oxygenated
intermediates in oxidation of organic compounds. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2017;114:
13102–7. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1707564114.

[18] Savee JD, Papajak E, Rotavera B, Huang H, Eskola AJ, Welz O, et al. Direct

observation and kinetics of a hydroperoxyalkyl radical (QOOH). Science 2015;
347:643–6. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa1495.

[19] Hansen AS, Bhagde T, MooreIII KB, Moberg DR, Jasper AW, Georgievskii Y, et al.
Watching a hydroperoxyalkyl radical (•QOOH) dissociate. Science 2021. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.abj0412.

[20] Wang Z, Zhang L, Moshammer K, Popolan-Vaida DM, Shankar VSB, Lucassen A,
et al. Additional chain-branching pathways in the low-temperature oxidation of
branched alkanes. Combust Flame 2016;164:386–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2015.11.035.

[21] Luo YR. Comprehensive handbook of chemical bond energies. Boca Raton: CRC

Press; 2007.

[22] Tran LS, Herbinet O, Li Y, Wullenkord J, Zeng M, Br ̈auer E, et al. Low-

temperature gas-phase oxidation of diethyl ether: fuel reactivity and fuel-specific
products. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:511–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.05.135.

[23] Wang Z, Herbinet O, Hansen N, Battin-Leclerc F. Exploring hydroperoxides in

combustion: history, recent advances and perspectives. Prog Energy Combust Sci
2019;73:132–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.02.003.

[24] Ju Y, Reuter CB, Yehia OR, Farouk TI, Won SH. Dynamics of cool flames. Prog

Energy Combust Sci 2019;75:100787. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2019.100787.

[25] Ju Y. Understanding cool flames and warm flames. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:

83–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.09.019.

[26] Crochet M, Minetti R, Ribaucour M, Vanhove G. A detailed experimental study of
n-propylcyclohexane autoignition in lean conditions. Combust Flame 2010;157:
2078–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.04.012.
[27] Barraza-Botet CL, Luecke J, Zigler BT, Wooldridge MS. The impact of

physicochemical property interactions of iso-octane/ethanol blends on ignition
timescales. Fuel 2018;224:401–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.03.105.
[28] Wang Z, Chen B, Moshammer K, Popolan-Vaida DM, Sioud S, Shankar VSB, et al.
n-Heptane cool flame chemistry: unraveling intermediate species measured in a
stirred reactor and motored engine. Combust Flame 2018;187:199–216. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.09.003.

[29] Rodriguez A, Herbinet O, Meng X, Fittschen C, Wang Z, Xing L, et al.

Hydroperoxide measurements during low-temperature gas-phase oxidation of n-
heptane and n-decane. J Phys Chem A 2017;121:1861–76. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jpca.6b10378.

[30] Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F. Progress in understanding low-temperature organic
compound oxidation using a jet-stirred reactor. Int J Chem Kinet 2014;46:
619–39. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.20871.

[31] Jalan A, Alecu IM, Meana-Paneda R, Aguilera-Iparraguirre J, Yang KR,

Merchant SS, et al. New pathways for formation of acids and carbonyl products in
low-temperature oxidation: the Korcek decomposition of gamma-
ketohydroperoxides. J Am Chem Soc 2013;135:11100–14. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ja4034439.

[32] Herbinet O, Husson B, Serinyel Z, Cord M, Warth V, Fournet R, et al.

Experimental and modeling investigation of the low-temperature oxidation of n-
heptane. Combust Flame 2012;159:3455–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2012.07.008.

[33] Zhang K, Banyon C, Bugler J, Curran HJ, Rodriguez A, Herbinet O, et al. An

updated experimental and kinetic modeling study of n-heptane oxidation.
Combust Flame 2016;172:116–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2016.06.028.

[34] Pelucchi M, Bissoli M, Cavallotti C, Cuoci A, Faravelli T, Frassoldati A, et al.

Improved kinetic model of the low-temperature oxidation of n-heptane. Energy
Fuels 2014;28:7178–93. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef501483f.

[35] BP Energy Outlook: 2020 Edition. Available under Www.Bp.Com Accessed

October 16, 2020: 2020.

[36] EASAC policy report 37. Decarbonisation of transport: options and challenges

Available under Www.Easac.Eu: 2019.

[37] Huber GW, Iborra S, Corma A. Synthesis of transportation fuels from biomass:

chemistry, catalysts, and engineering. Chem Rev 2006;106:4044–98. https://doi.
org/10.1021/cr068360d.

[38] Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K, Oßwald P, Cool TA, Kasper T, Hansen N, Qi F, et al. Biofuel
combustion chemistry: from ethanol to biodiesel. Angew Chem Int Ed 2010;49:
3572–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200905335.

[39] Tran LS, Sirjean B, Glaude PA, Fournet R, Battin-Leclerc F. Progress in detailed
kinetic modeling of the combustion of oxygenated components of biofuels.
Energy 2012;43:4–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2011.11.013.

[40] Westbrook CK, Pitz WJ, Curran HJ. Chemical kinetic modeling study of the effects
of oxygenated hydrocarbons on soot emissions from diesel engines. J Phys Chem
A 2006;110:6912–22. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp056362g.

[41] Grad P. Biofuelling Brazil: an overview of the bioethanol success story in Brazil.
Refocus 2006;7:56–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1471-0846(06)70576-5.
[42] Agarwal AK. Biofuels (alcohols and biodiesel) applications as fuels for internal

combustion engines. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2007;33:233–71. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2006.08.003.

[43] Sarathy SM, Farooq A, Kalghatgi GT. Recent progress in gasoline surrogate fuels.

Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;65:67–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2017.09.004.

[44] He BQ, Shuai SJ, Wang JX, He H. The effect of ethanol blended diesel fuels on
emissions from a diesel engine. Atmospheric Environ 2003;37:4965–71. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2003.08.029.

[45] Knothe G, Razon LF. Biodiesel fuels. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;58:36–59.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2016.08.001.

[46] Abomohra AEF, Elsayed M, Esakkimuthu S, El-Sheekh M, Hanelt D. Potential of
fat, oil and grease (FOG) for biodiesel production: a critical review on the recent

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101997

L.-S. Tran et al.

progress and future perspectives. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;81:100868.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100868.

[47] Demirbas A. Biodiesel production from vegetable oils via catalytic and non-

catalytic supercritical methanol transesterification methods. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2005;31:466–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2005.09.001.

[48] Cheah WY, Sankaran R, Show PL, Ibrahim T, Chew KW, Culaba A, et al.

Pretreatment methods for lignocellulosic biofuels production: current advances,
challenges and future prospects. Biofuel Res J 2020;7:1115. https://doi.org/
10.18331/BRJ2020.7.1.4.

[49] Yi Z, Xu H, Hu D, Yan K. Facile synthesis of supported Pd catalysts by chemical
fluid deposition method for selective hydrogenation of biomass-derived furfural.
J Alloys Compd 2019;799:59–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jallcom.2019.05.350.

[50] Hu D, Xu H, Yi Z, Chen Z, Ye C, Wu Z, et al. Green CO2-assisted synthesis of
mono- and bimetallic Pd/Pt nanoparticles on porous carbon fabricated from
sorghum for highly selective hydrogenation of furfural. ACS Sustainable Chem
Eng 2019;7:15339–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b02665.
[51] Boot MD, Tian M, Hensen EJM, Mani Sarathy S. Impact of fuel molecular

structure on auto-ignition behavior – Design rules for future high performance
gasolines. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;60:1–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2016.12.001.

[52] Thewes M, Muether M, Pischinger S, Budde M, Brunn A, Sehr A, et al. Analysis of

the impact of 2-methylfuran on mixture formation and combustion in a direct-
injection spark-ignition engine. Energy Fuels 2011;25:5549–61. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef201021a.

[53] Brassat A, Thewes M, Müther M, Pischinger S, Lee C, Fernandes RX, et al. Analysis
of the effects of certain alcohol and furan-based biofuels on controlled auto
Ignition. SAE Tech. Pap. 2012 2012-01–1135.

[54] Kumar A, Jones DD, Hanna MA. Thermochemical biomass gasification: a review
of the current status of the technology. Energies 2009;2:556–81. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en20300556.

[55] Tijmensen MJA, Faaij APC, Hamelinck CN, van Hardeveld MRM. Exploration of
the possibilities for production of Fischer Tropsch liquids and power via biomass
gasification. Biomass Bioenergy 2002;23:129–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0961-9534(02)00037-5.

[56] Wang M, Raf D, Maniatis K, Wheeldon J, Tan T, Baeyens J, et al. Biomass-derived

aviation fuels: challenges and perspective. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2019;74:
31–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.04.004.

[57] Verhelst S, Turner JW, Sileghem L, Vancoillie J. Methanol as a fuel for internal
combustion engines. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2019;70:43–88. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2018.10.001.

[58] Sikarwar VS, Zhao M, Fennell PS, Shah N, Anthony EJ. Progress in biofuel
production from gasification. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;61:189–248.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2017.04.001.

[59] Azizi Z, Rezaeimanesh M, Tohidian T, Rahimpour MR. Dimethyl ether: a review
of technologies and production challenges. Chem Eng Process 2014;82:150–72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2014.06.007.

[60] Xiu S, Shahbazi A. Bio-oil production and upgrading research: a review. Renew

Sustain Energy Rev 2012;16:4406–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2012.04.028.

[61] Tekin K, Karag ̈oz S, Bektas ̧  S. A review of hydrothermal biomass processing.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;40:673–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2014.07.216.

[62] Akhtar J, Amin NAS. A review on process conditions for optimum bio-oil yield in
hydrothermal liquefaction of biomass. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2011;15:
1615–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2010.11.054.

[63] L ́ed ́e J. Biomass fast pyrolysis reactors: a review of a few scientific challenges and
of related recommended research topics. Oil Gas Sci Technol Rev IFP Energ
Nouvelles 2013;68:801–14. https://doi.org/10.2516/ogst/2013108.
[64] Kan T, Strezov V, Evans TJ. Lignocellulosic biomass pyrolysis: A review of

product properties and effects of pyrolysis parameters. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2016;57:1126–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.185.
[65] Negahdar L, Gonzalez-Quiroga A, Otyuskaya D, Toraman HE, Liu L,

Jastrzebski JTBH, et al. Characterization and comparison of fast pyrolysis bio-oils
from pinewood, rapeseed cake, and wheat straw using 13C NMR and
comprehensive GC×GC. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2016;4:4974–85. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b01329.

[71] Climent MJ, Corma A, Iborra S. Conversion of biomass platform molecules into
fuel additives and liquid hydrocarbon fuels. Green Chem 2014;16:516–47.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C3GC41492B.

[72] Dahmen M, Marquardt W. Model-based design of tailor-made biofuels. Energy
Fuels 2016;30:1109–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b02674.
[73] Rom ́an-Leshkov Y, Barrett CJ, Liu ZY, Dumesic JA. Production of dimethylfuran

for liquid fuels from biomass-derived carbohydrates. Nature 2007;447:982–5.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05923.

[74] De Jong E, Gruter GJ. Furanics: a novel diesel fuel with superior characteristics.
Warrendale, PA: SAE International; 2009. https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-
2767.

[75] Gao Z, Li C, Fan G, Yang L, Li F. Nitrogen-doped carbon-decorated copper catalyst
for highly efficient transfer hydrogenolysis of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to
convertibly produce 2,5-dimethylfuran or 2,5-dimethyltetrahydrofuran. Appl
Catal B Environ 2018;226:523–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcatb.2018.01.006.

[76] Luterbacher JS, Rand JM, Alonso DM, Han J, Youngquist JT, Maravelias CT, et al.

Nonenzymatic sugar production from biomass using biomass-derived
γ-valerolactone. Science 2014;343:277–80. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1246748.

[77] Geilen FMA, Engendahl B, Harwardt A, Marquardt W, Klankermayer J, Leitner W.
Selective and flexible transformation of biomass-derived platform chemicals by a
multifunctional catalytic system. Angew Chem Int Ed 2010;49:5510–4. https://
doi.org/10.1002/anie.201002060.

[78] Liu C, Zhang C, Liu K, Wang Y, Fan G, Sun S, et al. Aqueous-phase hydrogenolysis
of glucose to value-added chemicals and biofuels: a comparative study of active
metals. Biomass Bioenergy 2015;72:189–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biombioe.2014.11.005.

[79] Marshall AL, Alaimo PJ. Useful products from complex starting materials:

common chemicals from biomass feedstocks. Chem Eur J 2010;16:4970–80.
https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.200903028.

[80] Sandbrink L, Beckerle K, Meiners I, Liffmann R, Rahimi K, Okuda J, et al.

Supported molybdenum catalysts for the deoxydehydration of 1,4-anhydroery-
thritol into 2,5-dihydrofuran. ChemSusChem 2017;10:1375–9. https://doi.org/
10.1002/cssc.201700010.

[81] Osmont A, Catoire L, Escot Bocanegra P, G ̈okalp I, Thollas B, Kozinski JA. Second

generation biofuels: thermochemistry of glucose and fructose. Combust Flame
2010;157:1230–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.12.002.
[82] Leppard WR. Autoignition chemistries of octane-enhancing ethers and cyclic

ethers: a motored engine study. SAE Technical Paper 912313 1991;100:589–604.
https://doi.org/10.4271/912313.

[83] Beydoun K, Klankermayer J. Ruthenium-catalyzed synthesis of cyclic and linear
acetals by the combined utilization of CO2, H2, and biomass derived diols. Chem
Eur J 2019;25:11412–5. https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.201901660.
[84] Li H, Wu C, Zhang Q, Li X, Gao X. Synthesis of 1,3-dioxolane from aqueous

formaldehyde solution and ethylene glycol: kinetics and reactive distillation. Ind
Eng Chem Res 2019;58:7025–36. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b00331.
[85] Liu D, Liu C, Li H, Lei A. Direct functionalization of tetrahydrofuran and 1,4-

dioxane: nickel-catalyzed oxidative c(sp3)-h arylation. Angew Chem Int Ed 2013;
52:4453–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201300459.

[86] Ramalingam S, Rajendran S, Ganesan P. Improving the performance is better and

emission reductions from Annona biodiesel operated diesel engine using 1,4-
dioxane fuel additive. Fuel 2016;185:804–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2016.08.049.

[87] Sudholt A, Cai L, Heyne J, Haas FM, Pitsch H, Dryer FL. Ignition characteristics of
a bio-derived class of saturated and unsaturated furans for engine applications.
Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:2957–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2014.06.147.

[88] Julis J, Leitner W. Synthesis of 1-octanol and 1,1-dioctyl ether from biomass-
derived platform chemicals. Angew Chem Int Ed 2012;51:8615–9. https://doi.
org/10.1002/anie.201203669.

[89] Shankar VSB, Li Y, Singh E, Sarathy SM. Understanding the synergistic blending
octane behavior of 2-methylfuran. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:5625–33. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.277.

[90] Simmie JM. Kinetics and thermochemistry of 2,5-dimethyltetrahydrofuran and
related oxolanes: next-generation biofuels. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:4528–38.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp301870w.

[66] Djokic MR, Dijkmans T, Yildiz G, Prins W, Van Geem KM. Quantitative analysis of

[91] Wei H, Feng D, Shu G, Pan M, Guo Y, Gao D, et al. Experimental investigation on

crude and stabilized bio-oils by comprehensive two-dimensional gas-
chromatography. J Chromatogr A 2012;1257:131–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chroma.2012.07.035.

[67] Demirbas A. Biofuels sources, biofuel policy, biofuel economy and global biofuel
projections. Energy Convers Manag 2008;49:2106–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enconman.2008.02.020.

[68] Sun Z, Fridrich B, de Santi A, Elangovan S, Barta K. Bright side of lignin

depolymerization: toward new platform chemicals. Chem Rev 2018;118:614–78.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00588.

[69] Ma R, Hao W, Ma X, Tian Y, Li Y. Catalytic ethanolysis of kraft lignin into high-
value small-molecular chemicals over a nanostructured α-molybdenum carbide
catalyst. Angew Chem Int Ed 2014;126:7438–43. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ange.201402752.

[70] Tian M, McCormick RL, Luecke J, de JE, van der Waal JC, van Klink GPM, et al.
Anti-knock quality of sugar derived levulinic esters and cyclic ethers. Fuel 2017;
202:414–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.04.027.

the combustion and emissions characteristics of 2-methylfuran gasoline blend
fuel in spark-ignition engine. Appl Energy 2014;132:317–24. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.07.009.

[92] Wu Y, Zhang X, Zhang Z, Wang X, Geng Z, Jin C, et al. Effects of diesel-ethanol-
THF blend fuel on the performance and exhaust emissions on a heavy-duty diesel
engine. Fuel 2020;271:117633. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117633.

[93] Mathieu F, Reddemann M, Martin D, Kneer R. Experimental investigation of fuel
influence on atomization and spray propagation using an outwardly opening GDI-
injector. SAE Tech Pap 2010. https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-2275.

[94] Yanowitz J, Christensen E, McCormick RL. Utilization of renewable oxygenates as

gasoline blending components. Colorado: National Renewable Energy
◦
Laboratory; 2011. rapport N

NREL/TP-5400-50791.

[95] Properties of furan. In: Zeitsch KJ, editor. Sugar Series. Elsevier; 2000. p. 240–2.

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7675(00)80036-6. vol. 13.

[96] Song J, Zello V, Boehman AL, Waller FJ. Comparison of the impact of intake
oxygen enrichment and fuel oxygenation on diesel combustion and emissions.
Energy Fuels 2004;18:1282–90. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef034103p.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101998

L.-S. Tran et al.

[97] Bereczky

 ́
A, Luk ́acs K, Farkas M, D ́ob ́e S. Effect of γ-valerolactone blending on

engine performance, combustion characteristics and exhaust emissions in a diesel
engine. Nat Resour 2014;5:177–91. https://doi.org/10.4236/nr.2014.55017.
[98] Stickney JA, Sager SL, Clarkson JR, Smith LA, Locey BJ, Bock MJ, et al. An

updated evaluation of the carcinogenic potential of 1,4-dioxane. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol 2003;38:183–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0273-2300(03)00090-4.
[99] Yuan Y, Zhao X, Wang S, Wang L. Atmospheric oxidation of furan and methyl-
substituted furans Initiated by hydroxyl radicals. J Phys Chem A 2017;121:
9306–19. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.7b09741.

[100] Wang C, Xu H, Daniel R, Ghafourian A, Martin Herreros J, Shuai S, et al.

Combustion characteristics and emissions of 2-methylfuran compared to 2,5-
dimethylfuran, gasoline and ethanol in a DISI engine. Fuel 2013;103:200–11.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2012.05.043.

[101] Daniel R, Wei L, Xu H, Wang C, Wyszynski ML, Shuai S. Speciation of

hydrocarbon and carbonyl emissions of 2,5-dimethylfuran combustion in a DISI
engine. Energy Fuels 2012;26:6661–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef301236f.

[102] Xiao H, Yang X, Hou B, Wang R, Xue Q, Ju H. Combustion performance and

pollutant emissions analysis of a diesel engine fueled with biodiesel and its blend
with 2-methylfuran. Fuel 2019;237:1050–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2018.09.146.

[103] Tran LS, Sirjean B, Glaude PA, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K, Battin-Leclerc F. Influence of
substituted furans on the formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in
flames. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:1735–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2014.06.137.

[123] Curtiss LA, Redfern PC, Raghavachari K. Gaussian-4 theory. J Chem Phys 2007;

126:084108. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2436888.

[124] Montgomery JA, Frisch MJ, Ochterski JW, Petersson GA. A complete basis set

model chemistry. VI. Use of density functional geometries and frequencies.
J Chem Phys 1999;110:2822–7. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.477924.

[125] Montgomery JA, Frisch MJ, Ochterski JW, Petersson GA. A complete basis set

model chemistry. VII. Use of the minimum population localization method.
J Chem Phys 2000;112:6532–42. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.481224.
[126] Ochterski JW, Petersson GA, Montgomery JA. A complete basis set model

chemistry. V. Extensions to six or more heavy atoms. J Chem Phys 1996;104:
2598–619. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.470985.

[127] Martin JML, de Oliveira G. Towards standard methods for benchmark quality ab

initio thermochemistry - W1 and W2 theory. J Chem Phys 1999;111:1843–56.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.479454.

[128] DeYonker NJ, Cundari TR, Wilson AK. The correlation consistent composite

approach (ccCA): an alternative to the Gaussian-n methods. J Chem Phys 2006;
124:114104. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2173988.

[129] Tajti A, Szalay PG, Cs ́asz ́ar AG, K ́allay M, Gauss J, Valeev EF, et al. HEAT: high
accuracy extrapolated ab initio thermochemistry. J Chem Phys 2004;121:
11599–613. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1811608.

[130] Klippenstein SJ, Harding LB, Ruscic B. Ab initio computations and active

thermochemical tables hand in hand: heats of formation of core combustion
species. J Phys Chem A 2017;121:6580–602. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpca.7b05945.

[104] Huang H, Buekens A. On the mechanisms of dioxin formation in combustion

[131] Ruscic B. Uncertainty quantification in thermochemistry, benchmarking

processes. Chemosphere 1995;31:4099–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-6535
(95)80011-9.

[105] Altarawneh M, Dlugogorski BZ, Kennedy EM, Mackie JC. Mechanisms for
formation, chlorination, dechlorination and destruction of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs). Prog Energy Combust Sci 2009;
35:245–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2008.12.001.

[106] Pilling MJ. From elementary reactions to evaluated chemical mechanisms for

combustion models. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32:27–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.proci.2008.08.003.

[107] Z ́ador J, Klippenstein SJ, Miller JA. Pressure-dependent OH yields in alkene

+ HO2 reactions: a theoretical study. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:10218–25. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp2059276.

[108] Møller C, Plesset MS. Note on an approximation treatment for many-electron
systems. Phys Rev 1934;46:618–22. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.46.618.

[109] Roos BO, Linse P, Siegbahn PEM, Blomberg MRA. A simple method for the

evaluation of the second-order-perturbation energy from external double-
excitations with a CASSCF reference wavefunction. Chem Phys 1982;66:197–207.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0301-0104(82)88019-1.

[110] Purvis GD, Bartlett RJ. A full coupled-cluster singles and doubles model: the

inclusion of disconnected triples. J Chem Phys 1982;76:1910–8. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.443164.

[111] Ross IG. Calculations of the energy levels of acetylene by the method of

antisymmetric molecular orbitals, including σ-π interaction. Trans Faraday Soc
1952;48:973–91. https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9524800973.

[112] Ditchfield R, Hehre WJ, Pople JA. Self-consistent molecular-orbital methods. IX.
An extended gaussian-type basis for molecular-orbital studies of organic
molecules. J Chem Phys 1971;54:724–8. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1674902.

[113] Dunning TH. Gaussian basis sets for use in correlated molecular calculations. I.
The atoms boron through neon and hydrogen. J Chem Phys 1989;90:1007–23.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.456153.

[114] Lee TJ. Comparison of the T1 and D1 diagnostics for electronic structure theory: a
new definition for the open-shell D1 diagnostic. Chem Phys Lett 2003;372:362–7.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2614(03)00435-4.

[115] Harding LB, Klippenstein SJ, Jasper AW. Ab initio methods for reactive potential
surfaces. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2007;9:4055–70. https://doi.org/10.1039/
B705390H.

[116] Stein CJ, Reiher M. Automated selection of active orbital spaces. J Chem Theory

Comput 2016;12:1760–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00156.

[117] Azizi Z, Roos BO, Veryazov V. How accurate is the CASPT2 method? Phys Chem

Chem Phys 2006;8:2727–32. https://doi.org/10.1039/B603046G.

[118] Bauer CA, Hansen A, Grimme S. The fractional occupation number weighted

electronic structure computations, and active thermochemical tables. Int J
Quantum Chem 2014;114:1097–101. https://doi.org/10.1002/qua.24605.

[132] Simmie JM, Somers KP. Benchmarking compound methods (CBS-QB3, CBS-

APNO, G3, G4, W1BD) against the active thermochemical tables: a litmus test for
cost-effective molecular formation enthalpies. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:7235–46.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp511403a.

[133] Ruscic B, Pinzon RE, Morton ML, von Laszevski G, Bittner SJ, Nijsure SG, et al.
Introduction to active thermochemical tables:  several “key” enthalpies of
formation revisited. J Phys Chem A 2004;108:9979–97. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp047912y.

[134] Cagnina S, Nicolle A, de Bruin T, Georgievskii Y, Klippenstein SJ. First-principles

chemical kinetic modeling of methyl trans-3-hexenoate epoxidation by HO2.
J Phys Chem A 2017;121:1909–15. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.7b00519.
[135] Martin JML. Ab initio total atomization energies of small molecules - towards the
basis set limit. Chem Phys Lett 1996;259:669–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-
2614(96)00898-6.

[136] Feller D, Dixon DA. Extended benchmark studies of coupled cluster theory

through triple excitations. J Chem Phys 2001;115:3484–96. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.1388045.

[137] Feller D, Franz JA. A theoretical determination of the heats of formation of furan,

tetrahydrofuran, THF-2-yl, and THF-3-yl. J Phys Chem A 2000;104:9017–25.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp001972w.

[138] McQuarrie DA, Simon JD. Molecular thermodynamics. Sausalito, United States:

University Science Books; 1999.

[139] Keçeli M, Elliott SN, Li YP, Johnson MS, Cavallotti C, Georgievskii Y, et al.

Automated computational thermochemistry for butane oxidation: a prelude to
predictive automated combustion kinetics. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:363–71.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.07.113.

[140] IUPAC. Compendium of chemical terminology. 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell

Scientific Publications; 1997. Compiled by A. D. McNaught and A. Wilkinson.
(Online version (2019-) created by S. J. Chalk. ISBN 0-9678550-9-8).
[141] Benson SW. Thermochemical kinetics. 2nd. ed. New York: John Wiley&Sons;

1976.

[142] Chen CJ, Bozzelli JW. Kinetic analysis for HO2 addition to ethylene, propene, and
isobutene, and thermochemical parameters of alkyl hydroperoxides and
hydroperoxide alkyl radicals. J Phys Chem A 2000;104:4997–5012. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp993111x.

[143] Bozzelli JW, Sheng C. Thermochemistry, reaction paths, and kinetics on the

hydroperoxy-ethyl radical reaction with O2:  new chain branching reactions in
hydrocarbon oxidation. J Phys Chem A 2002;106:1113–21. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp013604d.

density as a versatile analysis tool for molecules with a complicated electronic
structure. Chem Eur J 2017;23:6150–64. https://doi.org/10.1002/
chem.201604682.

[144] Hudzik JM, Bozzelli JW. Thermochemistry of hydroxyl and hydroperoxide

substituted furan, methylfuran, and methoxyfuran. J Phys Chem A 2017;121:
4523–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.7b02343.

[119] Stephens PJ, Devlin FJ, Chabalowski CF, Frisch MJ. Ab initio calculation of

vibrational absorption and circular dichroism spectra using density functional
force fields. J Phys Chem 1994;98:11623–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/
j100096a001.

[120] Zhao Y, Truhlar DG. The M06 suite of density functionals for main group

thermochemistry, thermochemical kinetics, noncovalent interactions, excited
states, and transition elements: two new functionals and systematic testing of four
M06-class functionals and 12 other functionals. Theor Chem Account 2008;120:
215–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00214-007-0310-x.

[121] Sun H, Bozzelli JW. Structures, intramolecular rotation barriers, and

thermochemical properties:  ethanol, α-monoethanols, dichloroethanols, and
corresponding radicals derived from H atom loss. J Phys Chem A 2001;105:
9543–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp011949q.

[122] Curtiss LA, Raghavachari K, Redfern PC, Rassolov V, Pople JA. Gaussian-3 (G3)
theory for molecules containing first and second-row atoms. J Chem Phys 1998;
109:7764–76. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.477422.

[145] Sebbar N, Bozzelli JW, Trimis D, Bockhorn H. Thermochemistry and kinetics of
the 2-butanone-4-yl CH3C(=O)CH2CH2• + O2 reaction system. Int J Chem Kinet
2019;51:541–62. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21276.

[146] MJr. JA Petersson GA, Malick DK, Wilson WG, Ochterski JW, Frisch MJ.

Calibration and comparison of the Gaussian-2, complete basis set, and density
functional methods for computational thermochemistry. J Chem Phys 1998;109:
10570–9. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.477794.

[147] Wheeler SE, Houk KN, Schleyer PR, Allen WD. A hierarchy of homodesmotic

reactions for thermochemistry. J Am Chem Soc 2009;131:2547–60. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ja805843n.

[148] Curtiss LA, Raghavachari K, Redfern PC, Pople JA. Assessment of Gaussian-2 and
density functional theories for the computation of enthalpies of formation.
J Chem Phys 1997;106:1063–79. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.473182.
[149] Melius CF, Allendorf MD. Bond additivity corrections for quantum chemistry
methods. J Phys Chem A 2000;104:2168–77. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp9914370.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)10101999

L.-S. Tran et al.

[150] Ince A, Carstensen HH, Reyniers MF, Marin GB. First-principles based group
additivity values for thermochemical properties of substituted aromatic
compounds. AlChE J 2015;61:3858–70. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.15008.
[151] Paraskevas PD, Sabbe MK, Reyniers MF, Papayannakos N, Marin GB. Group

additive values for the gas-phase standard enthalpy of formation, entropy and
heat capacity of oxygenates. Chem Eur J 2013;19:16431–52. https://doi.org/
10.1002/chem.201301381.

[152] Pitzer KS, Gwinn WD. Energy levels and thermodynamic functions for molecules
with internal rotation. I. Rigid frame with attached tops. J Chem Phys 1942;10:
428–40. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1723744.

[153] Pitzer KS, Kilpatrick JE. The entropies and related properties of branched paraffin

hydrocarbons. Chem Rev 1946;39:435–47. https://doi.org/10.1021/
cr60124a005.

[154] Kilpatrick JE, Pitzer KS. Energy levels and thermodynamic functions for

molecules with internal rotation. III. Compound rotation. J Chem Phys 1949;17:
1064–75. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1747114.

[155] East ALL, Radom L. Ab initio statistical thermodynamical models for the

computation of third-law entropies. J Chem Phys 1997;106:6655–74. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.473958.

[179] Bao JL, Zheng J, Truhlar DG. Kinetics of hydrogen radical reactions with toluene

including chemical activation theory employing system-specific quantum rrk
theory calibrated by variational transition state theory. J Am Chem Soc 2016;138:
2690–704. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5b11938.

[180] Pratali Maffei L, Pelucchi M, Cavallotti C, Bertolino A, Faravelli T. Master

equation lumping for multi-well potential energy surfaces: a bridge between ab
initio based rate constant calculations and large kinetic mechanisms. Chem Eng J
2021;422:129954. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.129954.

[181] DeSain JD, Klippenstein SJ, Miller JA, Taatjes CA. Measurements, theory, and

modeling of OH formation in ethyl + O2 and propyl + O2 reactions. J Phys Chem
A 2003;107:4415–27. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0221946.

[182] Burke MP, Klippenstein SJ, Harding LB. A quantitative explanation for the

apparent anomalous temperature dependence of OH+HO2=H2O+O2 through
multi-scale modeling. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:547–55. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2012.05.041.

[183] Burke MP, Goldsmith CF, Klippenstein SJ, Welz O, Huang H, Antonov IO, et al.

Multiscale informatics for low-temperature propane oxidation: further
complexities in studies of complex reactions. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:7095–115.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.5b01003.

[156] Sharma S, Raman S, Green WH. Intramolecular hydrogen migration in

[184] Welz O, Burke MP, Antonov IO, Goldsmith CF, Savee JD, Osborn DL, et al. New

alkylperoxy and hydroperoxyalkylperoxy radicals: accurate treatment of hindered
rotors. J Phys Chem A 2010;114:5689–701. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9098792.
[157] Zheng J, Mielke SL, Clarkson KL, Truhlar DG. MSTor: a program for calculating

partition functions, free energies, enthalpies, entropies, and heat capacities of
complex molecules including torsional anharmonicity. Comput Phys Commun
2012;183:1803–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2012.03.007.

[158] Sumathi R, Carstensen HH, Green WH. Reaction rate prediction via group

additivity. Part 1:  H abstraction from alkanes by H and CH3. J Phys Chem A
2001;105:6910–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp010697q.

[159] Eyring H. The activated complex in chemical reactions. J Chem Phys 1935;3:

107–15. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1749604.

[160] Evans MG, Polanyi M. Some applications of the transition state method to the

calculation of reaction velocities, especially in solution. Trans Faraday Soc 1935;
31:875–94. https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9353100875.

[161] Pollak E, Pechukas P. Symmetry numbers, not statistical factors, should be used in
absolute rate theory and in Broensted relations. J Am Chem Soc 1978;100:
2984–91. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00478a009.

[162] Fern ́andez-Ramos A, Ellingson BA, Meana-Pa ̃neda R, Marques JMC, Truhlar DG.
Symmetry numbers and chemical reaction rates. Theor Chem Account 2007;118:
813–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00214-007-0328-0.

insights into low-temperature oxidation of propane from synchrotron
photoionization mass spectrometry and multiscale informatics modeling. J Phys
Chem A 2015;119:7116–29. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.5b01008.
[185] Grambow CA, Jamal A, Li YP, Green WH, Z ́ador J, Suleimanov YV. Unimolecular
reaction pathways of a γ-ketohydroperoxide from combined application of
automated reaction discovery methods. J Am Chem Soc 2018;140:1035–48.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.7b11009.

[186] Van de Vijver R, Kin Bot ZJ. Automated stationary point search on potential

energy surfaces. Comput Phys Commun 2020;248:106947. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cpc.2019.106947.

[187] Gao CW, Allen JW, Green WH, West RH. Reaction mechanism generator:

automatic construction of chemical kinetic mechanisms. Comput Phys Commun
2016;203:212–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2016.02.013.

[188] Liu M, Grinberg Dana A, Johnson MS, Goldman MJ, Jocher A, Payne AM, et al.
Reaction mechanism generator v3.0: advances in automatic mechanism
generation. J Chem Inf Model 2021;61:2686–96. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jcim.0c01480.

[189] Van de Vijver R, Van Geem KM, Marin GB. On-the-fly ab initio calculations

toward accurate rate coefficients. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:283–90. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.056.

[163] Eckart C. The penetration of a potential barrier by electrons. Phys Rev 1930;35:

[190] Blurock ES. Reaction: system for modeling chemical reactions. J Chem Inf Comput

1303–9. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.35.1303.

[164] Brown R. A method of calculating tunneling corrections for Eckart potential

barriers. J Res Natl Bur Stand 1981;86:357–9. https://doi.org/10.6028/
JRES.086.014.

[165] Skodje RT, Truhlar DG, Garrett BC. A general small-curvature approximation for
transition-state-theory transmission coefficients. J Phys Chem 1981;85:3019–23.
https://doi.org/10.1021/j150621a001.

[166] Marcus RA. Unimolecular dissociations and free radical recombination reactions.

J Chem Phys 1952;20:359–64. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1700424.

[167] Beyer T, Algorithm SDF. 448: number of multiply-restricted partitions. Commun

ACM 1973;16:379. https://doi.org/10.1145/362248.362275.

Sci 1995;35:607–16. https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00025a032.

[191] Mor ́eac G, Blurock ES, Mauss F. Automatic generation of a detailed mechanism
for the oxidation of n-decane. Combust Sci Technol 2006;178:2025–38. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00102200600793262.

[192] Ranzi E, Faravelli T, Gaffuri P, Sogaro A. Low-temperature combustion: automatic

generation of primary oxidation reactions and lumping procedures. Combust
Flame 1995;102:179–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)00253-O.
[193] Cˆome GM, Warth V, Glaude PA, Fournet R, Battin-Leclerc F, Scacchi G. Computer-
aided design of gas-phase oxidation mechanisms - application to the modeling of
n-heptane and iso-octane oxidation. Proc Combust Inst 1996;26:755–62. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(96)80284-0.

[168] Stein SE, Rabinovitch BS. Accurate evaluation of internal energy level sums and

[194] Buda F, Bounaceur R, Warth V, Glaude P, Fournet R, Battin-Leclerc F. Progress

densities including anharmonic oscillators and hindered rotors. J Chem Phys
1973;58:2438–45. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1679522.

[169] Klippenstein SJ. Variational optimizations in the rice–ramsperger–kassel–marcus
theory calculations for unimolecular dissociations with no reverse barrier. J Chem
Phys 1992;96:367–71. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.462472.

[170] Georgievskii Y, Klippenstein SJ. Transition state theory for multichannel addition

reactions:  multifaceted dividing surfaces. J Phys Chem A 2003;107:9776–81.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp034564b.

[171] Miller JA, Klippenstein SJ. Master equation methods in gas phase chemical

kinetics. J Phys Chem A 2006;110:10528–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp062693x.

toward a unified detailed kinetic model for the autoignition of alkanes from C4 to
C10 between 600 and 1200 K. Combust Flame 2005;142:170–86. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.03.005.

[195] Tran LS, Verdicchio M, Monge F, Martin RC, Bounaceeur R, Sirjean B, et al. An
experimental and modeling study of the combustion of tetrahydrofuran. Combust
Flame 2015;162:1899–918. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2014.12.010.

[196] Tran LS, De Bruycker R, Carstensen HH, Glaude PA, Monge F, Alzueta MU, et al.
Pyrolysis and combustion chemistry of tetrahydropyran: experimental and
modeling study. Combust Flame 2015;162:4283–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2015.07.030.

[172] Robertson SH, Pilling MJ, Jitariu LC, Hillier IH. Master equation methods for

[197] Blurock E, Battin-Leclerc F, Faravelli T, Green WH. Chapter 3: automatic

multiple well systems: application to the 1-,2-pentyl system. Phys Chem Chem
Phys 2007;9:4085–97. https://doi.org/10.1039/B704736C.

[173] Jasper AW, Pelzer KM, Miller JA, Kamarchik E, Harding LB, Klippenstein SJ.

Predictive a priori pressure-dependent kinetics. Science 2014;346:1212–5.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1260856.

[174] Glowacki DR, Liang CH, Morley C, Pilling MJ, Robertson SH. MESMER: an open-

source master equation solver for multi-energy well reactions. J Phys Chem A
2012;116:9545–60. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp3051033.

[175] Georgievskii Y, Miller JA, Burke MP, Klippenstein SJ. Reformulation and solution
of the master equation for multiple-well chemical reactions. J Phys Chem A 2013;
117:12146–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp4060704.

[176] Barker JR, Golden DM. Master equation analysis of pressure-dependent

atmospheric reactions. Chem Rev 2003;103:4577–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/
cr020655d.

[177] Lindemann FA, Arrhenius S, Langmuir I, Dhar NR, Perrin J, Lewis WCM.

Discussion on “the radiation theory of chemical action. Trans Faraday Soc 1922;
17:598–606. https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9221700598.

[178] Troe J. Theory of thermal unimolecular reactions at low pressures. I. Solutions of
the master equation. J Chem Phys 1977;66:4745–57. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.433837.

generation of detailed mechanisms. Cleaner combustion - developing detailed
chemical kinetic models. Springer London Ltd; 2013. Springer London Ltd, Eds:
Battin-Leclerc F., Blurock E., Simmie J.M. Edition.

[198] Van de Vijver R, Vandewiele NM, Bhoorasingh PL, Slakman BL, Seyedzadeh
Khanshan F, Carstensen HH, et al. Automatic mechanism and kinetic model
generation for gas- and solution-phase processes: a perspective on best practices,
recent advances, and future challenges. Int J Chem Kinet 2015;47:199–231.
https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.20902.

[199] ACD/ChemSketch: Structure drawing software for academic and personal use.
Advanced Chemistry Development, Inc., 8 King Street East, Suite 107 Toronto,
ON, M5C 1B5 Canada: ACDLAB S; 2020.

[200] Poling EB, Prausnitz MJ, O’Connell PJ. The properties of gases and liquids. 5th ed.

The McGraw-Hill Companies; 2001. 2001 ISBN: 0070116822.

[201] Lay TH, Bozzelli JW, Dean AM, Ritter ER. Hydrogen atom bond increments for
calculation of thermodynamic properties of hydrocarbon radical species. J Phys
Chem 1995;99:14514–27. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100039a045.

[202] NIST chemistry WebBook, available at < http://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry,

2021.

[203] Chase MW. NIST-JANAF themochemical tables. 4th ed., 9; 1998. p. 1–1951. J

Phys Chem Ref DataMonograph.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019100

L.-S. Tran et al.

[204] Pell AS, Pilcher G. Measurements of heats of combustion by flame calorimetry.
Part 3. Ethylene oxide, trimethylene oxide, tetrahydrofuran and tetrahydropy.
Trans Faraday Soc 1965;61:71–7. https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9656100071.
[205] Moureu H, Dode M. Chaleurs de formation de l’oxyde d’ethylene, de l’ethanediol

et de quelques homologues. Bull Soc Chim France 1937;4:637–47.
[206] Goldsmith CF, Magoon GR, Green WH. Database of small molecule

thermochemistry for combustion. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:9033–57. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp303819e.

[207] Wijaya CD, Sumathi R, Green WH. Thermodynamic properties and kinetic

parameters for cyclic ether formation from hydroperoxyalkyl radicals. J Phys
Chem A 2003;107:4908–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp027471n.
[208] Auzmendi-Murua I, Bozzelli JW. Thermochemical properties and bond

dissociation enthalpies of 3- to 5-member ring cyclic ether hydroperoxides,
alcohols, and peroxy radicals: cyclic ether radical + 3O2 reaction
thermochemistry. J Phys Chem A 2014;118:3147–67. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp412590g.

1,3-cyclopentadiene, and borole, C4H4X/C4H4X+ (X = S, O, NH, CH2, and BH).
J Phys Chem A 2011;115:932–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp110499c.

[231] Simmie JM, Curran HJ. Formation enthalpies and bond dissociation energies of
alkylfurans. The strongest C-X bonds known? J Phys Chem A 2009;113:5128–37.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp810315n.

[232] Sebbar N, Bozzelli JW, Bockhorn H. Enthalpy of formation and bond energies on
unsaturated oxygenated hydrocarbons using G3MP2B3 calculation methods. Int J
Chem Kinet 2005;37:633–48. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.20086.

[233] Steele WV, Chirico RD, Nguyen A, Hossenlopp IA, Smith NK. Determination of
some pure compound ideal-gas enthalpies of formation. In: Proceedings of the
AIChE Symposium Series1989; 1989. https://doi.org/10.2172/6020818. United
States: National Inst. for Petroleum and Energy Research.

[234] Miller P. The free energy of furfural and some of its derivatives. Iowa State Coll J

Sci 1936;10:91–3. https://doi.org/10.31274/rtd-180813-14020.

[235] Avramescu F, Isagescu DA. Heats of combustion of mono- and difurfurylidene

acetone. Rev Roum Chim 1978;23:655–9.

[209] Chao J, Hall KR, Marsh KN, Wilhoit RC. Thermodynamic properties of key organic

[236] Kudchadker SA, Kudchadker AP. Thermodynamic properties of oxygen

oxygen compounds in the carbon range C1 to C4. Part 2. Ideal gas properties.
J Phys Chem Ref Data 1986;15:1369–436. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.555769.

compounds III. Benzaldehyde and furfural (2-furaldehyde). Thermochim Acta
1975;12:432–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-6031(75)85074-X.

[210] Dorofeeva OV. Ideal gas thermodynamic properties of oxygen heterocyclic

compounds. Part 1. Three-membered, four-membered and five-membered rings.
Thermochim Acta 1992;194:9–46.

[237] Pedley JB. Thermochemical data and structures of organic compounds. CRC
Press; 1994. vol. 1. Texas (USA): College Station: thermodynamics research
center:.

[211] Sinke GC, Hildenbrand DL. Heat of formation of propylene oxide. J Chem Eng

[238] Simmie JM, Somers KP, Metcalfe WK, Curran HJ. Substituent effects in the

Data 1962;7. https://doi.org/10.1021/je60012a022. 74–74.

[212] Cox JD, Pilcher G. Thermochemistry of organic and organometallic compounds.

New York: Academic Press; 1970.

[213] Auzmendi-Murua I, Charaya S, Bozzelli JW. Thermochemical properties of

methyl-substituted cyclic alkyl ethers and radicals for oxiranes, oxetanes, and
oxolanes: C–H bond dissociation enthalpy trends with ring size and ether site.
J Phys Chem A 2013;117:378–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp309775h.
[214] Oetting FL. Low-temperature heat capacity and related thermodynamic functions

of propylene oxide. J Chem Phys 1964;41:149–53. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.1725614.

[215] Beaumont RH, Clegg B, Gee G, Herbert JBM, Marks DJ, Roberts RC, et al. Heat
capacities of propylene oxide and of some polymers of ethylene and propylene
oxides. Polymer 1966;7:401–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(66)90055-
3.

[216] Podlogar BL, Raber DJ. Molecular mechanics calculations of epoxides. Extension
of the MM2 force field. J Org Chem 1989;54:5032–5. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jo00282a016.

[217] Sch ̈onborn A, Le MD, Fournet R, Glaude PA, Warth V, Sirjean B. Auto-ignition

control using an additive with adaptable chemical structure. Part I: development
of a kinetic model for 1,3-cyclohexadiene and 1,3,5-hexatriene combustion.
Combust Flame 2019;205:466–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2019.04.020.

[218] Andruzzi F, Shaofeng L, Pilcher G, Heatley F. Enthalpy of polymerisation of 7-

oxabicyclo[4.1.0]heptane. Die Makromolekulare Chem. 1987;188:2643–50.
https://doi.org/10.1002/macp.1987.021881115.

[219] Kozina MP, Timofeeva LP, Luk’Yanova VA, Pimenova SM, Kas’yan LI. Enthalpies
of formation and some alicyclic epoxy compounds. Russ J Phys Chem 1988;62:
609–12 (Engl Transl).

[220] Sirjean B, Glaude PA, Ruiz-L`opez MF, Fournet R. Theoretical kinetic study of the
reactions of cycloalkylperoxy radicals. J Phys Chem A 2009;113:6924–35.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp901492e.

[221] Douslin DR, Scott DW, Good WD, Osborn AG. Thermodynamic properties of

organic compounds and thermodynamic properties of fluids. Gov Rep Announce
Index US 1976;76:97.

[222] Sun H, Bozzelli JW. Thermochemical and kinetic analysis on the reactions of
neopentyl and hydroperoxy-neopentyl radicals with oxygen:  Part I. OH and
initial stable HC product formation. J Phys Chem A 2004;108:1694–711. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp030667i.

[223] Zaheeruddin M, Lodhi ZH. Enthalpies of formation of some cyclic compounds.

Phys Chem 1991;10:111–8 (Peshawar Pak).

thermochemistry of furans: a theoretical (CBS-QB3, CBS-APNO and G3) study.
J Chem Thermodyn 2013;58:117–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2012.10.020.

[239] Ribeiro da Silva MAV, Amaral L. Standard molar enthalpies of formation of 2-

furancarbonitrile, 2-acetylfuran, and 3-furaldehyde. J Chem Thermodyn 2009;41:
26–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2008.08.004.

[240] Ribeiro da Silva MAV, Amaral L. Standard molar enthalpies of formation of some

methylfuran derivatives. J Therm Anal Calorim 2010;100:375–80. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10973-009-0636-9.

[241] Chowdhury PK, Upadhyaya HP, Naik PD. ArF laser photodissociation dynamics of
furfuryl alcohol: LIF observation of OH state distribution. Chem Phys Lett 2001;
344:292–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2614(01)00783-7.

[242] Parks GS, Mosley JR, Peterson PV. Heats of combustion and formation of some
organic compounds containing oxygen. J Chem Phys 1950;18:152–3. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.1747444.

[243] Verevkin SP, Welle FM. Thermochemical studies for determination of the

standard molar enthalpies of formation of alkyl-substituted furans and some
ethers. Struct Chem 1998;9:215–21. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022475115296.

[244] Sirjean B, Fournet R. Unimolecular decomposition of 2,5-dimethylfuran: a

theoretical chemical kinetic study. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2013;15:596–611.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c2cp41927k.

[245] Steele WV, Chirico RD. Thermodynamics and the hydrodeoxygenation of 2,3-

benzofuran. Bartlesville, OK (USA): National Institute for Petroleum and Energy
Research; 1990. https://doi.org/10.2172/5086490.

[246] Clegg GA, Gee DR, Melia TP, Tyson A. Thermodynamics of polymerization of

heterocyclic compounds II—The heat capacity, entropy, enthalpy and free energy
of polytetrahydrofuran. Polymer 1968;9:501–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-
3861(68)90060-8.

[247] Lebedev BV, Rabinovich IB, Milov VI, Lityagov VY. Thermodynamic properties of
tetrahydrofuran from 8 to 322 K. J Chem Thermodyn 1978;10:321–9. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0021-9614(78)90064-2.

[248] McMillen DF, Golden DM. Hydrocarbon bond dissociation energies. Annu Rev

Phys Chem 1982;33:493–532. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
pc.33.100182.002425.

[249] Muedas CA, Ferguson RR, Brown SH, Crabtree RH. Hydrogen atoms as convenient
synthetic reagents: mercury-photosensitized dimerization of functionalized
organic compounds in the presence of molecular hydrogen. J Am Chem Soc 1991;
113:2233–42. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00006a048.

[250] Laarhoven LJJ, Mulder P. α-C(cid:0) H bond strengths in tetralin and THF:  application
of competition experiments in photoacoustic calorimetry. J Phys Chem B 1997;
101:73–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp960982n.

[224] Landrieu P, Baylocq F, Johnson JR. Etude thermochimique dans la serie

[251] Tran LS, Carstensen HH, Foo KK, Lamoureux N, Gosselin S, Gasnot L, et al.

furanique. Bull Soc Chim France 1929:36–49.

[225] Guthrie GB, Scott DW, Hubbard WN, Katz C, McCullough JP, Gross ME, et al.
Thermodynamic properties of furan. J Am Chem Soc 1952;74:4662–9. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ja01138a063.

[226] Tian Z, Yuan T, Fournet R, Glaude PA, Sirjean B, Battin-Leclerc F, et al. An

experimental and kinetic investigation of premixed furan/oxygen/argon flames.
Combust Flame 2011;158:756–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2010.12.022.

[227] Feller D, Simmie JM. High-level ab initio enthalpies of formation of 2,5-dime-

thylfuran, 2-methylfuran, and furan. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:11768–75. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp3095984.

Experimental and modeling study of the high-temperature combustion chemistry
of tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:631–40. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.057.

[252] Pihlaja K, Heikklia J. Enthalpies of formation of cyclic acetals. 1,3-Dioxolane, 2-
methyl-1,3-dioxolane, and 2,4-dimethyl-1,3-dioxolanes. Acta Chem Scand 1969;
23:1053–5.

[253] Clegg GA. Thermodynamics of polymerization of heterocyclic compounds. Part V.
The heat capacity, entropy, enthalpy and free energy of 1,3-dioxolan and poly-
1,3-dioxolan. Polymer 1969;10:912–22.

[254] Pihlaja K, Heikkila J. Heats of formation of cyclic vinyl ethers. A correction. Suom

Kemistilehti 1972:148.

[228] Mai TVT, Chuang YY, Giri BR, Huynh LK. Ab-initio studies of thermal

[255] Wiberg KB, Waldron RF. Lactones. 2. Enthalpies of hydrolysis, reduction, and

unimolecular decomposition of furan: a complementary deterministic and
stochastic master equation model. Fuel 2020;264:116492. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2019.116492.

[229] Denis PA. Coupled cluster, B2PLYP and M06-2X investigation of the

thermochemistry of five-membered nitrogen containing heterocycles, furan, and
thiophene. Theor Chem Acc 2011;129:219–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00214-
011-0922-z.

[230] Lo PK, Lau KC. High-level ab initio predictions for the ionization energies and
heats of formation of five-membered-ring molecules: thiophene, furan, pyrrole,

formation of the C4-C13 monocyclic lactones. Strain energies and conformations.
J Am Chem Soc 1991;113:7697–705. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00020a036.

[256] Leit ̃ao MLP, Pilcher G, Meng-Yan Y, Brown JM, Conn AD. Enthalpies of

combustion of γ-butyrolactone, γ-valerolactone, and δ-valerolactone. J Chem
Thermodyn 1990;22:885–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9614(90)90176-Q.

[257] Ismailov TS, Gabzalilova NR, Makhkamoov KM. Complex study of

physicochemical properties of γ-butyrolactone. Uzb Khim Zh 1988:48–50.
[258] Yevstropov AA, Lebedev BV, Kiparisova YG, Alekseyev VA, Stashina GA.

Thermodynamic parameters of transformation of γ-butyrolactone into poly-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019101

L.-S. Tran et al.

◦
γ-butyrolactone at normal pressure in the range of 0-400
1980;22:2685–92.

K. Polym Sci USSR

[259] De Bruycker R, Carstensen HH, Reyniers MF, Marin GB, Simmie JM, Van
Geem KM. An experimental and kinetic modeling study of γ-valerolactone
pyrolysis. Combust Flame 2016;164:183–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2015.11.016.

[260] Cass RC, Fletcher SE, Mortimer CT, Springall HD, White TR. Heats of combustion
and molecular structure. Part V. The mean bond energy term for the C–O bond in
ethers, and the structures of some cyclic ethers. J Chem Soc 1958:1406–10.
https://doi.org/10.1039/JR9580001406.

conditions. Energy Fuels 2015;29:6118–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.5b01057.

[283] Fenard Y, Gil A, Vanhove G, Carstensen HH, Van G, Westmoreland PR, et al.
A model of tetrahydrofuran low-temperature oxidation based on theoretically
calculated rate constants. Combust Flame 2018;191:252–69. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.01.006.

[284] Monge F, Aranda V, Millera A, Bilbao R, Alzueta MU. Chapter 9: tubular flow

reactors. Cleaner combustion - developing detailed chemical kinetic models.
Springer London Ltd; 2013. Springer London Ltd, Eds: Battin-Leclerc F., Blurock
E., Simmie J.M. Edition:.

[261] Snelson A, Skinner HA. Heats of combustion: sec-propanol, 1,4-dioxan, 1,3-

[285] Herbinet O, Dayma G. Chapter 8: jet-stirred reactors. Cleaner combustion -

dioxan and tetrahydropyran. Trans Faraday Soc 1961;57:2125–31. https://doi.
org/10.1039/TF9615702125.

developing detailed chemical kinetic models. Springer London Ltd; 2013.
Springer London Ltd, Eds: Battin-Leclerc F., Blurock E., Simmie J.M. Edition:.

[262] Dorofeeva OV. Ideal gas thermodynamic properties of oxygen heterocyclic

[286] Zhao H, Souza MJ, Ju Y. A supercritical jet-stirred reactor. Fus J Am Sci Glassblow

compounds: part 2. Six-membered, seven-membered and eight-membered rings.
Thermochim Acta 1992;200:121–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-6031(92)
85111-8.

[263] Morais VMF. Ab initio energetics of nonsubstituted monocyclic pyrones. J Chem

Thermodyn 2011;43:9–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2010.07.009.

[264] Muller C, Michel V, Scacchi G, Cˆome GM. THERGAS: a computer program for the
evaluation of thermochemical data of molecules and free radicals in the gas
phase. J Chim Phys 1995;92:1154–78. https://doi.org/10.1051/jcp/
1995921154.

[265] Taatjes CA, Hansen N, Osborn DL, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K, Cool TA,

Westmoreland PR. Imaging” combustion chemistry via multiplexed synchrotron-
photoionization mass spectrometry. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2007;10:20–34.
https://doi.org/10.1039/B713460F.

[266] Eskola AJ, Antonov IO, Sheps L, Savee JD, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA. Time-resolved
measurements of product formation in the low-temperature (550–675 K)
oxidation of neopentane: a probe to investigate chain-branching mechanism. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2017;19:13731–45. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CP01366C.
[267] Sirignano M, Conturso M, D’Anna A. Effect of furans on particle formation in

diffusion flames: an experimental and modeling study. Proc Combust Inst 2015;
35:525–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.062.

[268] Konnov AA, Mohammad A, Kishore VR, Kim NI, Prathap C, Kumar S.

A comprehensive review of measurements and data analysis of laminar burning
velocities for various fuel+air mixtures. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;68:
197–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2018.05.003.

[269] Egolfopoulos FN, Hansen N, Ju Y, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K, Law CK, Qi F. Advances

and challenges in laminar flame experiments and implications for combustion
chemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2014;43:36–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2014.04.004.

[270] Tian G, Daniel R, Li H, Xu H, Shuai S, Richards P. Laminar burning velocities of

2,5-dimethylfuran compared with ethanol and gasoline. Energy Fuels 2010;24:
3898–905. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef100452c.

[271] Goey LPH, Maaren A, Quax RM. Stabilization of adiabatic premixed laminar

flames on a flat flame burner. Combust Sci Technol 1993;92:201–7. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00102209308907668.

[272] Nilsson EJK, Konnov AA. Chapter 10: flame studies of oxygenates. Cleaner

combustion - developing detailed chemical kinetic models. Springer London Ltd;
2013. Springer London Ltd, Eds: Battin-Leclerc F., Blurock E., Simmie J.M.
Edition:.

[273] Liu D, Togb ́e C, Tran LS, Felsmann D, Oßwald P, Nau P, et al. Combustion

chemistry and flame structure of furan group biofuels using molecular-beam mass
spectrometry and gas chromatography – Part I: Furan. Combust Flame 2014;161:
748–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.05.028.

[274] Tran LS, Togb ́e C, Liu D, Felsmann D, Oßwald P, Glaude PA, et al. Combustion
chemistry and flame structure of furan group biofuels using molecular-beam mass
spectrometry and gas chromatography – Part II: 2-Methylfuran. Combust Flame
2014;161:766–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.05.027.
[275] Togb ́e C, Tran LS, Liu D, Felsmann D, Oßwald P, Glaude PA, et al. Combustion
chemistry and flame structure of furan group biofuels using molecular-beam mass
spectrometry and gas chromatography – Part III: 2,5-dimethylfuran. Combust
Flame 2014;161:780–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.05.026.
[276] Gueniche HA, Glaude PA, Dayma G, Fournet R, Battin-Leclerc F. Rich methane
premixed laminar flames doped with light unsaturated hydrocarbons: I. Allene
and propyne. Combust Flame 2006;146:620–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2006.07.004.

[277] Griffiths JF. Reduced kinetic models and their application to practical combustion

systems. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1995;21:25–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0360-1285(94)00022-V.

[278] Goldsborough SS, Hochgreb S, Vanhove G, Wooldridge MS, Curran HJ, Sung C-J.
Advances in rapid compression machine studies of low- and intermediate-
temperature autoignition phenomena. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;63:1–78.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2017.05.002.

[279] Yasunaga K, Tranter RS. Chapter 6: speciation in shock tubes. Cleaner combustion
- developing detailed chemical kinetic models. Springer London Ltd; 2013.
Springer London Ltd, Eds: Battin-Leclerc F., Blurock E., Simmie J.M. Edition:.
[280] Gauthier BM, Davidson DF, Hanson RK. Shock tube determination of ignition

delay times in full-blend and surrogate fuel mixtures. Combust Flame 2004;139:
300–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2004.08.015.

[281] Uygun Y, Ishihara S, Olivier H. A high pressure ignition delay time study of 2-

methylfuran and tetrahydrofuran in shock tubes. Combust Flame 2014;161:
2519–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.04.004.

[282] Vanhove G, Yu Y, Boumehdi MA, Frottier O, Herbinet O, Glaude PA, et al.

Experimental study of tetrahydrofuran oxidation and ignition in low-temperature

Soci 2018;66:19–24.

[287] Chen W, Xu Q, Lou H, Di Q, Xie C, Liu B, et al. Variable pressure JSR study of low

temperature oxidation chemistry of n-heptane by synchrotron photoionization
mass spectrometry. Combust Flame 2022;240:111946. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.combustflame.2021.111946.

[288] Rodriguez A.  ́Etude de la combustion de compos ́es organiques grˆace au couplage
d’un r ́eacteur parfaitement agit ́e avec des m ́ethodes analytiques spectroscopiques
et spectrom ́etriques: application `a la d ́etection des hydroperoxydes. Thesis.
Universit ́e de Lorraine, 2016.

[289] Doner AC, Christianson MG, Davis JC, Koritzke AL, Larsson A, Frandsen K, et al.

Vacuum-ultraviolet absorption cross-sections of functionalized cyclic
hydrocarbons: Six-membered rings. J Quant Spectrosc Radiat Transf 2019;236:
106603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jqsrt.2019.106603.

[290] Mamyrin BA. Time-of-flight mass spectrometry (concepts, achievements, and
prospects). Int J Mass spectrom 2001;206:251–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1387-3806(00)00392-4.

[291] Hoffmann E. Mass spectrometry. Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical

Technology. American Cancer Society; 2005. https://doi.org/10.1002/
0471238961.1301191913151518.a01.pub2.

[292] Qi F. Combustion chemistry probed by synchrotron VUV photoionization mass

spectrometry. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:33–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2012.09.002.

[293] Rodriguez A, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F. A study of the low-temperature
oxidation of a long chain aldehyde: n-hexanal. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:
365–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.05.047.

[294] Anderson JB. Molecular beams from nozzle sources. New York: Marcel Dekker,
Inc.; 1974. p. 1–91. https://doi.org/10.1002/0471238961.1301191913151518.
a01.pub2. Molecular Beams and Low Density Gasdynamics. Wegener P.P.
[295] Dagaut P, Reuillon M, Cathonnet M. Experimental study of the oxidation of n-

heptane in a jet stirred reactor from low to high temperature and pressures up to
40 atm. Combust Flame 1995;101:132–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180
(94)00184-T.

[296] Belhadj N, Benoit R, Dagaut P, Lailliau M, Serinyel Z, Dayma G, et al. Oxidation of

di-n-butyl ether: experimental characterization of low-temperature products in
JSR and RCM. Combust Flame 2020;222:133–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2020.08.037.

[297] Weiser L, Weber I, Olzmann M. Pyrolysis of Furan and its methylated derivatives:
a shock-tube/TOF-MS and modeling study. J Phys Chem A 2019;123:9893–904.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b06967.

[298] Bradley JN, Kistiakowsky GB. Shock wave studies by mass spectrometry. I.

Thermal decomposition of nitrous oxide. J Chem Phys 1961;35:256–63. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.1731897.

[299] Photonionization Cross Section Database (Version 2.0). Edited by Jiu Zhong Yang
and Combustion Team. http://flame.nsrl.ustc.edu.cn/database/. National
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, Hefei, China. (2017) n.d. http://flame.nsrl.
ustc.edu.cn/database/?version=en (accessed February 10, 2021).

[300] Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F, Bax S, Le Gall H, Glaude PA, Fournet R, et al.

Detailed product analysis during the low temperature oxidation of n-butane. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2011;13:296–308. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0cp00539h.

[301] Yang B, Wang J, Cool TA, Hansen N, Skeen S, Osborn DL. Absolute

photoionization cross-sections of some combustion intermediates. Int J Mass
spectrom 2012;309:118–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijms.2011.09.006.
[302] Holmes JL, Lossing FP. Ionization energies of homologous organic compounds
and correlation with molecular size. Org Mass Spectrom 1991;26:537–41.
https://doi.org/10.1002/oms.1210260603.

[303] Aue DH, Webb HM, Davidson WR, Vidal M, Bowers MT, Goldwhite H, et al.

Proton affinities and photoelectron spectra of three-membered-ring heterocycles.
J Am Chem Soc 1980;102:5151–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00536a004.
[304] Aue DH, Bowers MT. Chapter 9 - stabilities of positive ions from equilibrium gas-

phase basicity measurements. In: Bowers MT, editor. Gas Phase Ion Chemistry.
Academic Press; 1979. p. 1–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-120802-
8.50007-2.

[305] Holmes J, Turlouw J, Lossing F. The Thermochemistry of C2H4O+ Ions. J Phys

Chem 1976;80:2860–2. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100567a600.

[306] Corderman RR, LeBreton PR, Buttrill SE, Williamson AD, Beauchamp JL.

Photoionization and ion cyclotron resonance studies of the ion chemistry of
ethylene oxide. J Chem Phys 1976;65:4929–39. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.432969.

[307] Kr ̈aßig R, Reinke D, Baumg ̈artel H. Photoreaktionen kleiner organischer moleküle
II. Die photoionenspektren der isomeren propylen-cyclopropan und acetaldehyd-
 ̈athylenoxyd. Ber Bunsenges Phys Chem 1974;78:425–36. https://doi.org/
10.1002/bbpc.19740780502.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019102

L.-S. Tran et al.

[308] Basch H, Robin MB, Kuebler NA, Baker C, Turner DW. Optical and photoelectron

[335] ADavid B, David B, Kemp NR, Kirby RE. Application of photoelectron

spectra of small rings. III. The saturated three-membered rings. J Chem Phys
1969;51:52–66. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1671770.

[309] Lowrey A, Watanabe K. Absorption and ionization coefficients of ethylene oxide.

J Chem Phys 1958;28:208–10. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1744093.
[310] Watanabe K, Nakayama T, Mottl J. Ionization potentials of some molecules.

J Quant Spectrosc Radiat Transf 1962;2:369–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-
4073(62)90023-7.

[311] Vorob’ev AS, Furlei II, Sultanov AS, Khvostenko VI, Leplyanin GV,

Derzhinskii AR, et al. Mass spectrometry of resonance capture of electrons and
photo-electron spectroscopy of molecules of ethylene oxide, ethylene sulfide, and
their derivatives. Russ Chem Bull 1989;38:1388–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00978424.

spectrometry to pesticide analysis. Photoelectron spectra of five-membered
heterocycles and related molecules. Anal Chem 1970;42:1064–73. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ac60291a042.

[336] Watanabe K. Ionization potentials of some molecules. J Chem Phys 1957;26:

542–7. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1743340.

[337] Zykov BG, Erchak NP, Khvostenko VI, Lukevits E, Matorykina VF,

Asfandiarov NL. Photoelectron spectra of furylsilanes and their carbon analogs.
J Organomet Chem 1983;253:301–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-328X(00)
99225-8.

[338] Bock H, Roth B. Radical ions 491 redox reactions of some thiophene derivatives.
Phosphorus Sulfur Silicon Relat Elem 1983;14:211–23. https://doi.org/10.1080/
03086648308075943.

[312] Johnson K, Powis I, Danby CJ. A photoelectron - photoion coincidence study of

[339] Kobayashi T, Kubota T, Ezumi K, Utsunomiya C. Photoelectron angular

acetaldehyde and ethylene oxide molecular ions. Chem Phys 1982;70:329–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0301-0104(82)88103-2.

[313] Bieri G, Åsbrink L, von Niessen W. 30.4-nm He (II) photoelectron spectra of

distribution study of some isoxazoles combined with perturbation theoretic
approach. Bull Chem Soc Jpn 1982;55:3915–9. https://doi.org/10.1246/
BCSJ.55.3915.

organic molecules: part VII. Miscellaneous compounds. J Electron Spectros Relat
Phenomena 1982;27:129–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/0368-2048(82)85059-7.

[314] Kimura K, Katsumata S, Achiba Y. Handbook of HeI photoelectron spectra of

[340] Schweig A, Thiel W. Photoionization cross sections: He I- and He II-photoelectron
spectra of homologous oxygen and sulphur compounds. Mol Phys 1974;27:265–8.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00268977400100241.

fundamental organic molecules ionization energies, ab initio assignments, and
valence electronic structure for 200 molecules. Tokyo; New York: Japan scientific
societies Press, Halsted Press; 1981.

[341] Xie M, Zhou Z, Wang Z, Chen D, Qi F. Determination of absolute photoionization
cross-sections of oxygenated hydrocarbons. Int J Mass spectrom 2010;293:28–33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijms.2010.03.007.

[315] Aue DH, Webb HM, Bowers MT. Proton affinities, ionization potentials, and

[342] Czekner J, Taatjes CA, Osborn DL, Meloni G. Absolute photoionization cross-

hydrogen affinities of nitrogen and oxygen bases. Hybridization effects. J Am
Chem Soc 1975;97:4137–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00847a050.
[316] McAlduff EJ, Houk KN. Photoelectron spectra of substituted oxiranes and

thiiranes. Substituent effects on ionization potentials involving σ orbitals. Can J
Chem 1977;55:318–32. https://doi.org/10.1139/v77-048.

[317] Roszak S, Kaufman JJ, Koski WS, Barreto RD, Fehlner TP, Balasubramanian K.

Experimental and theoretical studies of photoelectron spectra of oxetane and
some of its halogenated methyl derivatives. J Phys Chem 1992;96:7226–30.
https://doi.org/10.1021/j100197a018.

[318] Mollere PD. The photoelectron spectrum of oxetane: non-degenerate walsh
orbitals in a four-membered heterocycle. Tetrahedron Lett 1973;14:2791–4.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-4039(01)96140-4.

sections of selected furanic and lactonic potential biofuels. Int J Mass spectrom
2013;348:39–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijms.2013.04.020.

[343] Schmidt H, Schweig A, Anastassiou AG, Wetzel JC. The dominant role of

hyperconjugation in the 9-oxabicyclo[4.2.1] nona-2,4,7-triene series.
Tetrahedron 1976;32:2239–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-4020(76)85138-
1.

[344] Schmidt H, Schweig A. Notiz zur transanularen n/π-Wechselwirkung in 2,5-
Dihydrofuran. Chem Ber 1974;107:725–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cber.19741070249.

[345] Bain AD, Buenzli JC, Frost DC, Larry W. Photoelectron spectra of cyclic ethers.
J Am Chem Soc 1973;95:291–2. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00782a079.
[346] Holmes J.L., Lossing F.P. Title unavailable. Personal communication to SG Lias

[319] Hernandez GJ. Vacuum-ultraviolet absorption spectra of the cyclic ethers:

1986.

trimethylene oxide, tetrahydrofuran, and tetrahydropyran. J Chem Phys 1963;38:
2233–42. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1733955.

[320] Klapstein D, MacPherson CD, O’Brien RT. The photoelectron spectra and

electronic structure of 2-carbonyl furans. Can J Chem 1990;68:747–54. https://
doi.org/10.1139/v90-118.

[321] Veszpr ́emi T, Nyul ́aszi L, Nagy J. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy and
quantum-mechanical study of alkyl- and trimethylsilyl-furanes. J Organomet
Chem 1987;331:175–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-328X(87)80019-0.

[322] Arimura M, Yoshikawa Y. Ionization efficiency and ionization energy of cyclic

compounds by electron impact. Shitsuryo Bunseki 1984;32:375–80.

[323] Klasinc L, Sablji ́c A, Kluge G, Rieger J, Scholz M. Chemistry of excited states. Part

13. Assignment of lowest π-ionizations in photoelectron spectra of thiophen,
furan, and pyrrole. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1982;2:539–43. https://doi.org/
10.1039/P29820000539.

[324] Galasso V, Klasinc L, Sablji ́c A, Trinajsti ́c N, Pappalardo GC, Steglich W.

[347] Wada Y, Kiser RW. Electron impact spectroscopy of some substituted oxiranes.
J Phys Chem 1962;66:1652–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100815a021.
[348] Pignataro S, Distefano G. n-σ Mixing in pentatomic heterocyclic compounds of

sixth group by photoelectron spectroscopy. Chem Phys Lett 1974;26:356–60.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2614(74)89048-2.

[349] Gerson SH, Worley SD, Bodor N, Kaminski JJ, Flechtner TW. The photoelectron
spectra of some heterocyclic compounds which contain N, O, Cl and Br. J Electron
Spectros Relat Phenomena 1978;13:421–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/0368-2048
(78)85046-4.

[350] Doucet J, Sauvageau P, Sandorfy C. The vacuum ultraviolet spectrum of

tetrahydrofuran. Chem Phys Lett 1972;17:316–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-
2614(72)87085-4.

[351] Spilker R, Grützmacher H-F. Isomerization and fragmentation of methylfuran ions
and pyran ions in the gas phase. Org Mass Spectrom 1986;21:459–66. https://doi.
org/10.1002/oms.1210210803.

Conformation and photoelectron spectra of 2-(2-furyl)pyrrole and 2-(2-thienyl)
pyrrole. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1981;2:127–31. https://doi.org/10.1039/
P29810000127.

[352] Lias SG, Ausloos P. Ionization energies of organic compounds by equilibrium
measurements. J Am Chem Soc 1978;100:6027–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja00487a009.

[325] Willett G, Baer T. Thermochemistry and dissociation dynamics of state-selected

[353] Varsel CJ, Morrell FA, Resnik FE, Powell WA. Qualitative and quantitative

C4H4X ions. 2. Furan and 3-butyn-2-one. J Am Chem Soc 1980;102:6769–73.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00542a017.

[326] Tedder JM, Vidaud PH. Charge-exchange mass spectra of thiophene, pyrrole and
Furan. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1980;2(76):1516–22. https://doi.org/10.1039/
F29807601516.

[327] Holmes JL, Terlouw JK. Structures of [C4H4O]+.cntdot.ions produced from 2-

and 4-pyrone. J Am Chem Soc 1979;101:4973–5. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja00511a029.

[328] Van Veen EH. Triplet π→π* transitions in thiophene, furan and pyrrole by low-
energy electron-impact spectroscopy. Chem Phys Lett 1976;41:535–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0009-2614(76)85411-5.

[329] Aloisi GG, Santini S, Savelli G. Molecular complexes of heteroaromatic five

membered ring compounds with tetracyanoethylene. Charge transfer spectra,
equilibrium constants and ionization potentials of the donors. J Chem Soc
Faraday Trans 1975;71(1):2045–50. https://doi.org/10.1039/F19757102045.

analysis of organic compounds. Use of low-voltage mass spectrometry. Anal Chem
1960;32:182–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac60158a011.

[354] Colonna FP, Distefano G, Guerra M, Jones D, Modelli A. Furyl- and thienyl-

mercury derivatives studied by means of ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy.
Evidence for the participation in bonding of the vacant 6pπ orbitals of mercury in
bis-2-furyl- and bis-2-thienyl-mercury. J Chem Soc Dalton Trans 1979:2037–41.
https://doi.org/10.1039/DT9790002037.

[355] Fringuelli F, Marino G, Taticchi A, Distefano G, Colonna FP, Pignataro S.
Photoelectron spectra of the α-substituted derivatives of furan, thiophen,
selenophen, and tellurophen. A comparative study of the molecular orbital
energies. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1976;2:276–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/
P29760000276.

[356] Bloch M, Brogli F, Heilbronner E, Jones TB, Prinzbach H, Schweikert O.

Photoelectron spectra of unsaturated oxides. I. 1,4-dioxin and related systems.
Helv Chim Acta 1978;61:1388–98. https://doi.org/10.1002/hlca.19780610422.

[330] Thorstad O, Undheim K. Mass spectrometry of onium compounds. XXIV.

[357] Planckaert AA, Doucet J, Sandorfy C. Comparative study of the vacuum

Ionisation potential in structure analysis of pyridodiazo-oxides. Chem Scr 1974;6:
222–5.

[331] Linda P, Marino G, Pignataro S. A comparison of sensitivities to substituent effects

of five-membered heteroaromatic rings in gas phase ionization. J Chem Soc B
1971:1585–7. https://doi.org/10.1039/J29710001585.

[332] Derrick PJ, Åsbrink L, Edqvist O, J ̄onsson B, Lindholm E. Rydberg series in small
molecules. X. Photoelectron spectroscopy and electronic structure of furan. Int J
Mass Spectrom Ion Phys 1971;6:161–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-7381
(71)80001-3.

ultraviolet absorption and photoelectron spectra of some simple ethers and
thioethers. J Chem Phys 1974;60:4846–53. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1680992.
[358] Batich C, Heilbronner E, Quinn CB, Wiseman JR. The electronic structure of vinyl

ethers and sulfides with interrupted conjugation examined by photoelectron
spectroscopy. Helv Chim Acta 1976;59:512–22. https://doi.org/10.1002/
hlca.19760590217.

[359] Jinno M, Watanabe I, Yokoyama Y, Ikeda S. He I photoelectron spectra of

ethylene carbonate and related compounds. Bull Chem Soc Jpn 1977;50:597–603.
https://doi.org/10.1246/bcsj.50.597.

[333] Potapov VK, Bazhenov BA. The photionization of pyrrole, furan, and thiophene.

[360] Behan JM, Dean FM, Johnstone RAW. Photoelectron spectra of cyclic aromatic

High Energy Chem 1970;505. ???-???

[334] Johnstone RAW, Mellon FA, Ward SD. On-line acquisition of ionization efficiency
data. Int J Mass Spectrom Ion Phys 1970;5:241–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-
7381(70)80019-5.

ethers: The question of the mills-nixon effect. Tetrahedron 1976;32:167–71.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-4020(76)80038-5.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019103

L.-S. Tran et al.

[361] Kobayashi T, Nagakura S. Photoelectron spectra of tetrahydropyran, 1,3-dioxane,
and 1,4-dioxane. Bull Chem Soc Jpn 1973;46:1558–60. https://doi.org/10.1246/
BCSJ.46.1558.

[362] Sweigart DA, Turner DW. Lone pair orbitals and their interactions studied by

photoelectron spectroscopy. II. Equivalent orbitals in saturated oxygen and sulfur
heterocycles. J Am Chem Soc 1972;94:5599–603. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja00771a012.

[363] Fraser-Monteiro ML, Fraser-Monteiro L, Butler JJ, Baer T, Hass JR.

Thermochemistry and dissociation dynamics of state-selected C4H8O2+ ions. 1.
1,4-dioxane. J Phys Chem 1982;86:739–47. https://doi.org/10.1021/
j100394a031.

[364] Gol’denfel’d IV, Korostyshevskii IZ, Mischanchuk BG, Pokrovskii VA.

Determination of ionization potentials of atoms and molecules using a field mass
spectrometer equipped with an energy analyzer. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR 1973;213:
626.

[365] Collin JE, Conde G. Spectrometrie de masse: l’ionisation et la dissociation des

polyethers cycliques soumis a l’impact electronique. Bull Cl Sci Acad R Belg 1966;
52:978–1009.

[366] Asfandiarov NL, Zykov BG. Photoelectron spectra of methyl-substituted 1,3-
dioxanes. Russ Chem Bull 1983;32:2069–72. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00955773.

[367] Coughlin DJ, Brown RS, Salomon RG. The prostaglandin endoperoxide nucleus
and related bicyclic peroxides. Synthetic and spectroscopic studies. J Am Chem
Soc 1979;101:1533–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00500a027.

[368] Rodin A.A., Chistyakov A.B., Sarkisov Y.S., Sergeev Y.L., V’yunov K.A., Golovin A.

V.. Electronic structure and geometric structure of three-member J Heterocycl
Chem I hotoelectron spectra of gylcidyl and thioglycidyl ethers Russ J Phys Chem
1985;59:444.

[369] Yu M, Kim HS, LeBreton PR. UV photoelectron and theoretical characterization of

′

-deoxyguanosine-5

-phosphate valence electronic properties: changes in

′
2
structure associated with the B to Z-DNA conformational transition. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 1992;184:16–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-291X(92)
91151-F.

[370] Kumakura M, Sugiura T, Okamura S. Characteristics of RPD ion source of time-of-

[386] Wang J, Yang B, Cool TA, Hansen N, Kasper T. Near-threshold absolute

photoionization cross-sections of some reaction intermediates in combustion. Int
J Mass spectrom 2008;269:210–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijms.2007.10.013.
[387] Baer T, Guyon PM. An historical introduction to threshold photoionization. High

resolution laser photoionization and photoelectron studies. Chichester: John
Wiley&Sons Ltd; 1995. Eds: Powis I., Baer T., Ng C.Y.

[388] Osborn DL, Hayden CC, Hemberger P, Bodi A, Voronova K, Szt ́aray B. Breaking
through the false coincidence barrier in electron–ion coincidence experiments.
J Chem Phys 2016;145:164202. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4965428.

[389] Holzmeier F. Photoionization of reactive molecules – a powerful tool for

understanding combustion processes. Ber Bunsenges Phys Chem 2020;2:27–34.
https://doi.org/10.26125/04EC-3M42.

[390] Eskola AJ, Welz O, Savee JD, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA. Synchrotron

photoionization mass spectrometry measurements of product formation in low-
temperature n-butane oxidation: toward a fundamental understanding of
autoignition chemistry and n-C4H9 + O2/s-C4H9 + O2 reactions. J Phys Chem A
2013;117:12216–35. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp408467g.

[391] Krüger J, Garcia GA, Felsmann D, Moshammer K, Lackner A, Brockhinke A, et al.

Photoelectron–photoion coincidence spectroscopy for multiplexed detection of
intermediate species in a flame. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2014;16:22791–804.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CP02857K.

[392] Bourgalais J, Gouid Z, Herbinet O, Garcia GA, Arnoux P, Wang Z, et al. Isomer-

sensitive characterization of low temperature oxidation reaction products by
coupling a jet-stirred reactor to an electron/ion coincidence spectrometer: case of
n-pentane. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2020;22:1222–41. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C9CP04992D.

[393] Oßwald P, Güldenberg H, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K, Yang B, Yuan T, Qi F. Combustion
of butanol isomers – a detailed molecular beam mass spectrometry investigation
of their flame chemistry. Combust Flame 2011;158:2–15. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2010.06.003.

[394] Cool TA, Nakajima K, Taatjes CA, McIlroy A, Westmoreland PR, Law ME, et al.

Studies of a fuel-rich propane flame with photoionization mass spectrometry.
Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:1681–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2004.08.103.

flight mass spectrometer, and measurement of the ionization potential and the
appearance potentials of trioxymethylene. J Mass Spectrom Soc Jpn 1968;16:
16–22. https://doi.org/10.5702/massspec1953.16.16.

[395] Christianson MG, Doner AC, Davis MM, Koritzke AL, Turney JM, Schaefer HF,

et al. Reaction mechanisms of a cyclic ether intermediate: ethyloxirane. Int J
Chem Kinet 2021;53:43–59. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21423.

[371] Dewar MJS, Worley SD. Photoelectron spectra of molecules. i. ionization

[396] Kanno N, Tonokura K. Vacuum ultraviolet photoionization mass spectra and

potentials of some organic molecules and their interpretation. J Chem Phys 1969;
50:654–67. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1671114.

cross-sections for volatile organic compounds at 10.5 eV. Appl Spectrosc 2007;61:
896–902. https://doi.org/10.1366/000370207781540033.

[372] Smith AR, Meloni G. Absolute photoionization cross sections of furanic fuels: 2-
ethylfuran, 2-acetylfuran and furfural. J Mass Spectrom 2015;50:1206–13.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jms.3638.

[373] Colonna FP, Distefano G, Guerra M, Jones D. Photoelectron (He(I), He(II) and X-

ray) spectroscopy of γ-pyrone and its related sulphur derivatives: valence and
core ionization energies and shake-up satellites. J Electron Spectrosc Relat
Phenom 1980;18:309–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/0368-2048(80)80019-3.

[374] Kreile J, Münzel N, Schweig A, Specht H. Uv photoelectron spectrum of

cyclobutadiene. Free cyclobutadiene stable up to high temperatures. Chem Phys
Lett 1986;124:140–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2614(86)85133-8.
[375] Grützmacher HF, Spilker R. Loss of CO from 4,6-dimethyl-2-pyrone and 2,6-
dimethyl-4-prypne radical cations. Org Mass Spectrom 1985;20:258–61.

[376] Thorstad O, Undheim K, Cederlund B, H ̈ornfeldt AB, Servin R, Sternerup H.
Ionisation potentials in tautomeric analysis of 2-hydroxy derivatives of
thiophenes, selenophenes, and furans. Acta Chem Scand 1975;29b:647–51.
https://doi.org/10.3891/acta.chem.scand.29b-0647.

[377] Jørgensen FS, Gajhede M, Frei B. Cyclic acetals. Structural analysis of 1,3-dioxe-
pine and related compounds. Helv Chim Acta 1985;68:2148–57. https://doi.org/
10.1002/hlca.19850680809.

[378] Scharf HD, Plum H, Fleischhauer J, Schleker W. Zur Diels-Alder-reaktivit ̈at s-cis-
fixierter 1,3-diene. Chem Ber 1979;112:862–82. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cber.19791120312.

[379] Zverev VV, Villem YY, Villem NV, Klimovitskii EN, Arbuzov BA. Photoelectron
spectra and intramolecular interactions of dimethoxymethane and 4,7-dihydro-
1,3-dioxepin. J Gen Chem USSR 1982;52:1674.

[380] Rotavera B, Z ́ador J, Welz O, Sheps L, Scheer AM, Savee JD, et al. Photoionization

mass spectrometric measurements of initial reaction pathways in low-
temperature oxidation of 2,5-dimethylhexane. J Phys Chem A 2014;118:
10188–200. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp507811d.

[381] Frisch MJ, Trucks GW, Schlegel HB, Scuseria GE, Robb MA, et al. Gaussian 16,

revision B. Wallingford, CT: Gaussian, Inc.; 2019.

[382] Rayne S, Forest K. Estimated adiabatic ionization energies for organic compounds

using the Gaussian-4 (G4) and W1BD theoretical methods. J Chem Eng Data
2011;56:350–5. https://doi.org/10.1021/je100913f.

[397] Davis JC, Koritzke AL, Caravan RL, Antonov IO, Christianson MG, Doner AC, et al.
Influence of the ether functional group on ketohydroperoxide formation in cyclic
hydrocarbons: tetrahydropyran and cyclohexane. J Phys Chem A 2019;123:
3634–46. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b12510.

[398] Rotavera B, Savee JD, Antonov IO, Caravan RL, Sheps L, Osborn DL, et al.

Influence of oxygenation in cyclic hydrocarbons on chain-termination reactions
from R+O2: tetrahydropyran and cyclohexane. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:
597–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.05.020.

[399] Koritzke AL, Davis JC, Caravan RL, Christianson MG, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA, et al.
 ̇QOOH-mediated reactions in cyclohexene oxidation. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:
323–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.029.

[400] Schenk M, Leon L, Moshammer K, Oßwald P, Zeuch T, Seidel L, et al. Detailed

mass spectrometric and modeling study of isomeric butene flames. Combust
Flame 2013;160:487–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2012.10.023.

[401] Tran LS, Pieper J, Zeng M, Li Y, Zhang X, Li W, et al. Influence of the biofuel

isomers diethyl ether and n-butanol on flame structure and pollutant formation in
premixed n-butane flames. Combust Flame 2017;175:47–59. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.06.031.

[402] Biordi JC. Molecular beam mass spectrometry for studying the fundamental

chemistry of flames. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1977;3:151–73. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0360-1285(77)90002-8.

[403] Zhou Z, Du X, Yang J, Wang Y, Li C, Wei S, et al. The vacuum ultraviolet

beamline/endstations at NSRL dedicated to combustion research. J Synchrotron
Rad J Synchrotron Radiat 2016;23:1035–45. https://doi.org/10.1107/
S1600577516005816.

[404] Li Y, Zhang L, Tian Z, Yuan T, Wang J, Yang B, et al. Experimental study of a fuel-

rich premixed toluene flame at low pressure. Energy Fuels 2009;23:1473–85.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef800902t.

[405] Bierkandt T, Oßwald P, Gaiser N, Krüger D, K ̈ohler M, Hoener M, et al.

Observation of low-temperature chemistry products in laminar premixed low-
pressure flames by molecular-beam mass spectrometry. Int J Chem Kinet 2021;53:
1063–81. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21503.

[406] Bartle KD, Myers P. History of gas chromatography. Trends Analyt Chem 2002;21:

[383] El-Nahas AM, Simmie JM, Mangood AH, Hirao K, Song JW, Watson MA, et al.

547–57.

Assessment of hybrid, meta-hybrid-GGA, and long-range corrected density
functionals for the estimation of enthalpies of formation, barrier heights, and
ionisation potentials of selected C1–C5 oxygenates. Mol Phys 2015;113:1630–5.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2014.1002552.

[384] Cord M, Husson B, Lizardo Huerta JC, Herbinet O, Glaude PA, Fournet R, et al.

Study of the low temperature oxidation of propane. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:
12214–28. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp309821z.

[385] Sun W, Lailliau M, Serinyel Z, Dayma G, Moshammer K, Hansen N, et al. Insights
into the oxidation kinetics of a cetane improver –1,2-dimethoxyethane (1,2-DME)
with experimental and modeling methods. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:555–64.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.077.

[407] Minetti R, Ribaucour M, Carlier M, Fittschen C, Sochet LR. Experimental and

modeling study of oxidation and autoignition of butane at high pressure. Combust
Flame 1994;96:201–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)90009-4.
[408] Minetti R, Carlier M, Ribaucour M, Therssen E, Sochet LR. A rapid compression
machine investigation of oxidation and auto-ignition of n-heptane: measurements
and modeling. Combust Flame 1995;102:298–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0010-2180(94)00236-L.

[409] Minetti R, Roubaud A, Therssen E, Ribaucour M, Sochet LR. The chemistry of pre-
ignition of n-pentane and 1-pentene. Combust Flame 1999;118:213–20. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(98)00151-5.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019104

L.-S. Tran et al.

[410] Minetti R, Carlier M, Ribaucour M, Therssen E, Sochet LR. Comparison of

oxidation and autoignition of the two primary reference fuels by rapid
compression. Proc Combust Inst 1996;26:747–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(96)80283-9.

[411] Ribaucour M, Minetti R, Sochet LR. Autoignition of n-pentane and 1-pentene:
experimental data and kinetic modeling. Proc Combust Inst 1998;27:345–51.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80422-0.

[412] Dagaut P, Reuillon M, Cathonnet M. High pressure oxidation of liquid fuels from
low to high temperature. 1. n-heptane and iso-octane. Combust Sci Technol 1993;
95:233–60. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209408935336.

[413] Dagaut P, Reuillon M, Cathonnet M. High-pressure oxidation of liquid fuels from

low to high-temperature. 2. Mixtures of n-heptane and isooctane. Combust Sci
Technol 1994;103:315–36. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209408907701.
[414] Dagaut P, Reuillon M, Cathonnet M. High pressure oxidation of liquid fuels from

low to high temperature. 3. n-decane. Combust Sci Technol 1994;103:349–59.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209408907703.

[415] Hakka MH, Glaude PA, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F. Experimental study of the
oxidation of large surrogates for diesel and biodiesel fuels. Combust Flame 2009;
156:2129–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.06.003.

[416] Bax S, Hakka MH, Glaude PA, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F. Experimental study of
the oxidation of methyl oleate in a jet-stirred reactor. Combust Flame 2010;157:
1220–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.12.008.

[417] Husson B, Herbinet O, Glaude PA, Ahmed SS. Battin-Leclerc F. Detailed product

analysis during low- and intermediate-temperature oxidation of
ethylcyclohexane. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:5100–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp301043r.

[418] Serinyel Z, Herbinet O, Frottier O, Dirrenberger P, Warth V, Glaude PA, et al. An
experimental and modeling study of the low- and high-temperature oxidation of
cyclohexane. Combust Flame 2013;160:2319–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2013.05.016.

[419] Wang Z, Herbinet O, Cheng Z, Husson B, Fournet R, Qi F, et al. Experimental
investigation of the low temperature oxidation of the five isomers of hexane.
J Phys Chem A 2014;118:5573–94. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp503772h.
[420] Battin-Leclerc F, Rodriguez A, Husson B, Herbinet O, Glaude PA, Wang Z, et al.
Products from the oxidation of linear isomers of hexene. J Phys Chem A 2014;
118:673–83. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp4107102.

[436] Wang Z, Mohamed SY, Zhang L, Moshammer K, Popolan-Vaida DM, Shankar VSB,
et al. New insights into the low-temperature oxidation of 2-methylhexane. Proc
Combust Inst 2017;36:373–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.06.085.

[437] Hoener M, Kaczmarek D, Bierkandt T, Bodi A, Hemberger P, Kasper T.

A pressurized flow reactor combustion experiment interfaced with synchrotron
double imaging photoelectron photoion coincidence spectroscopy. Rev Sci
Instrum 2020;91:045115. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5141168.

[438] Felsmann D, Moshammer K, Krüger J, Lackner A, Brockhinke A, Kasper T, et al.

Electron ionization, photoionization and photoelectron/photoion coincidence
spectroscopy in mass-spectrometric investigations of a low-pressure ethylene/
oxygen flame. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:779–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2014.05.151.

[439] Szt ́aray B, Voronova K, Torma KG, Covert KJ, Bodi A, Hemberger P, et al. CRF-
PEPICO: double velocity map imaging photoelectron photoion coincidence
spectroscopy for reaction kinetics studies. J Chem Phys 2017;147:013944.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4984304.

[440] Battin-Leclerc F, Bourgalais J, Gouid Z, Herbinet O, Garcia G, Arnoux P, et al.

Chemistry deriving from OOQOOH radicals in alkane low-temperature oxidation:
a first combined theoretical and electron-ion coincidence mass spectrometry
study. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:309–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2020.06.159.

[441] Knox JH. A new mechanism for the low temperature oxidation of hydrocarbons in
the gas phase. Combust Flame 1965;9:297–310. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-
2180(65)90095-7.

[442] Fish A. The non-isothermal oxidation of neopentane. Combust Flame 1969;13:

23–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(69)90024-8.

[443] Fish A. The non-isothermal oxidation of 2-methylpentane. II. The chemistry of

cool flames. Proc R Soc Lond A 1967;298:204–37. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rspa.1967.0100.

[444] Hughes KJ, Halford-Maw PA, Lightfoot PD, Tur ́anyi T, Pilling MJ. Direct

measurements of the neopentyl peroxy-hydroperoxy radical isomerisation over
the temperature range 660–750 K. Proc Combust Inst 1992;24:645–52. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80079-2.

[445] Baldwin RR, Hisham MWM, Walker RW. Arrhenius parameters of elementary
reactions involved in the oxidation of neopentane. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans
1982;78(1):1615–27. https://doi.org/10.1039/F19827801615.

[421] Meng X, Herbinet O, Wang T, Battin-Leclerc F. Experimental and modeling study
of 1-octene jet-stirred reactor oxidation. Fuel 2017;207:763–75. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2017.06.128.

[446] Curran HJ, Gaffuri P, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK. A comprehensive modeling study of
n-heptane oxidation. Combust Flame 1998;114:149–77. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00282-4.

[422] Tran LS, Wullenkord J, Li Y, Herbinet O, Zeng M, Qi F, et al. Probing the low-
temperature chemistry of di-n-butyl ether: detection of previously unobserved
intermediates. Combust Flame 2019;210:9–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2019.08.022.

[423] Vermeire FH, Carstensen HH, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F, Marin GB, Van

Geem KM. The thermal decomposition of furfural: molecular chemistry
unraveled. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:445–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.05.119.

[424] Bissoonauth T, Wang Z, Mohamed SY, Wang J, Chen B, Rodriguez A, et al.

Methylcyclohexane pyrolysis and oxidation in a jet-stirred reactor. Proc Combust
Inst 2019;37:409–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.086.
[425] NIST Standard reference database. NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Library.

Available at <https://www.nist.gov/srd/nist-standard-reference-database-1a>n.
d.

[426] Dagaut P, Reuillon M, Cathonnet M, Presvots D. Gas chromatography and mass
spectrometry identification of cyclic ethers formed from reference fuels
combustion. Chromatographia 1995;40:147–54. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02272163.

[447] Ranzi E, Gaffuri P, Faravelli T, Dagaut P. A wide-range modeling study of n-

heptane oxidation. Combust Flame 1995;103:91–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0010-2180(95)00091-J.

[448] Glaude PA, Warth V, Fournet R, Battin-Leclerc F, Scacchi G, Cˆome GM. Modelling

of normal-heptane and iso-octane gas-phase oxidation at low temperature by
using computer aided designed mechanisms. Bull Soc Chim Belg 1997;106:343–8.
[449] Koert DN, Miller DL, Cernansky NP. Experimental studies of propane oxidation
through the negative temperature coefficient region at 10 and 15 atmospheres.
Combust Flame 1994;96:34–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)90156-
2.

[450] Wang S, Miller DL, Cernansky NP, Curran HJ, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK. A flow

reactor study of neopentane oxidation at 8 atmospheres: experiments and
modeling. Combust Flame 1999;118:415–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-
2180(99)00014-0.

[451] Bourgalais J, Herbinet O, Carstensen HH, Debleza J, Garcia GA, Arnoux P, et al.

Jet-stirred reactor study of low-temperature neopentane oxidation: a combined
theoretical, chromatographic, mass spectrometric, and PEPICO analysis. Energy
Fuels 2021;35:19689–704. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c02080.

[427] Herbinet O, Bax S, Glaude PA, Carre V, Battin-Leclerc F. Mass spectra of cyclic

[452] Ramalingam A, Fenard Y, Heufer A. Ignition delay time and species measurement

ethers formed in the low-temperature oxidation of a series of n-alkanes. Fuel
2011;90:528–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2010.09.047.

[428] Koritzke AL, Frandsen KM, Christianson MG, Davis JC, Doner AC, Larsson A, et al.
Fragmentation mechanisms from electron-impact of complex cyclic ethers formed
in combustion. Int J Mass spectrom 2020;454:116342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijms.2020.116342.

[429] Bugler J, Rodriguez A, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F, Togbe C, Dayma G, et al. An
experimental and modelling study of n-pentane oxidation in two jet-stirred
reactors: the importance of pressure-dependent kinetics and new reaction
pathways. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:441–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.05.048.

[430] McWilliam IG, Dewar RA. Flame ionization detector for gas chromatography.

Nature 1958;181. https://doi.org/10.1038/181760a0. 760–760.
[431] Tranchant J, Gardais JF, Gorin P, Serpinet J, Untz G. Manuel pratique de

chromatographie en phase gazeuse. Paris: Masson; 1982.

[432] Zhu G, Zhao F, Wang D, Xia C. Extended effective carbon number concept in the

quantitative analysis of multi-ethers using predicted response factors.
J Chromatogr A 2017;1513:194–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chroma.2017.07.036.

[433] Vermeire FH, Carstensen HH, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F, Marin GB, Van

Geem KM. Experimental and modeling study of the pyrolysis and combustion of
dimethoxymethane. Combust Flame 2018;190:270–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.combustflame.2017.12.001.

[434] Porter K, Volman DH. Flame ionization detection of carbon monoxide for gas

chromatographic analysis. Anal Chem 1962;34:748–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ac60187a009.

[435] Tran L.S.  ́Etude de la formation de polluants lors de la combustion de carburants

oxyg ́en ́es. Thesis. Universit ́e de Lorraine, 2013.

in a rapid compression machine: a case study on high-pressure oxidation of
propane. Combust Flame 2020;211:392–405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2019.10.015.

[453] Tran LS, Li Y, Zeng M, Pieper J, Qi F, Battin-Leclerc F, et al. Elevated pressure

low-temperature oxidation of linear five-heavy-atom fuels: diethyl ether, n-
pentane, and their mixture. Z Physik Chem 2020;234:1269–93. https://doi.org/
10.1515/zpch-2020-1613.

[454] Zhang K, Banyon C, Togb ́e C, Dagaut P, Bugler J, Curran HJ. An experimental and
kinetic modeling study of n-hexane oxidation. Combust Flame 2015;162:
4194–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.08.001.

[455] Hakka HM, Cracknell RF, Pekalski A, Glaude PA, Battin-Leclerc F. Experimental
and modeling study of ultra-rich oxidation of n-heptane. Fuel 2015;144:358–68.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.12.058.

[456] Herbinet O, Husson B, Gall HL, Battin-Leclerc F. An experimental and modeling
study of the oxidation of n-heptane, ethylbenzene, n-butylbenzene in a jet-stirred
reactor at pressures up to 10 bar. Int J Chem Kinet 2020;52:1006–21. https://doi.
org/10.1002/kin.21417.

[457] Sarathy SM, Westbrook CK, Mehl M, Pitz WJ, Togbe C, Dagaut P, et al.

Comprehensive chemical kinetic modeling of the oxidation of 2-methylalkanes
from C7 to C20. Combust Flame 2011;158:2338–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2011.05.007.

[458] Sarathy SM, Javed T, Karsenty F, Heufer A, Wang W, Park S, et al.

A comprehensive combustion chemistry study of 2,5-dimethylhexane. Combust
Flame 2014;161:1444–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2013.12.010.

[459] Mergulh ̃ao CS, Carstensen HH, Song H, Wagnon SW, Pitz WJ, Vanhove G. Probing
the antiknock effect of anisole through an ignition, speciation and modeling study

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019105

L.-S. Tran et al.

of its blends with isooctane. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:739–48. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2020.08.013.

[460] Kukkadapu G, Wagnon SW, Mehl M, Zhang K, Westbrook CK, Pitz WJ, et al. An
updated comprehensive chemical kinetic model of C8-C20 n-alkanes. In:
Proceedings of the 10th US national combustion meeting; 2017.

[461] Chen W, Rodriguez A, Xie C, Li Y, Xu Q, Wang H, et al. Exploring low temperature

oxidation of iso-octane under atmospheric pressure. Combust Flame 2022 (in
press).

[462] Ranzi E, Cavallotti C, Cuoci A, Frassoldati A, Pelucchi M, Faravelli T. New
reaction classes in the kinetic modeling of low temperature oxidation of n-
alkanes. Combust Flame 2015;162:1679–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2014.11.030.

[463] Bugler J, Power J, Curran HJ. A theoretical study of cyclic ether formation

reactions. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:161–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.05.006.

[464] Biet J, Hakka MH, Warth V, Glaude PA, Battin-Leclerc F. Experimental and

modeling study of the low-temperature oxidation of large alkanes. Energy Fuels
2008;22:2258–69. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef8000746.

[465] Hakka M.H.  ́Etude de l’oxydation en phase gazeuse de composants des gazoles et
des biocarburants diesel. These de doctorat. Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, INPL, 2010.

[466] Bugler J, Marks B, Mathieu O, Archuleta R, Camou A, Gr ́egoire C, et al. An

ignition delay time and chemical kinetic modeling study of the pentane isomers.
Combust Flame 2016;163:138–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2015.09.014.

[467] Atef N, Kukkadapu G, Mohamed SY, Rashidi MA, Banyon C, Mehl M, et al.

correction for the original article with the same title). J Phys Chem A 2004;108:
7127–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp040467m.

[486] Launder AM, Turney JM, Agarwal J, Schaefer HF. Ethylperoxy radical:

approaching spectroscopic accuracy via coupled-cluster theory. Phys Chem Chem
Phys 2017;19:15715–23. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CP02795H.

[487] Villano SM, Huynh LK, Carstensen HH, Dean AM. High-pressure rate rules for

alkyl + O2 reactions. 2. The isomerization, cyclic ether formation, and β-scission
reactions of hydroperoxy alkyl radicals. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:5068–89.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp3023887.

[488] Villano SM, Carstensen HH, Dean AM. Rate rules, branching ratios, and pressure

dependence of the HO2 + olefin addition channels. J Phys Chem A 2013;117:
6458–73. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp405262r.

[489] Ranzi E, Frassoldati A, Granata S, Faravelli T. Wide-range kinetic modeling study
of the pyrolysis, partial oxidation, and combustion of heavy n-alkanes. Ind Eng
Chem Res 2005;44:5170–83. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie049318g.

[490] Ranzi E, Faravelli T, Gaffuri P, Sogaro A, D’Anna A, Ciajolo A. A wide-range

modeling study of iso-octane oxidation. Combust Flame 1997;108:24–42. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(95)00274-X.

[491] Westbrook CK, Pitz WJ, Herbinet O, Curran HJ, Silke EJ. A comprehensive

detailed chemical kinetic reaction mechanism for combustion of n-alkane
hydrocarbons from n-octane to n-hexadecane. Combust Flame 2009;156:181–99.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.07.014.

[492] Muharam Y, Warnatz J. Kinetic modelling of the oxidation of large aliphatic

hydrocarbons using an automatic mechanism generation. Phys Chem Chem Phys
2007;9:4218–29. https://doi.org/10.1039/B703415F.

A comprehensive iso-octane combustion model with improved thermochemistry
and chemical kinetics. Combust Flame 2017;178:111–34. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.12.029.

[493] Wang Z, Sarathy SM. Third O2 addition reactions promote the low-temperature

auto-ignition of n-alkanes. Combust Flame 2016;165:364–72. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.12.020.

[468] Liao H, Chen H, Liu Z, Zhang R, Zhang F, Yang B. MBMS study on plasma-assisted

low-temperature oxidation of n-heptane and iso-octane in a flow reactor. Int J
Chem Kinet 2021;53:428–39. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21454.

[469] Warth V, Stef N, Glaude PA, Battin-Leclerc F, Scacchi G, Cˆome GM. Computer-
aided derivation of gas-phase oxidation mechanisms: application to the modeling
of the oxidation of n-butane. Combust Flame 1998;114:81–102. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0010-2180(97)00273-3.

[470] Villano SM, Huynh LK, Carstensen HH, Dean AM. High-pressure rate rules for
alkyl + O2 reactions. 1. The dissociation, concerted elimination, and
isomerization channels of the alkyl peroxy radical. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:
13425–42. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp2079204.

[471] Duan J, Ji J, Ye L, Meng Q, Zhai Y, Zhang L. Theoretical calculation of low-
temperature oxidation of heptyl radicals and O2. Combust Flame 2020;217:
274–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.03.021.

[494] Miyoshi A. Systematic computational study on the unimolecular reactions of
alkylperoxy (RO2), hydroperoxyalkyl (QOOH), and hydroperoxyalkylperoxy
(O2QOOH) radicals. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:3301–25. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp112152n.

[495] Pfaendtner J, Yu X, Broadbelt LJ. Quantum chemical investigation of low-

temperature intramolecular hydrogen transfer reactions of hydrocarbons. J Phys
Chem A 2006;110:10863–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp061649e.

[496] Zhou CW, Li Y, Burke U, Banyon C, Somers KP, Ding S, et al. An experimental and
chemical kinetic modeling study of 1,3-butadiene combustion: ignition delay time
and laminar flame speed measurements. Combust Flame 2018;197:423–38.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.08.006.

[497] Chan WT, Pritchard HO, Hamilton IP. Dissociative ring-closure in aliphatic

hydroperoxyl radicals. Phys Chem Chem Phys 1999;1:3715–9. https://doi.org/
10.1039/A901134J.

[472] Battin-Leclerc F, Herbinet O, Glaude PA, Fournet R, Zhou Z, Deng L, et al. New

[498] Cord M, Sirjean B, Fournet R, Tomlin A, Ruiz-Lopez M, Battin-Leclerc F.

experimental evidences about the formation and consumption of
ketohydroperoxides. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:325–31. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2010.05.001.

[473] Taatjes CA. Uncovering the fundamental chemistry of alkyl + O2 reactions via

measurements of product formation. J Phys Chem A 2006;110:4299–312. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp056997f.

[474] Pilling MJ. Interactions between theory and experiment in the investigation of

elementary reactions of importance in combustion. Chem Soc Rev 2008;37:
676–85. https://doi.org/10.1039/B715767C.

[475] Klippenstein SJ, Pande VS, Truhlar DG. Chemical kinetics and mechanisms of

complex systems: a perspective on recent theoretical advances. J Am Chem Soc
2014;136:528–46. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja408723a.

[476] Klippenstein SJ. From theoretical reaction dynamics to chemical modeling of
combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:77–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.07.100.

[477] Miller JA, Sivaramakrishnan R, Tao Y, Goldsmith CF, Burke MP, Jasper AW, et al.

Combustion chemistry in the twenty-first century: developing theory-informed
chemical kinetics models. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2021;83:100886. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100886.

[478] Quelch GE, Gallo MM, Shen M, Xie Y, Schaefer HF, Moncrieff D. Aspects of the

reaction mechanism of ethane combustion. 2. Nature of the intramolecular
hydrogen transfer. J Am Chem Soc 1994;116:4953–62. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja00090a046.

[479] Ignatyev IS, Xie Y, Allen WD, Schaefer HF. Mechanism of the C2H5+O2 reaction.

J Chem Phys 1997;107:141–55. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.474610.

[480] Rienstra-Kiracofe JC, Allen WD, Schaefer HF. The C2H5 + O2 reaction

mechanism:  high-level ab initio characterizations. J Phys Chem A 2000;104:
9823–40. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp001041k.

[481] Wilke JJ, Allen WD, Schaefer HF. Establishment of the C2H5+O2 reaction

mechanism: a combustion archetype. J Chem Phys 2008;128:074308. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.2827133.

[482] Miller JA, Klippenstein SJ. The reaction between ethyl and molecular oxygen II:

further analysis. Int J Chem Kinet 2001;33:654–68. https://doi.org/10.1002/
kin.1063.

[483] Clifford EP, Farrell JT, DeSain JD, Taatjes CA. Infrared frequency-modulation
probing of product formation in Alkyl + O2 reactions:  I. The reaction of C2H5
with O2 between 295 and 698 K. J Phys Chem A 2000;104:11549–60. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp0024874.

[484] Carstensen HH, Naik CV, Dean AM. Detailed modeling of the reaction of C2H5
+ O2. J Phys Chem A 2005;109:2264–81. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0451142.
[485] DeSain JD, Klippenstein SJ, Miller JA, Taatjes CA. Measurements, theory, and
modeling of OH formation in ethyl + O2 and propyl + O2 reactions. (This is a

Improvement of the modeling of the low-temperature oxidation of n-butane:
study of the primary reactions. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:6142–58. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp211434f.

[499] Bugler J, Somers KP, Silke EJ, Curran HJ. Revisiting the kinetics and

thermodynamics of the low-temperature oxidation pathways of alkanes: a case
study of the three pentane isomers. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:7510–27. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.5b00837.

[500] DeSain JD, Taatjes CA, Miller JA, Klippenstein SJ, Hahn DK. Infrared frequency-
modulation probing of product formation in alkyl + O2 reactions. Part IV.
Reactions of propyl and butyl radicals with O2. Farad Discuss 2002;119:101–20.
https://doi.org/10.1039/B102237G.

[501] Sheng CY, Bozzelli JW, Dean AM, Chang AY. Detailed kinetics and

thermochemistry of C2H5 + O2: reaction kinetics of the chemically-activated and
stabilized CH3CH2OO• adduct. J Phys Chem A 2002;106:7276–93. 10.1021/
jp014540+.

[502] Oakley LH, Casadio F, Shull KR, Broadbelt LJ. Theoretical study of epoxidation
reactions relevant to hydrocarbon oxidation. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:
7454–61. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.7b01443.

[503] Hashemi H, Jacobsen JG, Rasmussen CT, Christensen JM, Glarborg P, Gersen S,
et al. High-pressure oxidation of ethane. Combust Flame 2017;182:150–66.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.03.028.

[504] Xu Y, Xi S, Wang F, Li X. Theoretical study on reactions of alkylperoxy radicals.
J Phys Chem A 2019;123:3949–58. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b01496.

[505] Duan J, Ji J, Ye L, Zhai Y, Zhang L. A theoretical kinetics study on low-

temperature oxidation of n-C4H9 radicals. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:681–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.120.

[506] Wood GPF, Henry DJ, Radom L. Performance of the RB3-LYP, RMP2, and UCCSD

(T) procedures in calculating radical stabilization energies for •NHX radicals.
J Phys Chem A 2003;107:7985–90. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp035945s.
[507] Wilk RD, Green RM, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK, Addagarla S, Miller DL, et al. An

experimental and kinetic modeling study of the combustion of n-butane and
isobutane in an internal combustion engine. Warrendale, PA: SAE International;
1990. https://doi.org/10.4271/900028.

[508] Curran HJ, Gaffuri P, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK. A comprehensive modeling study of
iso-octane oxidation. Combust Flame 2002;129:253–80. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0010-2180(01)00373-X.

[509] Fang R, Kukkadapu G, Wang M, Wagnon SW, Zhang K, Mehl M, et al. Fuel

molecular structure effect on autoignition of highly branched iso-alkanes at low-
to-intermediate temperatures: Iso-octane versus iso-dodecane. Combust Flame
2020;214:152–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.12.037.
[510] Cai L, Pitsch H, Mohamed SY, Raman V, Bugler J, Curran H, et al. Optimized
reaction mechanism rate rules for ignition of normal alkanes. Combust Flame
2016;173:468–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.04.022.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019106

L.-S. Tran et al.

[511] Doner AC, Davis MM, Koritzke AL, Christianson MG, Turney JM, Schaefer HF,
et al. Isomer-dependent reaction mechanisms of cyclic ether intermediates: cis-
2,3-dimethyloxirane and trans-2,3-dimethyloxirane. Int J Chem Kinet 2021;53:
127–45. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21429.

[512] Fridlyand A, Goldsborough SS, Al Rashidi M, Sarathy SM, Mehl M, Pitz WJ. Low
temperature autoignition of 5-membered ring naphthenes: effects of substitution.
Combust Flame 2019;200:387–404. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2018.10.028.

[513] Al Rashidi MJ, M ́armol JC, Banyon C, Sajid MB, Mehl M, Pitz WJ, et al.

Cyclopentane combustion. Part II. Ignition delay measurements and mechanism
validation. Combust Flame 2017;183:372–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2017.05.017.

[514] Lokachari N, Wagnon SW, Kukkadapu G, Pitz WJ, Curran HJ. An experimental

and kinetic modeling study of cyclopentane and dimethyl ether blends. Combust
Flame 2021;225:255–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.10.017.

[515] Silke EJ, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK, Ribaucour M. Detailed chemical kinetic

modeling of cyclohexane oxidation. J Phys Chem A 2007;111:3761–75. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp067592d.

[516] Buda F, Heyberger B, Fournet R, Glaude PA, Warth V, Battin-Leclerc F. Modeling
of the gas-phase oxidation of cyclohexane. Energy Fuels 2006;20:1450–9. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ef060090e.

[517] Voisin D, Marchal A, Reuillon M, Boettner JC, Cathonnet M. Experimental and
kinetic modeling study of cyclohexane oxidation in a jsr at high pressure.
Combust Sci Technol 1998;138:137–58. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00102209808952066.

[518] Dagaut P. On the kinetics of hydrocarbons oxidation from natural gas to kerosene
and diesel fuel. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2002;4:2079–94. https://doi.org/
10.1039/B110787A.

[519] Ristori A, Dagaut P, El Bakali A, Cathonnet M. The oxidation of n-

propylcyclohexane: experimental results and kinetic modeling. Combust Sci
Technol 2001;165:197–228. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200108935832.
[520] Sheps L, Dewyer AL, Demireva M, Z ́ador J. Quantitative detection of products and
radical intermediates in low-temperature oxidation of cyclopentane. J Phys Chem
A 2021;125:4467–79. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.1c02001.

[521] Lemaire O, Ribaucour M, Carlier M, Minetti R. The production of benzene in the

low-temperature oxidation of cyclohexane, cyclohexene, and cyclohexa-1,3-
diene. Combust Flame 2001;127:1971–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180
(01)00301-7.

[522] Zou J, Jin H, Liu D, Zhang X, Su H, Yang J, et al. A comprehensive study on low-

temperature oxidation chemistry of cyclohexane. II. Experimental and kinetic
modeling investigation. Combust Flame 2022;235:111550. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.111550.

[523] Roubaud A, Lemaire O, Minetti R, Sochet LR. High pressure auto-ignition and

oxidation mechanisms of o-xylene, o-ethyltoluene, and n-butylbenzene between
600 and 900 K. Combust Flame 2000;123:561–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0010-2180(00)00174-7.

[524] Ribaucour M, Roubaud A, Minetti R, Sochet LR. The low-temperature

autoignition of alkylaromatics: experimental study and modeling of the oxidation
of n-butylbenzene. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:1701–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(00)80570-6.

[525] Husson B, Bounaceur R, Tanaka K, Ferrari M, Herbinet O, Glaude PA, et al.

Experimental and modeling study of the oxidation of n-butylbenzene. Combust
Flame 2012;159:1399–416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2011.12.006.

[526] Granata S, Faravelli T, Ranzi E. A wide range kinetic modeling study of the
pyrolysis and combustion of naphthenes. Combust Flame 2003;132:533–44.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00465-0.

[527] Gulati SK, Walker RW. Addition of cyclohexane to slowly reacting H2-O2

C. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1989;85(2):1799–812. https://doi.

mixtures at 480
org/10.1039/F29898501799.

◦

[528] Zou J, Li W, Ye L, Zhang X, Li Y, Yang J, et al. Exploring the low-temperature

oxidation chemistry of cyclohexane in a jet-stirred reactor: an experimental and
kinetic modeling study. Chin J Chem Phys 2018;31:537–46. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1674-0068/31/CJCP1806135.

[529] Zou J, Li Y, Ye L, Jin H. A comprehensive study on low-temperature oxidation

chemistry of cyclohexane. I. Conformational analysis and theoretical study of first
and second oxygen addition. Combust Flame 2022;235:111658. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.111658.

[530] Sirjean B, Glaude PA, Ruiz-Lop`ez MF, Fournet R. Theoretical kinetic study of
thermal unimolecular decomposition of cyclic alkyl radicals. J Phys Chem A
2008;112:11598–610. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp805640s.

[531] Cavallotti C, Rota R, Faravelli T, Ranzi E. Ab initio evaluation of primary cyclo-
hexane oxidation reaction rates. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31:201–9. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.195.

[532] Pitz WJ, Mueller CJ. Recent progress in the development of diesel surrogate fuels.

Prog Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:330–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2010.06.004.

[533] Pitz WJ, Naik CV, Mhaoldúin TN, Westbrook CK, Curran HJ, Orme JP, et al.
Modeling and experimental investigation of methylcyclohexane ignition in a
rapid compression machine. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31:267–75. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.041.

[534] Mittal G, Sung CJ. Autoignition of methylcyclohexane at elevated pressures.

Combust Flame 2009;156:1852–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2009.05.009.

[535] Weber BW, Pitz WJ, Mehl M, Silke EJ, Davis AC, Sung CJ. Experiments and

modeling of the autoignition of methylcyclohexane at high pressure. Combust

Flame 2014;161:1972–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2014.01.018.

[536] Yang Y, Boehman AL, Simmie JM. Effects of molecular structure on oxidation

reactivity of cyclic hydrocarbons: experimental observations and conformational
analysis. Combust Flame 2010;157:2369–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2010.04.015.

[537] Zou J, Zhang X, Li Y, Ye L, Xing L, Li W, et al. Experimental and kinetic modeling

investigation on ethylcyclohexane low-temperature oxidation in a jet-stirred
reactor. Combust Flame 2020;214:211–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2019.12.038.

[538] Wang Z, Zhao L, Wang Y, Bian H, Zhang L, Zhang F, et al. Kinetics of

ethylcyclohexane pyrolysis and oxidation: an experimental and detailed kinetic
modeling study. Combust Flame 2015;162:2873–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2015.03.017.

[539] Battin-Leclerc F, Warth V, Bounaceur R, Husson B, Herbinet O, Glaude PA. The

oxidation of large alkylbenzenes: an experimental and modeling study. Proc
Combust Inst 2015;35:349–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.087.

[540] Husson B.  ́Etude en r ́eacteur auto-agit ́e par jets gazeux de l’oxydation

d’hydrocarbures napht ́eniques et aromatiques pr ́esents dans les gazoles. These de
doctorat. Universit ́e de Lorraine, 2013.

[541] Di ́evart P, Dagaut P. The oxidation of n-butylbenzene: experimental study in a
JSR at 10atm and detailed chemical kinetic modeling. Proc Combust Inst 2011;
33:209–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.05.013.

[542] Roubaud A, Minetti R, Sochet LR. Oxidation and combustion of low alkylbenzenes
at high pressure: comparative reactivity and auto-ignition. Combust Flame 2000;
121:535–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(99)00169-8.

[543] Ye L, Wang D, Bian H, Li B, Gao W, Bi M. Exploring the chemical kinetics on
oxygen addition reactions of o-xylyl radical at the low temperature. Combust
Flame 2021;227:95–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.01.002.
[544] Zhou CW, Farooq A, Yang L, Mebel AM. Combustion chemistry of alkenes and

alkadienes. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2022;90:100983. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pecs.2021.100983.

[545] Baldwin RR, Lodhi ZH, Stothard N, Walker RW. The oxidation chemistry of allyl
radicals and related “stable” radicals. Proc Combust Inst 1991;23:123–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80250-X.

[546] Stark MS, Waddington DJ. Oxidation of propene in the gas phase. Int J Chem

Kinet 1995;27:123–51. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.550270205.
[547] Stark MS. Epoxidation of alkenes by peroxyl radicals in the gas phase:

structure(cid:0) activity relationships. J Phys Chem A 1997;101:8296–301. 10.1021/
jp972054+.

[548] Meng X, Rodriguez A, Herbinet O, Wang T, Battin-Leclerc F. Revisiting 1-hexene

low-temperature oxidation. Combust Flame 2017;181:283–99. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.03.031.

[549] Burke SM, Metcalfe W, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F, Haas FM, Santner J, et al. An
experimental and modeling study of propene oxidation. Part 1: speciation
measurements in jet-stirred and flow reactors. Combust Flame 2014;161:
2765–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.05.010.
[550] Westbrook CK, Pitz WJ, Mehl M, Glaude PA, Herbinet O, Bax S, et al.
Experimental and kinetic modeling study of 2-methyl-2-butene: allylic
hydrocarbon kinetics. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:7462–80. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jpca.5b00687.

[551] Vermeire FH, De Bruycker R, Herbinet O, Carstensen HH, Battin-Leclerc F,

Marin GB, et al. Experimental and kinetic modeling study of the pyrolysis and
oxidation of 1,5-hexadiene: the reactivity of allylic radicals and their role in the
formation of aromatics. Fuel 2017;208:779–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2017.07.042.

[552] Ribaucour M, Lemaire O, Minetti R. Low-temperature oxidation and autoignition
of cyclohexene: a modeling study. Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:1303–10. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80160-2.

[553] Z ́ador J, Jasper AW, Miller JA. The reaction between propene and hydroxyl. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2009;11:11040–53. https://doi.org/10.1039/B915707G.
[554] Lizardo-Huerta JC, Sirjean B, Bounaceur R, Fournet R. Intramolecular effects on
the kinetics of unimolecular reactions of β-HOROO ̇ and HOQ ̇OOH radicals. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2016;18:12231–51. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6CP00111D.

[555] Goldsmith CF, Klippenstein SJ, Green WH. Theoretical rate coefficients for allyl+
HO2 and allyloxy decomposition. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:273–82. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.05.054.

[556] Cao C, Zhang X, Zhang Y, Zou J, Li Y, Yang J, et al. Probing the fuel-specific

intermediates in the low-temperature oxidation of 1-heptene and modeling
interpretation. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:385–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2020.06.025.

[557] Lee J, Bozzelli JW. Thermochemical and kinetic analysis of the allyl radical with
O2 reaction system. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:1015–22. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.092.

[558] D ̈ontgen M, Pekkanen TT, Joshi SP, Timonen RS, Eskola AJ. Oxidation kinetics

and thermodynamics of resonance-stabilized radicals: the pent-1-en-3-yl + O2
reaction. J Phys Chem A 2019;123:7897–910. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpca.9b03923.

[559] Baldwin RR, Stout DR, Walker RW. Arrhenius parameters for the addition of HO2
C. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1991;87:

radicals to ethene between 400 and 500
2147–50. https://doi.org/10.1039/FT9918702147.

◦

[560] Guo J, Xu J, Li Z, Tan N, Li X. Temperature and pressure dependent rate

coefficients for the reaction of C2H4 + HO2 on the C2H4O2H potential energy
surface. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:3161–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp511991n.
[561] Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K. Combustion in the future: the importance of chemistry. Proc
Combust Inst 2021;38:1–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.375.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019107

L.-S. Tran et al.

[562] Herbinet O, Pitz WJ, Westbrook CK. Detailed chemical kinetic oxidation

[586] Serinyel Z, Lailliau M, Dayma G, Dagaut P. A high pressure oxidation study of di-

mechanism for a biodiesel surrogate. Combust Flame 2008;154:507–28. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.03.003.

n-propyl ether. Fuel 2020;263:116554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2019.116554.

[563] Rogers CO, Kaczmarek D, Kasper T, Labbe NJ. Probing the low-temperature
chemistry of methyl hexanoate: insights from oxygenate intermediates. Proc
Combust Inst 2021;38:621–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.056.
[564] Togb ́e C, May-Carle JB, Dayma G, Dagaut P. Chemical kinetic study of the

oxidation of a biodiesel(cid:0) bioethanol surrogate fuel: methyl octanoate(cid:0) ethanol
mixtures. J Phys Chem A 2010;114:3896–908. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp906882h.

[565] Dayma G, Togb ́e C, Dagaut P. Detailed kinetic mechanism for the oxidation of

vegetable oil methyl esters: new evidence from methyl heptanoate. Energy Fuels
2009;23:4254–68. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef900184y.

[566] Rousso AC, Jasper AW, Ju Y, Hansen N. Extreme low-temperature combustion

chemistry: ozone-initiated oxidation of methyl hexanoate. J Phys Chem A 2020;
124:9897–914. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.0c07584.

[567] Zhai Y, Feng B, Zhang Y, Mei B, Zou J, Yang J, et al. Experimental and kinetic
modeling study of methyl heptanoate low-temperature oxidation in a jet-stirred
reactor. Fuel 2021;283:118885. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118885.

[568] Meng X, Herbinet O, Coniglio L, Wang T, Battin-Leclerc F. Gas-phase oxidation of
methyl-10-undecenoate in a jet-stirred reactor. Int J Chem Kinet 2017;49:711–28.
https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21109.

[569] Pelucchi M, Namysl S, Ranzi E, Frassoldati A, Herbinet O, Battin-Leclerc F, et al.
An experimental and kinetic modelling study of n-C4-C6 aldehydes oxidation in a
jet-stirred reactor. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:389–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.proci.2018.07.087.

[570] Serinyel Z, Lailliau M, Thion S, Dayma G, Dagaut P. An experimental chemical
kinetic study of the oxidation of diethyl ether in a jet-stirred reactor and
comprehensive modeling. Combust Flame 2018;193:453–62. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.04.002.

[571] Belhadj N, Benoit R, Dagaut P, Lailliau M, Serinyel Z, Dayma G. Oxidation of di-n-

propyl ether: characterization of low-temperature products. Proc Combust Inst
2021;38:337–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.350.
[572] Pelucchi M, Namysl S, Ranzi E, Rodriguez A, Rizzo C, Somers KP, et al.

Combustion of n-C3–C6 linear alcohols: an experimental and kinetic modeling
study. Part II: speciation measurements in a jet-stirred reactor, ignition delay time
measurements in a rapid compression machine, model validation, and kinetic
analysis. Energy Fuels 2020;34:14708–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.0c02252.

[573] De Bruycker R, Herbinet O, Carstensen HH, Battin-Leclerc F, Van Geem KM.

Understanding the reactivity of unsaturated alcohols: Experimental and kinetic
modeling study of the pyrolysis and oxidation of 3-methyl-2-butenol and 3-
methyl-3-butenol. Combust Flame 2016;171:237–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2016.06.009.

[574] Pelucchi M, Ranzi E, Frassoldati A, Faravelli T. Alkyl radicals rule the low

temperature oxidation of long chain aldehydes. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:
393–401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.05.051.

[575] Namysl S. Experimental study of the formation of pollutants during the

combustion of bio-oil surrogate molecules. These de doctorat. Universit ́e de
Lorraine, 2019.

[576] Ranzi E, Frassoldati A, Stagni A, Pelucchi M, Cuoci A, Faravelli T. Reduced kinetic
schemes of complex reaction systems: fossil and biomass-derived transportation
fuels. Int J Chem Kinet 2014;46:512–42.

[577] Togb ́e C, Dagaut P, Mz ́e-Ahmed A, Di ́evart P, Halter F, Foucher F. Experimental
and detailed kinetic modeling study of 1-hexanol oxidation in a pressurized jet-
stirred reactor and a combustion bomb. Energy Fuels 2010;24:5859–75. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ef101255w.

[578] Welz O, Z ́ador J, Savee JD, Sheps L, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA. Low-temperature

[587] Fan X, Sun W, Gao Y, Hansen N, Chen B, Pitsch H, et al. Chemical insights into the
multi-regime low-temperature oxidation of di-n-propyl ether: jet-stirred reactor
experiments and kinetic modeling. Combust Flame 2021;233:111592. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.111592.

[588] Cai L, Sudholt A, Lee DJ, Egolfopoulos FN, Pitsch H, Westbrook CK, et al.
Chemical kinetic study of a novel lignocellulosic biofuel: Di-n-butyl ether
oxidation in a laminar flow reactor and flames. Combust Flame 2014;161:
798–809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.10.003.

[589] Marrod ́an L, Royo E, Millera

 ́
A, Bilbao R, Alzueta MU. High pressure oxidation of

dimethoxymethane. Energy Fuels 2015;29:3507–17. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.energyfuels.5b00459.

[590] Belhadj N, Benoit R, Dagaut P, Lailliau M. Experimental characterization of

tetrahydrofuran low-temperature oxidation products including
ketohydroperoxides and highly oxygenated molecules. Energy Fuels 2021;35:
7242–52. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c03291.

[591] Bogan DJ, Hand CW. Absolute rate constant, kinetic isotope effect and mechanism
of the reaction of ethylene oxide with oxygen(3P) atoms. J Phys Chem 1978;82:
2067–73. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100508a006.

[592] Ravishankara AR, Davis DD. Kinetic rate constants for the reaction of hydroxyl

with methanol, ethanol, and tetrahydrofuran at 298 K. J Phys Chem 1978;82:
2852–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100515a022.

[593] Duke MG, Holbrook KA. Reactions of methyl radicals with oxetan, 2-methyloxe-

tan and 2,4-dimethyloxetan. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1980;76(1):1232–9.
https://doi.org/10.1039/F19807601232.

[594] Lifshitz A, Ben-Hamou H. Thermal reactions of cyclic ethers at high temperatures.

1. Pyrolysis of ethylene oxide behind reflected shocks. J Phys Chem 1983;87:
1782–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100233a026.

[595] Schliephake V, Mix KH, Wagner HG. Investigations of the kinetics of the reactions
of tetrahydrofurane, tetrahydropyrane, cyclopentanone and cyclohexanone with
atomic oxygen. Z Physik Chem 1986;150:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1524/
zpch.1986.150.1.001.

[596] Philippe D, Renzhang L, Wallington TJ, Kurylo MJ. Flash photolysis resonance
fluorescence investigation of the gas-phase reactions of hydroxyl radicals with
cyclic ethers. J Phys Chem 1990;94:1881–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/
j100368a030.

[597] Atkinson R. A structure-activity relationship for the estimation of rate constants
for the gas-phase reactions of OH radicals with organic compounds. Int J Chem
Kinet 1987;19:799–828. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.550190903.

[598] Wallington TJ, Liu R, Dagaut P, Kurylo MJ. The gas phase reactions of hydroxyl
radicals with a series of aliphatic ethers over the temperature range 240–440 K.
Int J Chem Kinet 1988;20:41–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.550200106.
[599] Wallington TJ, Dagaut P, Kurylo MJ. Correlation between gas-phase and solution-

phase reactivities of hydroxyl radicals towards saturated organic compounds.
J Phys Chem 1988;92:5024–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100328a039.

[600] Liu R, Dagaut P, Huie RE, Kurylo MJ. A flash photolysis resonance fluorescence
investigation of the reactions of Oxygen O(3P) atoms with aliphatic ethers and
diethers in the gas phase. Int J Chem Kinet 1990;22:711–7. https://doi.org/
10.1002/kin.550220707.

[601] Winer AM, Lloyd AC, Darnall KR, Atkinson R, Pitts JN. Rate constants for the

reaction of OH radicals with n-propyl acetate, sec-butyl acetate, tetrahydrofuran
and peroxyacetyl nitrate. Chem Phys Lett 1977;51:221–6. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0009-2614(77)80388-6.

[602] Moriarty J, Sidebottom H, Wenger J, Mellouki A, Le Bras G. Kinetic studies on the

reactions of hydroxyl radicals with cyclic ethers and aliphatic diethers. J Phys
Chem A 2003;107:1499–505. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp021267i.

combustion chemistry of n-butanol: principal oxidation pathways of hydroxybutyl
radicals. J Phys Chem A 2013;117:11983–2001. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp403792t.

[603] Middala S, Campbell S, Olea C, Scruggs A, Hasson AS. Kinetics and mechanism of
the reaction of propylene oxide with chlorine atoms and hydroxy radicals. Int J
Chem Kinet 2011;43:507–21. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.20580.

[579] Hartness SW, Rotavera B. Dependence of Biofuel Ignition Chemistry on OH-

[604] Barnes I, Kirschbaum S, Simmie JM. Combined experimental and theoretical

Initiated Branching Fractions. Front Mech Eng 2021;7:76. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmech.2021.718598.

[580] Cai L, Uygun Y, Togb ́e C, Pitsch H, Olivier H, Dagaut P, et al. An experimental and

modeling study of n-octanol combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:419–27.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.088.

[581] Serinyel Z, Togb ́e C, Dayma G, Dagaut P. An experimental and modeling study of
2-methyl-1-butanol oxidation in a jet-stirred reactor. Combust Flame 2014;161:
3003–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2014.06.004.
[582] Welz O, Savee JD, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA. Chlorine atom-initiated low-

temperature oxidation of prenol and isoprenol: the effect of CC double bonds on
the peroxy radical chemistry in alcohol oxidation. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:
401–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.004.

[583] Cai L, vom Lehn F, Pitsch H. Higher alcohol and ether biofuels for compression-

ignition engine application: a review with emphasis on combustion kinetics.
Energy Fuels 2021;35:1890–917. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.0c03590.

[584] Thion S, Togb ́e C, Serinyel Z, Dayma G, Dagaut P. A chemical kinetic study of the
oxidation of dibutyl-ether in a jet-stirred reactor. Combust Flame 2017;185:4–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.06.019.

[585] Fan X, Sun W, Liu Z, Gao Y, Yang J, Yang B, et al. Exploring the oxidation
chemistry of diisopropyl ether: Jet-stirred reactor experiments and kinetic
modeling. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:321–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2020.06.242.

[605] Ill ́es

study of the reactivity of γ-butyro- and related lactones, with the OH radical at
room temperature. J Phys Chem A 2014;118:5013–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp502489k.
 ́
A, Farkas M, Zügner GL, Novod ́arszki G, Mih ́alyi M, D ́ob ́e S. Direct and
relative rate coefficients for the gas-phase reaction of OH radicals with 2-meth-
yltetrahydrofuran at room temperature. Reac Kinet Mech Cat 2016;119:5–18.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11144-016-1037-2.

[607] Ill ́es

[606] Giri BR, Khaled F, Sz ̋ori M, Viskolcz B, Farooq A. An experimental and theoretical
kinetic study of the reaction of OH radicals with tetrahydrofuran. Proc Combust
Inst 2017;36:143–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.06.016.

 ́
A, R ́ozsa ZB, Thangaraj R, D ́ecsin ́e Gombos E, D ́ob ́e S, Giri BR, et al. An
experimental and theoretical kinetic study of the reactions of hydroxyl radicals
with tetrahydrofuran and two deuterated tetrahydrofurans. Chem Phys Lett 2021;
776:138698. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2021.138698.

[608] Chakravarty HK, Fernandes RX. Reaction kinetics of hydrogen abstraction
reactions by hydroperoxyl radical from 2-methyltetrahydrofuran and 2,5-
dimethyltetrahydrofuran. J Phys Chem A 2013;117:5028–41. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp402801c.

[609] Saheb V, Bahadori A. Theoretical studies on the kinetics of the hydrogen-

abstraction reactions from 1,3,5-trioxane and 1,4-dioxane by OH radicals. Prog
React Kinet Mech 2020;45:1468678319899252. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1468678319899252.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019108

L.-S. Tran et al.

[610] Dagaut P, Voisin D, Cathonnet M, McGuinness M, Simmie J. The oxidation of

ethylene oxide in a jet-stirred reactor and its ignition in shock waves. Combust
Flame 1996;106:62–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(95)00229-4.

[611] Lopez JG, Rasmussen CL, Alzueta MU, Gao Y, Marshall P, Glarborg P.

Experimental and kinetic modeling study of C2H4 oxidation at high pressure.
Proc Combust Inst 2009;32:367–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2008.06.188.

[612] Lockwood KS, Labbe NJ. Insights on keto-hydroperoxide formation from O2

addition to the beta-tetrahydrofuran radical. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:533–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.357.

[613] Lifshitz A, Bidani M, Bidani S. Thermal reactions of cyclic ethers at high

temperatures. 2. Pyrolysis of tetrahydrofuran behind reflected shocks. J Phys
Chem 1986;90:3422–9.

[614] Lifshitz A, Tamburu C. Isomerization and decomposition of propylene oxide.

Studies with a single-pulse shock tube. J Phys Chem 1994;98:1161–70. https://
doi.org/10.1021/j100055a020.

[615] Holbrook KA, Scott RA. Gas-phase thermal unimolecular decomposition of

oxetan. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1975;71(1):1849–56. https://doi.org/
10.1039/F19757101849.

[616] Baldwin RR, Keen A, Walker RW. Studies of the decomposition of oxirane and of
its addition to slowly reacting mixtures of hydrogen and oxygen at 480
J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1984;80(1):435–56. https://doi.org/10.1039/
F19848000435.

C.

◦

[617] Joshi A, You X, Barckholtz TA, Wang H. Thermal decomposition of ethylene

oxide: potential energy surface, master equation analysis, and detailed kinetic
modeling. J Phys Chem A 2005;109:8016–27. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp0516442.

Aided Chemical Engineering. Elsevier; 2019. p. 363–443. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-444-64087-1.00007-3. vol. 45

[636] Sendt K, Bacskay GB, Mackie JC. Pyrolysis of furan: ab initio quantum chemical
and kinetic modeling studies. J Phys Chem A 2000;104:1861–75. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp993537b.

[637] Vasiliou A, Nimlos MR, Daily JW, Ellison GB. Thermal decomposition of furan

generates propargyl radicals. J Phys Chem A 2009;113:8540–7. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp903401h.

[638] Cheng Z, Tan Y, Wei L, Xing L, Yang J, Zhang L, et al. Experimental and kinetic
modeling studies of furan pyrolysis: fuel decomposition and aromatic ring
formation. Fuel 2017;206:239–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.05.090.

[639] Simmie JM, Metcalfe WK. Ab initio study of the decomposition of 2,5-

dimethylfuran. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:8877–88. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp2039477.

[640] Vermeire FH, Yang J, Cao C, Liu Z, Marin GB, Van Geem KM. Thermal

decomposition of furans with oxygenated substituents: a combined experimental
and quantum chemical study. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:699–707. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.124.

[641] Djokic M, Carstensen HH, Van Geem KM, Marin GB. The thermal decomposition
of 2,5-dimethylfuran. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:251–8. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2012.05.066.

[642] Sirjean B, Fournet R. Theoretical study of the thermal decomposition of the 5-

methyl-2-furanylmethyl radical. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:6675–84. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp303680h.

[643] Burcat A. Kinetics of the ignition of fuels in artificial air mixtures. I. The oxidation
of ethylene oxide. Combust Sci Technol 1980;21:169–74. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00102208008946930.

[618] Verdicchio M, Sirjean B, Tran LS, Glaude PA, Battin-Leclerc F. Unimolecular

[644] Kang JG, Ryu JC, Choi ES, Kang SK, Yeo HG. Determination of ignition delay

decomposition of tetrahydrofuran: carbene vs. diradical pathways. Proc Combust
Inst 2015;35:533–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.08.015.
[619] Shiroudi A, Tahan A, Zahedi E. The unimolecular thermal decomposition of

oxetane and its methyl derivatives: an Ab initio and RRKM calculations. Russ J
Phys Chem 2012;86:1245–9. https://doi.org/10.1134/S0036024412060246.
[620] Dubnikova F, Lifshitz A. Isomerization of propylene oxide. quantum chemical
calculations and kinetic modeling. J Phys Chem A 2000;104:4489–96. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp994485t.

[621] Lizardo-Huerta JC, Sirjean B, Glaude PA, Fournet R. Pericyclic reactions in ether
biofuels. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:569–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.07.035.

[622] Wang H, Bozzelli JW. Thermochemistry and kinetic analysis of the unimolecular
oxiranyl radical dissociation reaction: a theoretical study. ChemPhysChem 2016;
17:1983–92. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.201600152.

[623] Dagaut P, Cathonnet M, McGuinness M, Simmie JM. The ignition of oxetane in
shock waves and oxidation in a jet-stirred reactor: an experimental and kinetic
modeling study. Combust Flame 1997;110:409–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0010-2180(97)00075-8.

[624] Antonov IO, Z ́ador J, Rotavera B, Papajak E, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA, et al.

Pressure-dependent competition among reaction pathways from first- and second-
O2 additions in the low-temperature oxidation of tetrahydrofuran. J Phys Chem A
2016;120:6582–95. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.6b05411.

[625] Hansen N, Moshammer K, Jasper AW. Isomer-selective detection of keto-

hydroperoxides in the low-temperature oxidation of tetrahydrofuran. J Phys
Chem A 2019;123:8274–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b07017.
[626] Labbe NJ, Seshadri V, Kasper T, Hansen N, Oßwald P, Westmoreland PR. Flame
chemistry of tetrahydropyran as a model heteroatomic biofuel. Proc Combust Inst
2013;34:259–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.07.027.

[627] Dagaut P, McGuinness M, Simmie JM, Cathonnet M. The ignition and oxidation of
tetrahydropyran: experiments and kinetic modeling. Combust Sci Technol 1997;
129:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209708935717.
[628] Telfah H, Reza MA, Alam J, Paul AC, Liu J. Direct observation of

tetrahydrofuranyl and tetrahydropyranyl peroxy radicals via cavity ring-down
spectroscopy. J Phys Chem Lett 2018;9:4475–80. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpclett.8b01721.

[629] Chen MW, Rotavera B, Chao W, Z ́ador J, Taatjes CA. Direct measurement of  ̇OH

and HO2 ̇ formation in  ̇R + O2 reactions of cyclohexane and tetrahydropyran.
Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;20:10815–25. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C7CP08164B.

[630] Dubnikova F, Lifshitz A. Isomerization of 2,3-dihydrofuran and 5-methyl-2,3-

times in mixtures of ethylene oxide, oxygen, and argon behind a reflected shock.
Combust Flame 1996;106:81–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(95)00244-
8.

[645] Yoon H, Yeo H, Yun SS, Kim C, Kang JG. Ignition delay times in ethylene oxide-
oxygen-argon mixtures behind a reflected shock. Combust Flame 1993;92:481–4.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(93)90160-5.

[646] Lifshitz A, Suslensky A. Shock-initiated ignition in ethylene oxide, propylene

oxide, 1,2-epoxybutane, and 2,3-epoxybutane. Proc Combust Inst 1994;25:
1571–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(06)80802-7.

[647] Würmel J, McGuinness M, Simmie M. High-temperature oxidation of ethylene
oxide in shock waves. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1996;92:715–21. https://doi.
org/10.1039/FT9969200715.

[648] Burluka AA, Harker M, Osman H, Sheppard CGW, Konnov AA. Laminar burning
velocities of three C3H6O isomers at atmospheric pressure. Fuel 2010;89:
2864–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2010.02.004.

[649] Ramalingam A, Minwegen H, Fenard Y, Heufer KA. Insights into the oxidation of
propylene oxide through the analysis of experiments and kinetic modeling. Proc
Combust Inst 2021;38:459–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.290.

[650] Knyazkov DA, Dmitriev AM, Korobeinichev OP, Osipova KN, Pio G, Shmakov AG,

et al. Structure of premixed flames of propylene oxide: molecular beam mass
spectrometric study and numerical simulation. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:
2467–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.336.

[651] Lifshitz A, Tamburu C. Isomerization and decomposition of 2,3-dimethyloxirane.
studies with a single-pulse shock tube. J Phys Chem 1995;99:10251–60. https://
doi.org/10.1021/j100025a028.

[652] Wang X, Chen R, He B, Li D, Qin M, Fan X. Laminar flame characteristics of THF

family fuels at elevated temperatures and pressures. Fuel 2020;273:117721.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117721.

[653] Dagaut P, McGuinness M, Simmie JM, Cathonnet M. The ignition and oxidation of
tetrahydrofuran: experiments and kinetic modeling. Combust Sci Technol 1998;
135:3–29. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102209808924147.

[654] Sudholt A, Lee C, Klankermayer J, Fernandes RX, Pitsch H. Ignition characteristics

of saturated and unsaturated furans. Combust Flame 2016;171:133–6. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.05.016.

[655] Wu Y, Xu N, Yang M, Liu Y, Tang C, Huang Z. Ignition delay time measurement
and kinetic modeling of furan, and comparative studies of 2,3-dihydrofuran and
tetrahydrofuran at low to intermediate temperatures by using a rapid
compression machine. Combust Flame 2020;213:226–36. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.12.010.

[656] Kasper T, Lucassen A, Jasper AW, Li W, Westmoreland PR, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K,

dihydrofuran: quantum chemical and kinetics calculations. J Phys Chem A 2002;
106:1026–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp012714h.

et al. Identification of tetrahydrofuran reaction pathways in premixed flames.
Z Physik Chem 2011;225:1237–70. https://doi.org/10.1524/zpch.2011.0163.

[631] Lifshitz A, Bidani M. Thermal reactions of cyclic ethers at high temperatures. 5.

[657] Molera MJ, Couto A, Garcia-Dominguez JA. Gas phase oxidation of

Pyrolysis of 2,3-dihydrofuran behind reflected shocks. J Phys Chem 1989;93:
1139–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100340a024.

[632] Lifshitz A, Bidani M, Bidani S. Thermal reactions of cyclic ethers at high

temperatures. 4. Pyrolysis of 2,5-dihydrofuran behind reflected shocks. J Phys
Chem 1986;90:6011–4.

[633] Fan X, Wang X, Wang J, Yang K. Comparative shock tube and kinetic study on

high-temperature ignition of 2,3-dihydrofuran and 2,5-dihydrofuran. Energy
Fuels 2016;30:8727–36. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b01332.
[634] Dubnikova F, Lifshitz A. Molecular hydrogen elimination from 2,5-dihydrofuran,
2,3-dihydrofuran, and 2-methyl-2,5-dihydrofuran: quantum chemical and
kinetics calculations. Int J Chem Kinet 2001;33:685–97. https://doi.org/
10.1002/kin.1065.

[635] Westbrook CK, Curran HJ. Chapter 7 - detailed kinetics of fossil and renewable

fuel combustion. eds.. In: Faravelli T, Manenti F, Ranzi E, editors. Computer

tetrahydrofuran. Int J Chem Kinet 1988;20:673–85. https://doi.org/10.1002/
kin.550200902.

[658] De Bruycker R, Tran LS, Carstensen HH, Glaude PA, Monge F, Alzueta MU, et al.
Experimental and modeling study of the pyrolysis and combustion of 2-methyl-
tetrahydrofuran. Combust Flame 2017;176:409–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2016.11.017.

[659] Wang X, Fan X, Yang K, Wang J, Jiao X, Guo Z. Laminar flame characteristics and

chemical kinetics of 2-methyltetrahydrofuran and the effect of blending with
isooctane. Combust Flame 2018;191:213–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2017.12.028.

[660] Li Y, Xu W, Jiang Y, Liew KM, Qiu R. Laminar burning velocities of 2-methylte-
trahydrofuran at elevated pressures. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2175–83.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.253.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019109

L.-S. Tran et al.

[661] Wang J, Wang X, Fan X, Yang K. Shock tube experimental and modeling study of
MTHF ignition characteristics at high temperatures. Warrendale, PA: SAE
International; 2015. https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-1807.

[688] Zalotai L, B ́erces T, M ́arta F. Collisional energy transfer in the thermal

decomposition of oxetane. React Kinet Catal Lett 1989;40:35–40. https://doi.org/
10.1007/BF02235135.

[662] Wang J, Wang X, Fan X, Yang K, Zhang Y. An ignition delay time and kinetic

[689] Guenther WB, Walters WD. The thermal decomposition of dioxolane. J Am Chem

study of 2-methyltetrahydrofuran at high temperatures. Fuel 2016;186:758–69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.08.104.

Soc 1951;73:2127–31. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01149a064.

[690] Roquitte BC. The photochemistry of 1,3-dioxolane. J Phys Chem 1966;70:2863–8.

[663] Tripathi R, Lee C, Fernandes RX, Olivier H, Curran HJ, Mani Sarathy S, et al.

Ignition characteristics of 2-methyltetrahydrofuran: an experimental and kinetic
study. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:587–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.07.103.

[664] Jouzdani S, Zheng X, Zhou A, Akih-Kumgeh B. Shock tube investigation of methyl
tert butyl ether and methyl tetrahydrofuran high-temperature kinetics. Int J Chem
Kinet 2019;51:848–60. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21314.

[665] Jouzdani S, Eldeeb MA, Zhang L, Akih-Kumgeh B. High-temperature study of 2-
methyl furan and 2-methyl tetrahydrofuran combustion. Int J Chem Kinet 2016;
48:491–503. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.21008.

[666] Fenard Y, Boumehdi MA, Vanhove G. Experimental and kinetic modeling study of

2-methyltetrahydrofuran oxidation under engine-relevant conditions. Combust
Flame 2017;178:168–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.01.008.

[667] Moshammer K, Vranckx S, Chakravarty HK, Parab P, Fernandes RX, Kohse-

H ̈oinghaus K. An experimental and kinetic modeling study of 2-methyltetrahy-
drofuran flames. Combust Flame 2013;160:2729–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2013.07.006.

https://doi.org/10.1021/j100881a023.

[691] Molera MJ, Domínguez JAG, Acu ̃na AU. Gas-phase oxidation of 1,3-dioxolan.
J Chem Soc B 1971:1916–23. https://doi.org/10.1039/J29710001916.

[692] Tian Z, Fattahi A, Lis L, Kass SR. Cycloalkane and cycloalkene C(cid:0) H bond

dissociation energies. J Am Chem Soc 2006;128:17087–92. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ja065348u.

[693] Wiberg KB, Rablen PR. Re-examination of some carbocations. structures,

energies, and charge distributions. J Org Chem 2020;85:11741–9. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.joc.0c01469.

[694] Stedjan MK, Augspurger JD. Ring strain energy in ether- and lactone-containing
spiro compounds. J Phys Org Chem 2015;28:298–303. https://doi.org/10.1002/
poc.3410.

[695] Bach RD, Dmitrenko O. Effect of geminal substitution on the strain energy of

dioxiranes. origin of the low ring strain of dimethyldioxirane. J Org Chem 2002;
67:3884–96. https://doi.org/10.1021/jo025743c.

[696] Dudev T, Lim C. Ring strain energies from ab initio calculations. J Am Chem Soc

1998;120:4450–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja973895x.

[668] Tran LS, Carstensen HH, Lamoureux N, Foo KK, Gosselin S, El Bakali A, et al.

[697] Sirjean B, Glaude PA, Ruiz-Lopez MF, Fournet R. Detailed kinetic study of the ring

Exploring the flame chemistry of C5 tetrahydrofuranic biofuels:
tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol and 2-methyltetrahydrofuran. Energy Fuels 2021;35:
18699–715. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c01949.

[669] Tripathi R, Ramalingam AK, Minwegen H, Alquaity ABS, Heufer KA, Pitsch H.
Unraveling the high reactivity of 3-methyltetrahydrofuran over 2-methyltetra-
hydrofuran through kinetic modeling and experiments. Proc Combust Inst 2019;
37:221–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.129.

[670] Fenard Y, Song H, Minwegen H, Parab P, Sampaio Mergulh ̃ao C, Vanhove G, et al.

2,5-Dimethyltetrahydrofuran combustion: ignition delay times at high and low
temperatures, speciation measurements and detailed kinetic modeling. Combust
Flame 2019;203:341–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.02.022.

[671] Wang QP, Tang XY, Yang JZ, Zhang Y, Cao CC, Zhai YT, et al. Low pressure

pyrolysis experiment and kinetic modeling study of 2,5-dimethyltetrahydrofuran.
K Cheng Je Wu Li Hsueh Pao/J Eng Thermophys 2019;40:2928–37.
[672] Cai L, Minwegen H, Beeckmann J, Burke U, Tripathi R, Ramalingam A, et al.
Experimental and numerical study of a novel biofuel: 2-Butyltetrahydrofuran.
Combust Flame 2017;178:257–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2016.12.021.

[673] De Bruycker R, Carstensen HH, Simmie JM, Van Geem KM, Marin GB.

Experimental and computational study of the initial decomposition of gamma-
valerolactone. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:515–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2014.04.001.

[674] Sudholt A, Tripathi R, Mayer D, Glaude PA, Battin-Leclerc F, Pitsch H. The

oxidation of the novel lignocellulosic biofuel γ-valerolactone in a low pressure
flame. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:577–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.05.025.

[675] Wildenberg A, Fenard Y, Carbonnier M, K ́eromn`es A, Lefort B, Serinyel Z, et al. An
experimental and kinetic modeling study on the oxidation of 1,3-dioxolane. Proc
Combust Inst 2021;38:543–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.362.

[676] Cutler AH, Antal MJ, Jones M. Kinetics and mechanism of the vapor phase
pyrolysis of 1,3-dioxolane in steam. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1987;12:223–42.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-2370(87)85003-9.

[677] Fern ́andez-S ́anchez E, García-Domínguez JA, De la Iglesia-Gay ́a B. Radical-

sensitized thermal decomposition of 1,3-dioxolane in the gas phase. J Anal Appl
Pyrolysis 1991;18:219–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-2370(91)87003-5.

[678] Battin F, Marquaire PM, Baronnet F, Cˆome GM. Products of the gas-phase

pyrolysis of 1,4-dioxane. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1989;16:345–54. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0165-2370(89)80017-8.

[679] Battin F, Scacchi G, Baronnet F. Gas-phase oxidation of 1,4-dioxane. Int J Chem

Kinet 1991;23:861–79. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.550231003.

[680] Yang X, Jasper AW, Giri BR, Kiefer JH, Tranter RS. A shock tube and theoretical
study on the pyrolysis of 1,4-dioxane. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2011;13:3686–700.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C0CP01541E.

opening of cycloalkanes by CBS-QB3 calculations. J Phys Chem A 2006;110:
12693–704. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0651081.

[698] Sirjean B, Buda F, Hakka H, Glaude PA, Fournet R, Warth V, et al. The

autoignition of cyclopentane and cyclohexane in a shock tube. Proc Combust Inst
2007;31:277–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.247.

[699] Barnard JA, Cocks AT, Lee RKY. Kinetics of the thermal unimolecular reactions of
cyclopropane and cyclobutane behind reflected shock waves. J Chem Soc Faraday
Trans 1974;70(1):1782–92. https://doi.org/10.1039/F19747001782.

[700] Slutsky VG, Kazakov OD, Severin ES, Bespalov EV, Tsyganov SA. Self-ignition of
small-ring hydrocarbons behind reflected shock waves. Combust Flame 1993;94:
108–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(93)90023-V.

[701] Borisov AA, Zamanskii VM, Konnov AA, Lisyanskii VV, Shachkov GL. Pyrolysis
and combustion of ethylene-oxide. Sov J Chem Phys 1990;6:2181–95.

[702] Wu S, Tay KL, Yu W, Lin Q, Li H, Zhao F, et al. Development of a highly compact

and robust chemical reaction mechanism for the oxidation of tetrahydrofurans
under engine relevant conditions. Fuel 2020;276. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.118034.

[703] Eldeeb M.A., Wadugurunnehalage M. Chemical kinetic model reduction and

analysis of tetrahydrofuran combustion using stochastic species elimination. vol.
2020- August, 2020. /10.1115/POWER2020-16583.

[704] Li W, Law ME, Westmoreland PR, Kasper T, Hansen N, Kohse-H ̈oinghaus K.
Multiple benzene-formation paths in a fuel-rich cyclohexane flame. Combust
Flame 2011;158:2077–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2011.03.014.

[705] Kr ̈oger LC, D ̈ontgen M, Firaha D, Kopp WA, Leonhard K. Ab initio kinetics

predictions for H-atom abstraction from diethoxymethane by hydrogen, methyl,
and ethyl radicals and the subsequent unimolecular reactions. Proc Combust Inst
2019;37:275–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.056.

[706] Jacobs S, D ̈ontgen M, Alquaity ABS, Kopp WA, Kr ̈oger LC, Burke U, et al. Detailed

kinetic modeling of dimethoxymethane. Part II: experimental and theoretical
study of the kinetics and reaction mechanism. Combust Flame 2019;205:522–33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.12.026.

[707] Mendes J, Zhou CW, Curran HJ. Rate constant calculations of H-atom abstraction
reactions from ethers by HO2 radicals. J Phys Chem A 2014;118:1300–8. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp412496g.

[708] Zalotai L, B ́erces T, M ́arta F. Kinetics and energy transfer in the thermal

decomposition of 2-methyloxetane and 3-methyloxetane. J Chem Soc Faraday
Trans 1990;86:21–5. https://doi.org/10.1039/FT9908600021.

[709] Zalotai L, B ́erces T, M ́arta F. Collisional energy transfer in the decomposition of 2-
methyloxetane and 3-methyloxetane, I. Gas/gas collisions. React Kinet Catal Lett
1990;42:79–86. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02137621.

[710] Gibbs GJ, Calcote HF. Effect of molecular structure on burning velocity. J Chem

Eng Data 1959;4:226–37. https://doi.org/10.1021/je60003a011.

[681] Lin Z, Han D, Li S, Li Y, Yuan T. Combustion intermediates in fuel-rich 1,4-

[711] Flowers MC, Parker RM. Kinetics of the thermal gas phase reactions of cis- and

dioxane flame studied by tunable synchrotron vacuum ultraviolet
photoionization. J Phys Chem A 2009;113:1800–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp8098895.

[682] Klute CH, Walters WD. The thermal decomposition of tetrahydrofuran. J Am

Chem Soc 1946;68:506–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01207a045.

[683] Mcdonald G, Lodge NM, Walters WD. The effect of added gases upon the thermal

decomposition of tetrahydrofuran. J Am Chem Soc 1951;73:1757–60.

[684] Burden FA, Burgoyne JH. The ignition and flame reactions of ethylene oxide. Proc
R Soc Lond A 1949;199:328–51. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1949.0141.

[685] Wesdemiotis C, Leyh B, Fura A, McLafferty FW. The isomerization of oxirane.

Stable .CH2OCH2., .CH2CH2O., and:CHOCH3, and their counterpart ions. J Am
Chem Soc 1990;112:8655–60. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00180a004.
[686] Burgoyne JH, Kapur PK. The oxidation of ethylene oxide in the vapour phase.
Trans Faraday Soc 1952;48:234–43. https://doi.org/10.1039/TF9524800234.

[687] Zalotai L, Hunyadi-zolt ́an Z, B ́erces T, M ́arta F. Kinetics of gas-phase

decomposition of oxetan and oxetan-2,2-d2. Int J Chem Kinet 1983;15:505–19.
https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.550150602.

trans-2,3-epoxybutane. J Chem Soc B 1971:1980–8. https://doi.org/10.1039/
J29710001980.

[712] Bailey WJ, Bird CN. Pyrolysis of esters. 27. Pyrolysis of lactones. J Org Chem

1977;42:3895–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/jo00444a021.

[713] Flowers MC. Kinetics of the thermal gas-phase decomposition of 1,2-

epoxypropane. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1977;73(1):1927–35. https://doi.org/
10.1039/F19777301927.

[714] Coppens FHV, De Ruyck J, Konnov AA. The effects of composition on burning

velocity and nitric oxide formation in laminar premixed flames of CH4 + H2 + O2
+ N2. Combust Flame 2007;149:409–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2007.02.004.

[715] Sarathy SM, Vranckx S, Yasunaga K, Mehl M, Oßwald P, Metcalfe WK, et al.

A comprehensive chemical kinetic combustion model for the four butanol
isomers. Combust Flame 2012;159:2028–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2011.12.017.

[716] Xu N, Gong J, Huang Z. Review on the production methods and fundamental

combustion characteristics of furan derivatives. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;
54:1189–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.118.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019110

L.-S. Tran et al.

[717] Tanoue K, Takayama T, Ueno S, Mieno T, Irikura K, Kiritani T, et al. Study on the
combustion characteristics of furan- and nitromethane-added hydrocarbon fuels.
Fuel 2021;287:119550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119550.

[718] Wei L, Tang C, Man X, Jiang X, Huang Z. High-temperature ignition delay times
and kinetic study of furan. Energy Fuels 2012;26:2075–81. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef300336y.

[719] Eldeeb MA, Akih-Kumgeh B. Reactivity trends in furan and alkyl furan
combustion. Energy Fuels 2014;28:6618–26. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef501181z.

[720] Xu N, Tang C, Meng X, Fan X, Tian Z, Huang Z. Experimental and kinetic study on

the ignition delay times of 2,5-dimethylfuran and the comparison to 2-methyl-
furan and furan. Energy Fuels 2015;29:5372–81. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.5b00906.

[721] Lifshitz A, Bidani M, Bidani S. Thermal reactions of cyclic ethers at high

temperatures. 3. Pyrolysis of furan behind reflected shocks. J Phys Chem 1986;90:
5373–7.

[722] Organ PP, Mackie JC. Kinetics of pyrolysis of furan. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans

1991;87:815–23. https://doi.org/10.1039/FT9918700815.

[723] Fulle D, Dib A, Kiefer JH, Zhang Q, Yao J, Kern RD. Pyrolysis of furan at low

pressures: vibrational relaxation, unimolecular dissociation, and incubation
times. J Phys Chem A 1998;102:7480–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9823042.

[724] Weber I, Friese P, Olzmann M. H-atom-forming reaction pathways in the pyrolysis

of furan, 2-methylfuran, and 2,5-dimethylfuran: a shock-tube and modeling
study. J Phys Chem A 2018;122:6500–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpca.8b05346.

premixed flames. Energy Fuels 2009;23:4355–62. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef900454v.

[743] Wu X, Huang Z, Jin C, Wang X, Wei L. Laminar burning velocities and markstein
lengths of 2,5-dimethylfuran-air premixed flames at elevated temperatures.
Combust Sci Technol 2011;183:220–37. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00102202.2010.516037.

[744] Wu X, Huang Z, Wang X, Jin C, Tang C, Wei L, et al. Laminar burning velocities

and flame instabilities of 2,5-dimethylfuran-air mixtures at elevated pressures.
Combust Flame 2011;158:539–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2010.10.006.

[745] Wu X, Li Q, Fu J, Tang C, Huang Z, Daniel R, et al. Laminar burning
characteristics of 2,5-dimethylfuran and iso-octane blend at elevated
temperatures and pressures. Fuel 2012;95:234–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2011.11.057.

[746] Somers KP, Simmie JM, Gillespie F, Conroy C, Black G, Metcalfe WK, et al.

A comprehensive experimental and detailed chemical kinetic modelling study of
2,5-dimethylfuran pyrolysis and oxidation. Combust Flame 2013;160:2291–318.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.06.007.

[747] Sirjean B, Fournet R, Glaude PA, Battin-Leclerc F, Wang W, Oehlschlaeger MA.
Shock tube and chemical kinetic modeling study of the oxidation of 2,5-
dimethylfuran. J Phys Chem A 2013;117:1371–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp308901q.

[748] Lifshitz A, Tamburu C, Shashua R. Thermal decomposition of 2,5-dimethylfuran.
Experimental results and computer modeling. J Phys Chem A 1998;102:
10655–70. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp982772b.

[725] Grela MA, Amorebieta VT, Colussi AJ. Very low pressure pyrolysis of furan, 2-

[749] Wu X, Huang Z, Yuan T, Zhang K, Wei L. Identification of combustion

methylfuran and 2,5-dimethylfuran. The stability of the Furan ring. J Phys Chem
1985;89:38–41. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100247a011.

[726] Tran LS, Wang Z, Carstensen HH, Hemken C, Battin-Leclerc F, Kohse-

H ̈oinghaus K. Comparative experimental and modeling study of the low- to
moderate-temperature oxidation chemistry of 2,5-dimethylfuran, 2-methylfuran,
and furan. Combust Flame 2017;181:251–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2017.03.030.

[727] Fan X, Wang X, Yang K, Li Y, Wu C, Li Z. Experimental and modeling study on
ignition characteristics of 2,5-dihydrofuran. SAE Int J Fuels Lubr 2016;9:315–21.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2016-01-1270.

[728] Somers KP, Simmie JM, Gillespie F, Burke U, Connolly J, Metcalfe WK, et al.

A high temperature and atmospheric pressure experimental and detailed chemical
kinetic modelling study of 2-methyl furan oxidation. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:
225–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.06.113.

intermediates in a low-pressure premixed laminar 2,5-dimethylfuran/oxygen/
argon flame with tunable synchrotron photoionization. Combust Flame 2009;156:
1365–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.04.002.

[750] Liu X, Yao M, Wang Y, Wang Z, Jin H, Wei L. Experimental and kinetic modeling

study of a rich and a stoichiometric low-pressure premixed laminar 2,5-dime-
thylfuran/oxygen/argon flames. Combust Flame 2015;162:4586–97. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.09.017.

[751] Cheng Z, Xing L, Zeng M, Dong W, Zhang F, Qi F, et al. Experimental and kinetic

modeling study of 2,5-dimethylfuran pyrolysis at various pressures. Combust
Flame 2014;161:2496–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2014.03.022.

[752] Alexandrino K, Millera

 ́
A, Bilbao R, Alzueta MU. Novel aspects in the pyrolysis

and oxidation of 2,5-dimethylfuran. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:1717–25.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.06.002.

 ́
A, Bilbao R, Alzueta MU. Interaction between 2,5-dime-

[729] Ma X, Jiang C, Xu H, Ding H, Shuai S. Laminar burning characteristics of 2-

[753] Alexandrino K, Millera

methylfuran and isooctane blend fuels. Fuel 2014;116:281–91. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2013.08.018.

thylfuran and nitric oxide: experimental and modeling study. Energy Fuels 2014;
28:4193–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef5005573.

[730] Zhongyang L, Oppong F, Wang H, Li X, Xu C, Wang C. Investigating the laminar

[754] Xu C, Liu W, Zhang B, Liao H, He W, Wei L. Experimental and numerical study on

burning velocity of 2-methylfuran. Fuel 2018;234:1469–80. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2018.07.005.

[731] Wei L, Tang C, Man X, Huang Z. Shock-tube experiments and kinetic modeling of

2-methylfuran ignition at elevated pressure. Energy Fuels 2013;27:7809–16.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef401809y.

[732] Eldeeb MA, Akih-Kumgeh B. Investigation of 2,5-dimethyl furan and iso-octane
ignition. Combust Flame 2015;162:2454–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2015.02.013.

[733] Xu N, Wu Y, Tang C, Zhang P, He X, Wang Z, et al. Experimental study of 2,5-

dimethylfuran and 2-methylfuran in a rapid compression machine: comparison of
the ignition delay times and reactivity at low to intermediate temperature.
Combust Flame 2016;168:216–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2016.03.016.

[734] Xu N, Wu Y, Tang C, Zhang P, He X, Wang Z, et al. Ignition delay times of low
alkylfurans at high pressures using a rapid compression machine. Proc Combust
Inst 2017;36:323–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.075.

[735] Tripathi R, Burke U, Ramalingam AK, Lee C, Davis AC, Cai L, et al. Oxidation of 2-
methylfuran and 2-methylfuran/n-heptane blends: an experimental and modeling
study. Combust Flame 2018;196:54–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2018.05.032.

laminar premixed flame characteristics of 2-ethylfuran. Combust Flame 2021;
234:111631. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.111631.
[755] Li P, He W, Wang J, Song S, Wang J, Lv T, et al. Experimental and kinetic

modeling investigations on low-temperature oxidation of 2-ethylfuran in a jet-
stirred reactor. Combust Flame 2022;241:112098. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2022.112098.

[756] Song S, Wang J, He W, Lu J, Su H, Xu Q, et al. Experimental and kinetic modeling

studies of 2-ethylfuran pyrolysis at low and atmospheric pressures. Combust
Flame 2021;226:430–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.12.029.
[757] Jin ZH, Yu D, Liu YX, Tian ZY, Richter S, Braun-Unkhoff M, et al. An experimental

investigation of furfural oxidation and the development of a comprehensive
combustion model. Combust Flame 2021;226:200–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2020.12.015.

[758] Vasiliou AK, Kim JH, Ormond TK, Piech KM, Urness KN, Scheer AM, et al.

Biomass pyrolysis: thermal decomposition mechanisms of furfural and
benzaldehyde. J Chem Phys 2013;139:104310. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.4819788.

[759] Li Y, Meng Q, Wang J, Zhang Y, Cao C, Cheng Z, et al. Experimental and

theoretical investigation of the pyrolysis of furfural. J Phys Chem A 2019;123:
103–10. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b06261.

[736] Lifshitz A, Tamburu C, Shashua R. Decomposition of 2-methylfuran. Experimental
and modeling study. J Phys Chem A 1997;101:1018–29. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp962646c.

[760] Grela MA, Colussi AJ. Kinetics and mechanism of the thermal decomposition of
unsaturated aldehydes: benzaldehyde, 2-butenal, and 2-furaldehyde. J Phys Chem
1986;90:434–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100275a016.

[737] Wei L, Li Z, Tong L, Wang Z, Jin H, Yao M, et al. Primary combustion

[761] Grela M, Colussi A. Vacuum pyrolysis of furfural: a facile synthesis of vinylketene.

intermediates in lean and rich low-pressure premixed laminar 2-methylfuran/
oxygen/argon flames. Energy Fuels 2012;26:6651–60. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ef301173z.

[738] Cheng Z, Niu Q, Wang Z, Jin H, Chen G, Yao M, et al. Experimental and kinetic
modeling studies of low-pressure premixed laminar 2-methylfuran flames. Proc
Combust Inst 2017;36:1295–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.032.
[739] Wang J, He S, Wang H, Cheng Z, Wei L, Wang J, et al. Experimental and kinetic

modeling studies of the low-temperature oxidation of 2-methylfuran in a jet-
stirred reactor. Combust Flame 2021;233:111588. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2021.111588.

[740] Alexandrino K, Millera A, Bilbao R, Alzueta MU. 2-Methylfuran oxidation in the
absence and presence of NO. Flow Turbul Combust 2016;96:343–62. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10494-015-9635-z.

[741] Cheng Z, He S, Xing L, Wei L, Li W, Li T, et al. Experimental and kinetic modeling
study of 2-methylfuran pyrolysis at low and atmospheric pressures. Energy Fuels
2017;31:896–903. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b02399.

[742] Wu X, Huang Z, Jin C, Wang X, Zheng B, Zhang Y, et al. Measurements of laminar
burning velocities and markstein lengths of 2,5-dimethylfuran-air-diluent

An Asoc Quím Argent 1987;75:111–5.

[762] Wang J, Tian J, Xing L, He S, Cheng Z, Wei L, et al. Experimental and kinetic

modeling studies of furfural pyrolysis at low and atmospheric pressures. J Anal
Appl Pyrolysis 2021;157:105161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaap.2021.105161.

[763] He W, Xu Q, Xie C, Yin J, Li P, Wang Z, et al. Experimental and kinetic modeling
studies of 2-acetylfuran pyrolysis at atmospheric pressure. Combust Flame 2022;
236:111824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.111824.

[764] Yan B, Wang J, Meng Q, Cheng Z, Wei L, Zhang Y, et al. Experimental and kinetic
modeling studies of methyl 2-furoate pyrolysis at atmospheric pressure. Energy
Fuels 2019;33:4611–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b00367.
[765] Bounaceur R, Da Costa I, Fournet R, Billaud F, Battin-Leclerc F. Experimental and

modeling study of the oxidation of toluene. Int J Chem Kinet 2005;37:25–49.
https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.20047.

[766] Somers KP, Simmie JM, Metcalfe WK, Curran HJ. The pyrolysis of 2-methylfuran:

a quantum chemical, statistical rate theory and kinetic modelling study. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2014;16:5349–67. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cp54915a.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019111

L.-S. Tran et al.

[767] Conturso M, Sirignano M, D’Anna A. Effect of 2,5-dimethylfuran doping on

particle size distributions measured in premixed ethylene/air flames. Proc
Combust Inst 2017;36:985–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.06.048.

[768] Thorton MM, Malte PC, Crittenden AL. Oxidation of furan and furfural in a well-

stirred reactor. Proc Combust Inst 1988;21:979–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0082-0784(88)80329-1.

[769] Tay KL, Yang W, Zhao F, Lin Q, Wu S. Development of a highly compact and

robust chemical reaction mechanism for unsaturated furan oxidation in internal
combustion engines via a multiobjective genetic algorithm and generalized
polynomial chaos. Energy Fuels 2020;34:936–48. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.9b03272.

[770] Wu S, Tay KL, Li J, Yang W, Yang S. Development of a compact and robust kinetic
mechanism for furan group biofuels combustion in internal combustion engines.
Fuel 2021;298:120824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120824.
[771] Zhou C, Chang Y, Wang P, Niu B, Jia M. Construction of a skeletal oxidation

mechanism for 2,5-dimethylfuran using decoupling methodology and reaction
class-based global sensitivity analysis. Energy Fuels 2020;34:16654–65. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c03086.

[772] Davis AC, Sarathy SM. Computational study of the combustion and atmospheric
decomposition of 2-methylfuran. J Phys Chem A 2013;117:7670–85. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp403085u.

[773] Chu H, Xiang L, Nie X, Ya Y, Gu M, Jiaqiang E. Laminar burning velocity and

pollutant emissions of the gasoline components and its surrogate fuels: a review.
Fuel 2020;269:117451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117451.

[774] Osborn DL, Zou P, Johnsen H, Hayden CC, Taatjes CA, Knyazev VD, et al. The

multiplexed chemical kinetic photoionization mass spectrometer: a new approach
to isomer-resolved chemical kinetics. Rev Sci Instrum 2008;79:104103. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.3000004.

[775] Sheps L, Antonov I, Au K. Sensitive mass spectrometer for time-resolved gas-phase
chemistry studies at high pressures. J Phys Chem A 2019;123:10804–14. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b08393.

[776] Li Y, Qi F. Recent applications of synchrotron VUV photoionization mass

spectrometry: insight into combustion chemistry. Acc Chem Res 2010;43:68–78.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ar900130b.

[777] Struckmeier U, Oßwald P, Kasper T, Boehling L, Heusing M, Koehler M, et al.
Sampling probe influences on temperature and species concentrations in
molecular beam mass spectroscopic investigations of flat premixed low-pressure
flames. Z Physik Chem 2009;223:503–37. https://doi.org/10.1524/
zpch.2009.6049.

[778] Liu Z, Phillips JB. Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography using an
on-column thermal modulator interface. J Chromatogr Sci 1991;29:227–31.
https://doi.org/10.1093/chromsci/29.6.227.

[779] Rotavera B, Scheer AM, Huang H, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA. Influence of

temperature and resonance-stabilization on the ortho-effect in cymene oxidation.
Proc Combust Inst 2015;35:543–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2014.05.012.

[780] Burke MP. Harnessing the combined power of theoretical and experimental data

through multiscale informatics. Int J Chem Kinet 2016;48:212–35. https://doi.
org/10.1002/kin.20984.

[781] RMG: Molecule search n.d. https://rmg.mit.edu/molecule_search (accessed

January 27), 2022.

[782] Green WH. Chapter 5 - automatic generation of reaction mechanisms. eds.. In:
Faravelli T, Manenti F, Ranzi E, editors. Computer aided chemical engineering,
vol. 45. Elsevier; 2019. p. 259–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64087-
1.00005-X.

Luc-Sy TRAN received his Engineering Diploma in Automobile
Propulsion and Thermal Engines from Da Nang University of
Science  and  Technology,  Vietnam,  and  his  M.Sc.  degree  in
Thermal and Energy from INSA-Lyon, France. He received his
PhD in Process Engineering and Products from the University
of Lorraine, France at LRGP-CNRS-Nancy, in 2013 under the
guidance  of  Dr.  F.  Battin-Leclerc  and  Dr.  P.A.  Glaude.  He
worked  then  as  a  Postdoctoral  researcher  at  LCT-Ghent,
Belgium, with Prof. K. van Geem in 2014. Later, he received
a  fellowship  of  the  Alexander  von  Humboltd  Foundation  to
perform  his  research  in  the  group  of  Prof.  K.  Kohse-H ̈oing
haus  at  PC1-Department  of  Chemistry-Bielefeld  University,
Germany. He also performed several experiment campaigns at
NSRL  (Hefei,  China),  NSRRC  (Hsinchu,  Taiwan),  and  SOLEIL  Synchrotron  (GIF-sur-
YVETTE, France). Tran received a Bernard Lewis Fellowship of the Combustion Institute.
Since 2017, he works as a Research Scientist at CNRS (PC2A in Lille, France), focusing to
the formation chemistry of heavy pollutant components during the combustion of biofuels.
Tran has supplied massive experimental data obtained in different reactors (flame, flow
reactor,  etc.)  and  proposed  to  the  community  about  10  validated  mechanisms  for  the
combustion of several oxygenated biofuels, including cyclic ethers.

Olivier  HERBINET  received  his  engineering  degree  (2003)
from the Ecole Nationale Sup ́erieure des Industries Chimiques
of Nancy, France and PhD degree (2006) from the INPL, Nancy,
France (now University of Lorraine). His postgraduate research
studies were made at the Lawrence Livermore National Labo-
ratory (2007) in the Combustion Chemistry group with Dr C.K.
Westbrook  and  Dr  W.J.  Pitz.  He  joined  the  Combustion
Chemistry  group  at  the  Laboratoire  R ́eactions  et  G ́enie  des
Proc ́ed ́es,  Nancy,  France  in  2007  in  the  team  of  Fr ́ed ́erique
Battin-Leclerc.  His  research  interest  is  the  study  of  the  gas
phase reactions (oxidation and pyrolysis), especially the low-
temperature  combustion  of  fuel  and  biofuel  transportation
components. His activities in this area cover both combustion
experiments at the laboratory scale (in particular the coupling of reactors with different
diagnostics  like  gas  chromatography,  spectroscopic  techniques  and  mass  spectrometry)
and the development of detailed kinetic models. Herbinet got his French habilitation de-
gree in 2017. He teaches homogeneous combustion kinetics, heterogeneous catalysis ki-
netics  and  engineering,  and  analytical  chemistry  at  the  ENSIC  of  Nancy  (chemical
engineering department of the University of Lorraine) since 2007. He was the chair of the
Bernard Lewis Fellowship committee during the 37th  International Symposium on Com-
bustion, Dublin, Ireland.

Hans-Heinrich CARSTENSEN received his diploma in Chemis-
try in 1990 and his PhD in Physical Chemistry in 1994 from the
University of G ̈ottingen (Germany). Afterwards, he held mul-
tiple postdoctoral positions starting at the Max-Planck institute
for flow research in G ̈ottingen (1994-1995), followed by a stay
at  the  CRF  Dept.  at  Sandia  National  Laboratories  Livermore
(USA)  in  1995-1996.  Afterwards  he  joined  ExxonMobil
Research & Engineering Co. (USA) from 1996-1999, postdoced
at  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  (USA)  from  1999-
2000,  before  accepting  a  Research  Associate  professor  posi-
tion  at  Colorado  School  of  Mines  (USA)  2000-2004,  2006-
2012. In 2005 he was a visiting professor at the University of
Karlsruhe  (Germany).  From  2012-2018, he  worked  as  senior
scientist at Ghent University (Belgium) before accepting his current research position with
the ARAID foundation in Zaragoza (Spain). His main interests are in gas phase kinetics
(pyrolysis and oxidation). Carstensen is a trained experimentalist (laser photolysis, laser
induced fluorescence, flow reactors, low-pressure premixed flames, molecular beam mass
spectrometry, micro-pyrolyzer/GC, thermogravimetry) who also uses ab initio methods to
calculate thermochemical properties. In the context of automated mechanism generation,
Carstensen made contributions to the database for Bensons group additivity method and
developed rules for rate coefficient estimation.

Fr ́ed ́erique BATTIN-LECLERC (Knight  of the French National
Order of Merit, based at LRGP-Nancy, France) received her PhD
in  1991  in  gas-phase  kinetics  in  Nancy,  France,  under  the
guidance of Dr. F. Baronnet and Prof. G.M. Cˆome. She is since
then  a  CNRS  Researcher  (Research  Director  1st  class  since
2015)  studying  detailed  kinetic  mechanisms  to  model  gas-
phase  complex  reactions,  especially  the  combustion  and  the
low-temperature  oxidation  of  the  components  of  trans-
portation  fuels,  including  biofuels.  She  was  an  invited
researcher at AEA Technology, Harwell, UK (1993) and in N.O.
A.A., Boulder, USA (1997, in the Group of Dr. A. Ravishankara)
to work on atmospheric chemistry. Battin-Leclerc was awarded
an ERC Advanced research grant (invited in 2015 by ERC to
give  a  lecture  at  the  Summer  Davos”  World  Economic  Forum”  (https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=lGhQSRKzcgg&list=PL7m903CwFUgmDchnwjF3FzdsUvulh57G&index=
3&t=16s)) in 2008, the CNRS Silver Medal in 2010, and Fellow of the Combustion Institute
in  2018.  She  was  the  chair  of  the  management  committee  of  COST  Action  CM0901
gathering 23 countries (2010-2014). She was a co-editor of the book: Cleaner Combustion
– Developing Detailed Chemical Kinetic Models, F. Battin-Leclerc, J. Simmie, E. Blurock
Eds., Springer September 2013. Battin-Leclerc served as a technical co-chair for the 34th
International Symposium on Combustion, Warsaw, Poland. She published over 180 papers
in peer-reviewed international journals.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience92(2022)101019112
