Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Pyrolysis technology for plastic waste recycling: A state-of-the-art review 

Leilei Dai a, b, Nan Zhou a, Yuancai Lv a, Yanling Cheng a,c, Yunpu Wang b, Yuhuan Liu b, 
Kirk Cobb a, Paul Chen a, Hanwu Lei d, Roger Ruan a,* 
a Center for Biorefining and Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems Engineering, University of Minnesota, 1390 Eckles Ave., St. Paul MN 55108, United States 
b State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Engineering Research Center for Biomass Conversion, Ministry of Education, Nanchang University, Nanchang 
330047, P.R. China 
c Biochemical Engineering College, Beijing Union University, No. 18, Fatouxili 3 Area, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100023, P.R. China 
d Department of Biological Systems Engineering, Washington State University, Richland, WA 99354, United States   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Plastic waste 
Pyrolysis 
Fuels 
Chemicals 
Circular economy 

Discarded plastics can be converted to various fuels and chemicals to generate positive economic value instead of 
polluting the environment. In the past few years, pyrolysis has attracted much attention in the industrial and 
scientific  communities  as  a  promising  versatile  platform  to  convert  plastic  waste  into  valuable  resources. 
However, it is still difficult to fine-tune an efficient and selective pyrolysis process to narrow the product dis-
tribution  for  a  feasible  commercial  production.  Furthermore,  traditional  plastic-to-fuels  technology  looks  like 
another expensive way to burn fossil fuels, making no contribution to the plastic circular economy. By learning 
from the developed plastic-to-fuels technology, achieving the conversion of plastic waste into naphtha or plastic 
monomers that can be used for new plastic manufacturing in a closed-loop way is a more promising resource 
recovery pathway. However, there is no comprehensive review so far about achieving plastic waste recycling/ 
upcycling by pyrolysis. This article will provide a critical review about the recovery pathways of plastic pyrolysis 
based on the various products (fuels, naphtha, hydrogen, and light olefins). It will overview the recent advances 
regarding plastic pyrolysis process and reactor design, introduce various recovery pathways based on the py-
rolysis  process,  summarize  process  optimization  and  catalyst  development,  discuss  the  present  challenges  for 
plastic pyrolysis, highlight the importance and significance of creating a plastics’ circular economy, discuss the 
economic feasibility, the environmental impact, and outlook for future development for plastic pyrolysis. This 
review  presents  useful  information  to  further  develop  and  design  an  advanced  pyrolysis  process,  with  an 
improved  efficiency,  desirable  product  selectivity,  and  minimum  environmental  impacts.  It  is  helpful  to 
encourage more circular economy-oriented research aimed at converting waste plastics to naphtha and plastic 
monomers  instead  of  simply  producing  fuels  from  the  scientific  communities  of  chemistry,  energy,  and  the 
environment.   

1. Introduction 

Plastics are ubiquitous and have become an integral component of 
modern society. Growing annual demand for plastics has been observed 
in the last few decades, due to the ever-increasing dependency on these 
versatile materials used in a variety of ways, such as food packaging, 
hardware, electronics, and construction. This growing demand has been 

accompanied by a huge amount of plastic solid waste (PSW), with 6300 
Mt  of  PSW  being  generated  by  the  end  of  2015  and  most  of  them 
accumulating in landfills or the natural environment (Fig. 1). 

Global PSW pollution has led to serious environmental consequences 
both  on  land  and  in  the  oceans,  because  the  PSW  cannot  easily  be 
degraded  in  the  natural  environment,  unlike  biomass.  The  accompa-
nying micro- and nano-plastic particles are threatening the ecosystem 

Abbreviations: Psw, plastic solid waste; Vocs, volatile organic compounds; Pcdds, polychlorinated dibenzo-para-dioxins; Pcdfs, polychlorinated dibenzofurans; Pet, 
polyethylene  terephthalate;  Hdpe,  high  density  polyethylene;  Ldpe,  low  density  polyethylene;  Pe,  polyethylene;  Pvc,  polyvinyl  chloride;  Pp,  polypropylene;  Ps, 
polystyrene; Pahs, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; Csbr, conical spouted bed reactor; Sic, silicon carbide; (gc × gc-tofms), two-dimensional gas chromatography 
coupled with  time-of-flight  mass spectrometry;  GC–MS, Gas Chromatography-Mass  Spectrometer; FTIR, Fourier Transform  Infrared Spectroscopy; NMR, Nuclear 
Magnetic Resonance; SEC, Size Exclusion Chromatography; PC, polycarbonate. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: ruanx001@umn.edu (R. Ruan).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101021 
Received 16 September 2021; Received in revised form 9 January 2022; Accepted 3 June 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101021Availableonline5August20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

and even human health [2,3]. Although this makes PSW disposal and 
management a matter of paramount importance, technological limita-
tions pose a great constraint on the development of PSW recycling [4]. 
Without a bold shift in approach, PSW mismanagement may continue to 
worsen, thereby missing opportunities to harvest these valuable waste 
materials. Developing a systematic and “circular economy”  manner to 
address PSW pollution and stop catastrophic ocean plastic pollution is 
imperative. 

Up to date, primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary recycling 
methods for PSW have been developed, as shown in Fig. 2 [5]. Currently, 
primary  and  secondary  recycling  are  widely  applied,  due  to  ease  of 

operation,  which  can  probably  obtain  valuable  products,  but  these 
methods can only be done with uncontaminated and single-use plastics 
and produce polymers which have inferior properties to virgin materials 
[6]. Serious contamination and a high variety in plastics in the waste 
stream also affect the product quality from mechanical recycling that 
dominates current recycling practices. Apart from mechanical recycling, 
current PSW recycling relies heavily on “quaternary”  recycling which 
results  in  contamination  of  nearby  landscape  surfaces,  as  well  as  air 
pollution emissions such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), NOx, 
SOx, polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), and dioxins [7]. A more 
promising  recycling  pathway,  “tertiary”  recycling,  focuses  on  the 

Fig. 1. Global primary plastics production, waste generation, recycling rate and disposal. a. Global production, use, and fate of plastics (in million metric tons) from 
1950 to 2015. b. Cumulative plastic waste generation and disposal (in million metric tons). (Adapted from [1] with permission from Science). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010212L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 2. Four main techniques of PSW recycling. (Adapted from [5] with permission from Elsevier).  

Table 1 
Main features and characteristics of thermochemical techniques. (Adapted from [14]).  

Process types 

Incineration 

Gasification 

Hydrogenation 

Pyrolysis 

Definition and 

main 
objective 

Main features 

Excess burning of feedstock whilst 
recovering power and heat after steam 
generation. Air is used in abundance over 
stoichiometric as an oxidizing agent. 
● Off gas is disposed with advanced 
electrostatic precipitators, fabric filters, 
scrubbers, etc. and then send back to stack. 
● The most common technologies are 
fluidized bed combustion, moving grate, 
and rotary kiln. 
● The produced bottom ash can be treated 
for recovering iron, steel, aluminum, 
copper, and zinc. 
● Very low bottom ash, suitable for 
landfill. 

Defined as the treatment of PSW in 
oxygen deficient environment to 
produce fuel or synthesis gasses 
through gas reforming. 
● Carbon in PSW is converted into 
syngas which comprises CO, H2, 
CH4, and light hydrocarbons. 
● Residues including ash and slag 
can be used as construction 
materials. 
● Scrubbing is conducted to remove 
particulates, hydrocarbons, etc. 
● Syngas can be used for heat, 
energy, or electricity generation. 
Syngas can also be used to produce 
transportation fuels (e.g. Fischer- 
tropsch reaction, Methanol-to- 
Gasoline process, etc.).  

Treatment of PSW under high 
pressure with hydrogen media to 
produce high quality products, 
syncrude oil. 
● Visbreaking is typically applied 
as a pretreatment process before 
hydrogenation. 
● The process is still in research 
and development phases, 
requiring high cost catalysts. 

Pyrolysis is a thermal degradation in 
the presence of heat with a 
surrounding inert atmosphere, 
typical nitrogen or vacuum. 
● The process maximizes 
degradation of PSW to liquid oil and 
gas. 
● The main product, liquid oil, can 
be easily upgraded into 
transportation fuels.  

Main products  ● High temperature flue gasses 

Operating 

conditions 

●Energy in form of heat and power 
The process is operated generally under 
atmospheric pressure, with temperatures 
between 850 
C and 1200 

C. 

◦

◦

Main 

pollutants 

Sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and 
dioxins 

● Syngas (H2 and CO) 
● CO2, H2O, and methane 
The process is operated generally 
under atmospheric pressure, with 
temperatures between 850 
C and 
1200 
Tar, H2S, and HCl 

C. 

◦

◦

● Syncrude 
● Natural gas equivalent 
High pressures reaching 100 bars 
in some sections with reaction 
◦
temperatures ranging from 350 
to 490 
C. 
HCl and residues 

◦

C 

● CO, H2, and hydrocarbons 

Open vent pressure to slightly above 
atmospheric, with temperature 
C. 
ranging from 300 

C to 900 

◦

◦

H2S, and HCl  

depolymerization  of  PSW  to  produce  fuels  and  chemicals  that can  be 
alternatives to petroleum-based products. Here, considerable research 
achievement  has  been  accomplished,  regarding  the  enzymatic  degra-
dation of plastics. But it was pointed out that the degradation capability 
of enzymes largely depends on the plastic types and given conditions 
[8].  Only  a  few  plastic  materials,  such  as  polyethylene  terephthalate 
(PET) and polyamides, can be enzymatically converted into oligomers or 
monomers  due  to  the  existing  of  hydrolysable  bonds.  Other  common 
plastics  which  contain  saturated  carbon–carbon  backbones  cannot  be 
broken down to desirable molecules. 

Comparatively  speaking,  thermochemical  conversion  of  PSW  is  a 
quite popular and promising choice for PSW recycling. Compared with 
biological recycling, thermochemical recycling is easier to scale up and 
able  to  treat  unsorted  and  contaminated  waste.  Table  1  shows  main 
features  and  characteristics  of  thermochemical  techniques.  Among 
thermochemical pathways, pyrolysis has gained more attention recently 
because it can achieve environmentally friendly conversion of PSW into 
highly valuable fuels and chemicals [9]. Compared to incineration and 
gasification,  pyrolysis  is  carried  out  in  the  absence  of  oxygen  so  that 

◦

there would be less CO2 emission and toxic pollutants can be minimized. 
Especially,  polychlorinated  dibenzo-para-dioxins  (PCDD)  and  poly-
chlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF) can be mitigated largely in the py-
rolytic  conditions  (lower  than  600 
C  and  the  absence  of  oxygen) 
[10–12].  Furthermore,  pyrolysis  shows  specific  advantages  from  the 
perspective  of  environmental  management,  operating  costs,  product 
value,  and  alternative  energy  production.  Techno-economic  analysis 
indicates that producing petroleum intermediates from PSW may have 
significant economic potential [13]. At this point, pyrolysis has been the 
focus of thermochemical recycling, and thermochemical recycling has 
always been at the center of PSW management when it comes to how to 
respond to the PSW pollution. 

Current research about this topic mainly focuses on plastic pyrolysis 
parameters  optimization,  catalyst  development,  kinetic  analysis,  and 
reactor  design,  to  improve  product  yield  and  selectivity  [15–18]. 
Various catalysts, such as Al-SBA-15 [19], fly ash synthesized natural 
catalyst  [20],  zeolites  (ZSM-5,  Y,  □,  etc.)  [15,21]  and,  pillared  clays 
[22], have been developed and used to enhance the pyrolysis oil yield by 
reducing  wax  formation  and  obtain  a  potentially  valuable  fuels  or 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010213L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

chemicals. Operating conditions, including the key pyrolysis tempera-
ture [23], residence time of vapors [24], and catalyst-to-reactant ratio 
[25], have been optimized to improve plastic-to-fuel feasibility. Typical 
types  of  reactors have  been  reported for  plastic pyrolysis  [24–26].  In 
terms of catalytic pyrolysis, in-situ catalysis mode and two-step system 
(pyrolysis-catalysis)  are  reported  in  the  literature  [27–29].  One  chal-
lenge related to in-situ catalysis mode is that the impurities in the PSW 
could  potentially  deactivate  the  catalyst  materials  and  the  catalyst 
separation  after  reaction  is  much  more  tricky.  In  contrast,  the 
pyrolysis-catalysis  system  is  divided  into  two  stages  where  plastic  is 
decomposed  to  primary  volatiles  at  around  500 
C,  and  then  passes 
through a catalytic reforming bed at a given temperature. The advan-
tages of two independent reactors in series are very clear, compared to 
the  conventional  one  step  pyrolysis/gasification  process.  First  of  all, 
controlling the pyrolysis temperature and reforming parameters can be 
addressed  separately, allowing  independent  temperature optimization 
and  injecting  steam  into  the  subsequent  reforming  reactor  without 
affecting the pyrolysis process. Second, the catalyst is separated from the 
PSW pyrolysis reactor, effectively avoiding the mass and heat transfer 
issues posed by high plastic viscosity and making the catalyst recovery 
much  easier.  In  addition,  there  is  no  contact  between  the  reforming 
catalysts and PSW feedstock so that the impurities present in the PSW 
may no longer cause undesirable catalyst deactivation. 

◦

This  review  primarily  introduces  recent  advances  in  converting 
plastics to fuels, naphtha, light olefins, and hydrogen by catalytic py-
rolysis.  A  few  review  articles  summarized  plastic  pyrolysis  for  fuels 
production in the past few years, including process parameter conditions 
[30], examples of plastic-to-fuel processes [9], reactor design [31], and 
chemistry  [32].  Different  from  them,  the  scope  of  the  article  will  be 
narrowed  to  focus  on  catalytic  pyrolysis  of  plastics  for  selective 

production of different valuable products and provide a state-of-the-art 
review of this area. Furthermore, the emerging plastic-to-naphtha and 
light  olefins  technologies  that  are  able  to  contribute  to  the  circular 
plastic economy will be highlighted considering that they can be used as 
the  feedstock  for  new  plastic  manufacturing  by  utilizing  the  existing 
petroleum  refining  facilities.  In  addition,  techno-economic  and  envi-
ronmental considerations of PSW pyrolysis are discussed to encourage 
further study and investment. Overall, it will help researchers and in-
dustrial partners to fully understand what is going on for plastic pyrol-
ysis and determine what else they can do or if plastic pyrolysis technique 
is worth the investment. 

2. Conceptual design 

2.1. Plastics 

There are many different types of plastics available in the market as 
shown  in  Fig,  3.  It  is  unfortunate  that  only  PET,  high  density  poly-
ethylene  (HDPE),  and  low  density  polyethylene  (LDPE)  have  been 
routinely recycled, with a recovery rate not much higher than 5% [33]. 
Generally speaking, both proximate analysis and elemental analysis of 
various  plastics  are  necessary  to  understand  the  pyrolysis  process  of 
plastics.  Proximate  and  elemental  analyses  of  different  plastics  are 
shown in Table 2. In terms of proximate analysis, volatile matter content 
plays  a  key  role  in  determining  the  pyrolysis  oil  yield,  where  more 
volatile matter in a plastic lead to a higher pyrolysis oil yield. On the 
other hand, in order to obtain high quality petroleum-based products, 
carbon and hydrogen are the desirable components instead of oxygen or 
chlorine. 

Fig. 3. Various commercial plastics and corresponding applications. (Reprinted from [34] with permission from Elsevier).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010214L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Table 2 
Properties of different plastics.  

Plastics 

SPI codesa 

Chemical structure 

Proximate analysis (wt.%) 
VMc 
FCb 

Ash 

Elemental analysis (wt.%) 
C 

H 

O 

Cl 

Degradation temperature ( 
d 
T5%

e  
Tmax

◦

C) 

Ref.    

PET 

1 

13.15 

86.85 

0 

62.50 

4.21 

33.29 

0 

400 

435 

[35–37] 

HDPE 

2 

PVC 

3 

LDPE 

PP 

4 

5 

0 

100 

0 

85.50 

14.50 

0 

0 

415 

460 

[38,39] 

2.77 

97.23 

0 

38.40 

4.90 

0 

56.70 

270 

290, 465 

[31,40,41] 

0.02 

99.98 

0 

85.40 

14.60 

0 

0.03 

99.97 

0 

86.44 

14.46 

0 

0 

0 

375 

460 

[40,42,43] 

355 

470 

[40,44,45] 

PS 

6 

0 

99.80 

0.20 

93.63 

6.36 

0 

0 

400 

435 

[35,46,47]  

a means codes defined by Society of the Plastics Industry. 
b represents fixed carbon. 
c represents volatile matter. 

◦
Fig. 4. Product distribution based on thermogravimetric analysis within the temperature range of 400–750 

C. (Reprinted from [6] with permission from Elsevier).  

2.2. Pyrolysis technology 

2.2.1. Mechanism for plastic pyrolysis 

◦

During plastic pyrolysis, long chain polymers are broken into smaller 
fractions,  and  the  resulting  oils  and  gasses  are  both  highly  valuable 
precursors  of  fuels  and  chemicals  [9,48].  Without  using  any  catalyst, 
pyrolysis  of  PP  and  PE  at  500–600 
C  mainly  produces 
C20+hydrocarbons  that  are  a  solid  wax  product  at  room  temperature 
[49]. At higher temperatures, more gas and oil products can be formed, 
which  are  composed  of C1–C4  olefin  mixtures, C5–C20  olefins  and a 
small  amount  of  aromatics,  respectively  [49].  For  example,  thermal 
cracking of PE produces a wide range of hydrocarbons that are primarily 
composed  of  gasses  (C1–C4),  C5–C10  non-aromatic  hydrocarbons, 
mono-aromatics,  and  waxes  (>C11)  (Fig.  4).  Wax  yield  experiences  a 
linear  drop  with  the  increasing  temperature,  while  the  gas  yield 

significantly increases. It appears that operating under higher temper-
atures  may  slightly  facilitate  the  formation  of  aromatics.  It  is  widely 
accepted that polyethylene pyrolysis can be illustrated by a free radical 
mechanism  (initiation),  which  is  followed  by  random  scission  and 
chain-end scission (secondary decomposition) and then recombination 
of different chains (termination), as shown in Fig. 5 [50,51]. Similarly, 
PS pyrolysis is also considered to proceed via type free radical reactions 
that include β-scission, hydrogen abstraction, hydrogen transfer, radical 
recombination,  and  disproportionation  with  the  aromatic  monomer, 
dimer, and trimer as the main products [52–54]. Aromatic monomers 
are  mostly  produced  via  unzipping  reaction,  where  the  terminal  aro-
matic ring falls off due to the fracture of C–C linkage between two ar-
omatic rings. It can be seen from Fig. 6 that intramolecular hydrogen 
transfer  followed  by  □-scission  contributes  to  the  generation  of  aro-
matic dimers. However, intermolecular hydrogen transfer followed by 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010215L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 5. Reaction mechanism of low-density polyethylene pyrolysis. (Adapted from [63] with permission from Elsevier).  

□-scission  gives  a larger  molecule containing  three aromatic rings or 
more. On the other hand, aromatic dimers and trimers can be formed 
through  monomer  recombination  or  intermolecular  benzyl  radical 
addition  followed  by  □-scission  [55,56].  However,  PVC  is  totally 
different because PVC pyrolysis, without catalysts, can still obtain a high 
yield  of  liquid  oil  that  consists  of  polycyclic  aromatic  hydrocarbons 
(PAHs) instead of wax [57]. It is widely accepted that poly vinyl chloride 
(PVC) pyrolysis can be recognized as a three-stage mechanism, including 
(1)  dechlorination  accompanied  with  inner  cyclization;  (2)  aromatic 
chain  scission; (3)  release of  2–4  rings aromatics  [57,58]. During the 
PET pyrolysis, the major thermal degradation pathway is considered to 
include □-scission  and retro-hydroalkoxylation,  yielding benzoic acid 
and  vinylic  products,  where  the  bridging  glycol  O  (cid:0) C  bond  can  be 
cleaved  and  a  β-H  atom  is  transferred  to  the  carbonyl  O  [59,60]. 
Furthermore, the ester groups will be released to produce a large amount 
of CO2, CO, and ethylene, in agreement with previously reported PET 
pyrolysis product distribution [61]. 

As  we  know,  the  activation  energy  of  pyrolysis  reactions  will  be 
lower  if  a  catalyst  is  added,  which  is  important  for  lowering  energy 
consumption  of  pyrolysis  by  reducing  reaction  temperature  and/or 
processing time. The catalyst can also facilitate the degradation of long 
chain  polymers,  and  reduce  or  avoid  wax  formation  [62].  In  the 
above-mentioned polyethylene pyrolysis process, the presence of cata-
lyst can effectively lower the required energy for cracking the C–C and 
the  C–H  bonds,  thereby  generating  more  carbonium  ions  [63]. 

Furthermore, an effective catalyst can improve the hydrocarbon distri-
bution and selectivity, making it more suitable for upgrading to gaso-
line, diesel, and jet fuels. 

2.2.2. Process and reactor design 

Unlike  some  other  solid  wastes,  plastics  have  some  undesirable 
properties for pyrolysis, such as low thermal conductivity, sticky nature, 
low softening and melting temperatures. Generally  speaking, in a py-
rolysis process, a higher heating rate is favorable for liquid oil produc-
tion, and minimizes the drawbacks of secondary reactions, which could 
cause the formation of more solid residues or gas products. In order to 
achieve the high heat transfer and avoid clogging issues easily occurring 
in pilot and industrial scale systems, advanced reactor designs need to be 
developed for pyrolyzing plastics based on the most important principle 
of improving the heat transfer during pyrolysis and enhancing the en-
ergy efficiency of this process. 

A batch reactor can be used to easily implement a plastic pyrolysis, 
but  a  batch  system  can  also  cause  some  problems,  such  as  poor  heat 
transfer;  non-continuous  operations  also  pose  a  challenge  for  system 
scale-up [31,64]. Several reactor configurations have been proposed and 
developed  to  minimize  heat  transfer  limitations  and  avoid  common 
processing  issues  in  the  pyrolysis  of  waste  plastics.  The  simplest 
approach to improve heat transfer efficiency is stirring which assures 
better  thermal  convection  between  the  plastic  feedstock  and  heat 
transfer surfaces [65]. Based on this principle, some improved designs 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010216L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 6. Typical  polystyrene pyrolysis reactions. (a) Random  scission; (b) Unzipping reaction;  (c)  Intermolecular hydrogen transfer;  (d) Intramolecular hydrogen 
transfer. (Reprinted from [53] with permission from Elsevier). 

have  been  developed,  like  the  rotary  kiln  [66,67].  PSW  samples  are 
mainly  heated  by  conduction  from  the  reactor  walls;  additional  heat 
carriers (such as metal or ceramic balls, or sand) also needs to be added 
to  improve  heat  transfer  inside  the  reactor.  A  helical  screw  plays  an 
important role in this system, not only for conveying the PSW feedstock 
to the heating zone, but also evacuating any solid residue [68,69]. 

◦

A fluidized bed reactor enables a pyrolysis process to be continuous, 
at high heating rates, and relatively short residence times, which have 
been  widely  applied  in  plastic  pyrolysis  [16,70,71].  Jung  et  al.  [70] 
developed a lab scale fluidized bed reactor to pursue the high yield of 
aromatics  at  high  pyrolysis  temperatures  (650–750 
C).  The  process 
proposed by Park et al. [16,71,72] was also used to produce aromatics 
from polyolefins without a catalyst, and the selectivity of aromatic hy-
drocarbons in the pyrolysis oil could be up to 92%. In order to effectively 
reduce the residence time and convert waste plastics to olefins with high 
yield, Milne et al. [73] designed an internally circulating fluidized bed 
and confirmed its effectiveness. In spite of the many advantages of flu-
idized bed reactors, defluidization problems caused by the agglomera-
tion of the molten plastics and heat carriers need to be taken seriously. 
Once  a  well-fluidized  bed  loses  fluidization  partially  or  totally,  the 
temperature gradient will be observed in the reactor and the contact of 
gas and solid particles will be affected significantly, both of which can 
lead to side reactions, lower product quality, and potentially reduce the 
process efficiency. Seville et al. [74,75] concluded that the defluidiza-
tion can be attributed to an increased sintering rate and the tendency of 
particle  to  agglomerate  at  higher  temperatures.  Generally  speaking, 
agglomeration  and  defluidization  occurs  more  easily  if  “sticky”  bed 
materials or feedstock are used or the feedstock contains alkali elements. 
It  was  experimentally  found  that  the  bed  pressure  decreased  signifi-
cantly due to the accumulation and growth of the agglomerates, thereby 
causing  defluidization  [76].  The  inorganic  compositions  of  feedstock 
were the significant influence on the bed agglomeration, and both the 
increase in bed particle size and temperature and the decrease of gas 
velocity and static bed height accelerated the defluidization. If the initial 
bed height is increased, the bed resistance will increase accordingly so 
that much more power input is needed for re-fluidizing the consolidated 
bed [77]. Considering that defluidization is caused by agglomeration of 

bed materials coated with melted polymer, improving the contact be-
tween  gas and  solid phases is  an effective  to avoid  the defluidization 
problems. In this regard, a conical spouted bed reactor (CSBR) combines 
the advantages of the spouted bed regime with those of the conical ge-
ometry to provide high heat and mass transfer coefficients between gas 
and solid phases, thereby avoiding the defluidization to some extent. 

Another advantage of CSBR design over fluidized bed reactors is to 
lower the reactant residence time to about 20 ms, thus avoiding unde-
sirable secondary reactions and alleviating coke formation [49,78]. As 
shown in Fig. 8, CSBR is divided into three regions, including the spout, 
annulus, and fountain. In order to achieve the spout status, the gas inlet 
diameter would be 20–30 times larger than the particle diameter, but 
the use of a draft tube can resolve this and affect other operation pa-
rameters, such as spouting velocity, pressure drop, gas distribution, etc. 
[79,80]. The design of CSBR has been further developed for PSW py-
rolysis  applications  in  the  past  decades.  Research  headed  by  Olazar 
investigated the pyrolysis of different waste plastics, confirming CSBR’s 
suitability for PSW processing, in terms of its hydrodynamic behavior 
and versatility [49,61,81,82]. In the flash pyrolysis of polystyrene for 
monomer  recovery,  bed  temperature  and  gas  flow  rate  in  the  CSBR 
significantly affected the styrene yield, within the range from 50.8 wt.% 
to 70.6 wt.% [82]. The extremely vigorous mixing regime of particles 
inside the CSBR enables catalysts to be easily and effectively utilized in 
the  in-situ  catalytic  pyrolysis  of  PSW.  In  the  catalytic  pyrolysis  of 
polyolefins over HZSM-5, the resulting pyrolysis oil was composed of 60 
wt.% C2–C4  olefins,  10 wt.% single-ring aromatics,  15 wt.% nonaro-
matic  C5–C11  hydrocarbons,  and  14  wt.%  C4-  alkanes  [83].  It  was 
pointed out that polymer melting and catalyst coating with the melted 
polymer can be facilitated in a CSBR, and the high heat and mass transfer 
rates shortened the residence time of pyrolysis vapors to generate more 
primary pyrolysis products by minimizing any secondary reactions [84]. 
Dielectric  heating  enables  microwave  irradiation  to  be  a  fast  and 
selective heating method, which has been widely applied in solid waste 
pyrolysis  [85–87].  Unlike  the  conventional  pyrolysis  process,  in  this 
alternative approach, microwave-absorbing materials are preferentially 
heated without initially increasing the temperature of the surrounding 
pieces  of  the  HDPE  because  plastics  are  transparent  to  microwave 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010217L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

irradiation. It has been found that microwave-assisted pyrolysis is able 
to significantly minimize side reactions, compared to conventional py-
rolysis  of  plastic, and  thereby more effectively  control  product  distri-
bution [88]. A few studies have also confirmed the application potential 
in plastic pyrolysis [87,89]. Fig. 8 shows a typical microwave-assisted 
pyrolysis  reactor  which  was  developed  by  Ruan’s  group  [90].  Rele-
vant  process  operations,  optimization,  and  improvements  have  been 
reported [90–93]. One advantage for this microwave pyrolysis reactor is 
that plastic feedstock is heated by heat conduction from the high tem-
perature SiC balls which are stirred by a shaft, effectively increasing the 
heat  transfer  efficiency  and  achieving  fast  pyrolysis.  Based  on  a  200 
kg/day lab-scale continuous microwave pyrolysis system, Ruanʼs group 
has shown that pyrolysis of 1 kg HDPE chips consumed a total of 5 MJ 
electrical  energy  [94].  At  this  time  (2021)  a  California  company  has 
achieved a processing capacity of up to 1 ton/day of PSW via this mi-
crowave pyrolysis system, for recovery of fuels and naphtha from waste 
plastics, and has demonstrated the potential for commercial application. 
Several other up-to-date plastic pyrolysis reactor designs have also 
been studied, to improve the pyrolysis process, and product yield and 
quality, such as: (a) the molten salt pyrolysis reactor, and (b) thermal 
plasma  pyrolysis  reactor.  The  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  these 
plastic pyrolysis reactors are summarized in Table 3 and different py-
rolysis reactors are shown in Fig. 7. 

2.3. Plastic pyrolysis oil characterization 

Research and development of plastic pyrolysis in recent years mainly 
focus  on  maximizing  the  selectivity  and  yield  of  target  products  by 
innovative  catalyst  design,  optimizing  the  operating  conditions  and 
reactor configurations. The most important thing is to characterize the 
obtained liquid product. By a detailed chemical characterization of bio- 
oil,  it  would  increase  the  knowledge  of  the  chemical  composition  of 
liquid product, which is necessary to optimize the process and determine 
its potential uses. Although progress has been made to analyze the liquid 
product, limited information has been obtained from traditional tools 
due to the large number of various compounds and coelutions in the oil. 
Therefore, research focus needs to be shifted to developing a systematic 
and comprehensive strategy to characterize the liquid product with the 
help of advanced instrumentation. The current pyrolysis oil character-
ziation techniques are shown in Table 4 and the corresponding advan-
tages and disadvantages are also listed Table 4. 

The chemical profile of PSW derived oils can determine if the liquid 
oil  can  be  used  as  gasoline,  diesel,  other  fuels,  or  as  chemicals.  For 
example, with the goal of producing naphtha as a potential feedstock for 
virgin plastic production, more C5–C12 paraffins and less aromatics are 
desirable in naphtha [109]. Branched hydrocarbons are essential com-
ponents to improve the physical properties, such as low melting point 
and pour point, for using as transportation fuels [110]. The chemical 
composition  of  the  liquid  oil  is  usually  characterized  by  the  gas 

Table 3 
Advantages, disadvantages, and real practices of various PSW pyrolysis reactors.  

Reactor types 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Real practice 

Batch reactor 

Simple construction and operation; 
Low investment 

Low processing capacity; Long residence 
time; Low heat transfer rate 

Screw kiln 
reactor 

Uniform heat transfer; Controllable 
residence time; Simple separation of 
solid residue 

Plugging risk; Possible heat transfer 
difficulties at large scales; Poor mixing at 
radial direction 

Fluidized bed 

reactor 

High heat and mass transfer rate; 
Scale up; Good mixing; Good 
control of operation parameters 

Defluidization problems; High carrier gas 
rate; Required particle size; High 
investment 

Conical spouted 
bed reactor 

Extremely short residence time; 
High heat transfer rate; Good 
mixing; Good control of operation 
parameters 

Scale up; Bed material particle size 
limitation; Catalyst circulation 

Microwave- 
assisted 
pyrolysis 
reactor 

Fast, selective, and volumetric 
heating; Easy design and operation; 
Convenient start-up and shutdown 

Heating dependence on waste dielectric 
properties; The limited processing capacity 
due to the finite microwave penetration 
depth 

Molten salt 
pyrolysis 
reactor 

High heating transfer rate; No 
limitation on particle size 

Scale up; High operation cost 

Plasma pyrolysis 

reactor 

High heating transfer rate; Low 
investment; Ultra-fast reaction 
velocity 

Extremely high voltage; Scale up 

◦

◦

◦

C 

C, Reaction time 

C, 2 g HDPE in total, residence time 

–C40 linear paraffins almost without aromatcs), 7.4 

Operating condition: 3.5 L batch reactor, 100 g plastic 
mixture, pyrolysis temperature of 500 
of 30 min 
Result: 65.2 wt.% of liquid yield with 69.7 of 
monoaromatics; a positive energy balance (+700 kJ/kg) 
Operating condition: the reactor size of a 26.5 mm 
diameter and a 500 mm length, pyrolysis temperature of 
500 
C, 300 g plastic mixture/h, residence time of 15 s 
Result: 5.5 wt.% liquid oil and 93.2 wt.% of wax 
Operating condition: the reactor size of a 710 mm high 
cylinder with 58 mm of internal diameter, pyrolysis 
◦
temperature of 500 
of 1.3–1.7 s 
Results: 40.9 wt.% of liquids (mainly composed of 
C10
wt.% of wax 
Operating condition: 30 g of sands, LDPE flowrate of 60 
g/h; residence time of around 12 s; pyrolysis temperature 
of 500 
Result: 69 wt.% of wax with the Mw of 1534 Da; HHV of 
35.55 MJ/kg 
Operating condition: 6 kg of silicon carbide balls used as 
the microwave absorbents, HDPE feeding rate of 2 kg/h; 
residence time of around 90 s; pyrolysis temperature of 
500 
Result: 33 wt.% of liquid oil (mainly composed of C6-C26 
n-alkanes/alkenes), 41 wt.% of wax; if a ZSM-5 catalyst is 
used, pyrolyzing 1 kg of HDPE requires 5 MJ electrical 
energy, giving a 89.6% energy efficiency. Furthermore, 
6.1 MJ of electrical energy potentially produced from gas 
product enables this process to be energy self-sufficient. 
Operating condition: 13 kg of the tin and lead alloy used 
as the molten metal bed, 300 g of HDPE, pyrolysis 
◦
temperature of 419–428 
Result: 93.31 of liquid oil (48.8–52.1% of C4
–C16, 16.9–17.9% of C17
30.9–33.6% of C11
without aromatics) 
Operating condition: 270 W direct current thermal 
plasma, residence time of 30 min, pyrolysis temperature 
of 500 
Result: 75.6 wt.% of liquid yield with aromatic 
monomers and dimers as the main products  

C, pressure = (cid:0) 0.95 bar, 15 g LDPE sample 

–C10, 
–C24 almost 

C 

C 

◦

◦

References 

[24,95,96] 

[97,98] 

[16, 
99-101] 

[26,31,78, 
82] 

[31,94, 
102-104] 

[31,105, 
106] 

[107,108] 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010218L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

chromatography  (GC)-flame 
ionization  detection  (FID)  or  Gas 
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer (GC–MS) analysis. Baena-Gonz´alez 
et al. [111] analyzed the composition of plastic waste pyrolysis oils by 
GC–MS,  and  intended  to  recover  bitumen,  solvents,  and  styrene  by 
combining distillation and/or liquid-liquid extraction processing steps, 
as needed. As evaluated by GC–MS, the chemical compositions of PSW 
derived  liquid  oils  vary,  depending  on  the  chemical  structure  of  the 
beginning plastics. PS pyrolysis only obtained 79.5% of mono-aromatics 
and 11.5% di-aromatics, while the styrene content was as high as 53.5% 
[67].  More  complicated  compound  mixtures  were  generated  from 
polyolefin plastics pyrolysis. The liquid oil from PE pyrolysis contained 
55.5%  aromatic,  and  43.1%  aliphatic  compounds,  while  PP  pyrolysis 
obtained 52.9% aromatic and 44.7% aliphatic compounds [67]. 

However, common GC–MS technique is only able to analyze some of 
components in pyrolysis oil due to due to the insufficient resolution and 
the  difficulty  in  detecting  structural  isomers.  In  this  regard,  two- 
dimensional  gas  chromatography  (GC  × GC)  coupled  with  time-of- 
flight  mass  spectrometry  (TOF-MS)  (GC  × GC-TOFMS)  that  uses  a 
non-polar column to separate compounds with similar chemical struc-
tures first and a polar column for the second dimension could be one of 
the  most  attractive  options.  Fan  et  al.  [112]  found  more  than  5100 
compounds in characterizing the bio-oil produced from sewage sludge 
pyrolysis using GC × GC-TOFMS, which is about 10 times as many as 
those identified by GC–MS. Tessarolo et al. [113] studied the detailed 
chemical compositions of bio-oil by GC–MS and GC × GC-TOFMS with 
the hope of allowing the improved usage of this attractive renewable 
energy source in bio-fuels. Results showed that several coelutions pre-
sent in the GC–MS can be resolved by GC × GC-TOFMS and the number 
of  compounds  identified  by  GC  × GC-TOFMS  was  much  higher. 
Although GC × GC-TOFMS analysis of bio-oil in biomass pyrolysis has 
been  developed,  its  application  in  analyzing  plastic  pyrolysis  oil  is 
lacking. 

In order to further acquire the heavy hydrocarbons distribution that 
can not be calibrated by GC-FID/MS and information for distinguishing 
hydrocarbons  in  the  liquid  oil  with  the  extremely  similar  structure, 
Fourier  Transform  Infrared  Spectroscopy  (FTIR),  Nuclear  Magnetic 
Resonance (NMR), elemental analysis, and Size Exclusion Chromatog-
raphy (SEC) can be also applied. From 1H NMR spectra, protons attached 
to alkanes, olefins, and aromatics can be determined, and the percent-
ages of different chemical groups can be obtained, by integrating the 1H 
NMR spectra [114]. Chemical shifts, which are indicative of the func-
tionalities  of  alkenes  and  alkanes  are  4.5–6.5  ppm  and  0.5–2.7  ppm, 
respectively. The FTIR spectral analysis can also obtain similar results to 
NMR.  C–H  stretching  vibrations  of  the  chemical  functional  groups 
(cid:0) 1 and C = C stretching 
-CH3, -CH2, and -CH appeared at 2800–3000 cm
(cid:0) 1, indicating 
vibrations were observed at approximately 1640–1650 cm
the presence of olefins. If aromatics also existed, a peak at 3000–3100 
(cid:0) 1 would appear. SEC analysis is able to acquire the molecular weight 
cm
distribution  information  of  the  plastic  pyrolysis  oil.  On  average,  the 
molecular weight of an oil fraction with a lower boiling temperature, is 
lower than that of a higher boiling temperature. 

Currently,  the  most  common  tool  used  for  pyrolysis  oil  character-
ization is GC-FID/MS that can provide the detailed chemical composi-
tions  and  the  relative  contents  [19,115].  Considering  that  GC  inlet 
◦
temperature and oven temperature is usually around 280 
C, the heavy 
hydrocarbons  with  high  boiling  point  can  not  be  detected  by 
GC/GC–MS. Despite of this, heavy hydrocarbons have small solubility in 
CH2Cl2  that is usually used as a solvent for GC analysis so that the in-
formation about larger fractions may not be obtained accurately [110]. 
This  could  limit  the  understanding  for  the  pyrolysis  oil  by  only 
GC/GC–MS  analysis.  Based  on  our  knowledge,  a  PSW  pyrolysis  oil 
sample should be distilled into naphtha-range hydrocarbons (the boiling 
temperature˂170 
C˂  the 
◦
boiling temperature˂280 
C˂ the 
C), diesel-range hydrocarbons (280 
◦
boiling  temperature˂400 
C),  and  wax  (the  boiling  temperature˃400 
◦
C) fractions first. The relative yields of different range hydrocarbons 

C),  kerosene-range  hydrocarbons  (170 

◦

◦

◦

can be  determined by  simulated  distillation.  For  those naphtha-range 
and  kerosene-range  hydrocarbons,  GC-FID/MS  can  play  a  key  role  in 
analyzing the chemical compositions and determining the correspond-
ing carbon yield. With regard to heavier compounds, FTIR, NMR, and 
SEC can be effectively combined to analyze the corresponding chemical 
properties. 

3. PSW pyrolysis for recovery of fuels or chemicals 

Since mechanical recycling of PSW is hampered by high pre-sorting 
requirements  and  decreasing  product  quality  in  each  cycle,  chemical 
recycling  can tackle these  challenges  and has  attracted much  interest 
from scientific and industrial communities. Research and development 
on chemical recycling of PSW, especially pyrolysis, seem to have made 
significant  progress.  The  use  of  pyrolysis  to  recycle  highly  valuable 
products  from  PSW  around  the  world  shows  a  great  potential.  Espe-
cially, transforming PSW to pyrolysis oil at an industrial scale, which can 
be  fed  into  the  current  petrochemical  production  network  as  a  raw 
material and reduce the input of fossil resources, shows higher market 
attractiveness. By feeding the PSW derived pyrolysis oils into the current 
petrochemical production network to manufacture virgin plastic prod-
ucts, the loop for plastic re-use can be partially closed. In this regard, 
chemically recycled plastics can lead to lower CO2 emissions, compared 
to using fresh fossil resources for plastics production. 

3.1. Fuels production from pyrolysis of psw 

Pyrolysis  of  PSW  to  produce  valuable  liquid  fuels  suitable  for 
transportation,  is  an  effective  pathway  to  optimize  the  PSW  manage-
ment towards zero landfilling, and minimize the carbon footprint of the 
transportation industry [116]. Commercial PSW pyrolysis plants have 
been built in recent years, showing the feasibility of producing trans-
portation fuels from PSW at an industry scale. For example, a pyrolysis 
plant  with  the  capacity  of  5–7  tons/day  PSW  was  designed  and 
commissioned in South East Asia in 2014, with the aim to eliminate the 
PSW  already  in  the  landfill  [116].  In  this  system,  the  oil  yield  was 
approximately 65 wt.% and it was demonstrated to be distilled into 27% 
gasoline  and  70%  diesel.  Another  batch-operated  rotary  kiln  with  a 
volume of 35 m3 was assembled with a total processing capacity of 14 
tons/day  of  PSW  in  Eastern  Europe  in  2015  [116].  According  to  the 
report, the top priority for successfully commercializing the product is to 
mitigate wax formation by using suitable catalysts, and optimizing the 
process.  But  its  throughput  is  limited  by  the  batch  operating  mode, 
which  prevents  the  catalyst  from  working  at  optimized  conditions. 
Although the produced fuel is unable to meet transportation standards, 
it can, at least, be used as a fossil fuel substitute. Many observations have 
verified  that  production  of  liquid  fuels  from  PSW  via  pyrolysis  is 
promising and commercially viable. In this regard, a great number of 
studies  have  been  conducted  to  develop  new  catalysts  suitable  for 
different fuels production, and improve the pyrolysis process. 

3.1.1. Effects of temperature and residence time 

◦

Temperature  is  definitely  one  of  the  most  important  pyrolysis  pa-
rameters for controlling the cracking reaction of PSW, since the cracking 
of PSW is largely dependent on the temperature ranges they are exposed 
to. One study indicated that 99.4 wt.% decomposition can result for a 
plastic mixture at 500 
C [117]. Increasing the pyrolysis temperature 
will promote the cracking of PSW, which in turn generates more gas and 
gradually  eliminates  wax  in  the  products.  When  HDPE  pyrolysis  was 
performed  in  a  fluidized  bed  reactor  at  650–850 
C,  the  yield  of  the 
liquid (mainly composed of aliphatic hydrocarbons) was highest at 640 
◦
C (79.7 wt%), whereas only 9.6 wt% of liquid product (high aromatic 
hydrocarbons)  with  high  yields  of  gaseous  products  (86.4  wt%)  was 
obtained  at  780 
C  [23].  Gracida-Alvarez  et  al.  studied  the  effect  of 
temperature on HDPE pyrolysis, and found that higher temperature was 
favorable  for  the  formation  of  aromatics  and  light  aliphatics  and 

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010219L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 7. Scheme of the pyrolysis process in different reactors. (Adapted from [94,97] with permission from Elsevier).  

Table 4 
Advantages  and  disadvantages  of  methods 
characterization.  

for  plastic  pyrolysis  oil 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Methods 

GC-FID/MS 

GC × GC-TOFMS 

FTIR 

NMR 

SEC 

Thermogravimetric 

analysis 

Understanding the 
detailed chemical 
compositions 

Higher resolution in the 
chemical compositions in 
the oil 

Obtaining chemical groups 
information; No 
requirement for oil 
vaporization 
Obtaining chemical groups 
information; No 
requirement for oil 
vaporization 
Obtaining the molecular 
weight distribution 
information; No 
requirement for oil 
vaporization 
Obtaining boiling 
temperature range 

Limited inlet and column 
temperature; Different 
solubility of long chain 
hydrocarbons in solvents 
Limited inlet and column 
temperature; Different 
solubility of hydrocarbons 
in solvents 
No information for detailed 
chemical compositions 

No information for detailed 
chemical compositions 

No information for 
chemical compositions/ 
groups 

No information for 
chemical compositions/ 
groups 
High cost; Time-consuming  

Distillation, combined 

technologies 

Accurate chemical profiles 
for naphtha, kerosene, 
diesel, and wax 

◦
C to 450 

facilitated the degradation to diesel range aliphatics and wax [118]. In a 
small pilot scale batch pyrolysis reactor, increasing the pyrolysis tem-
◦
perature from 400 
C can obtain about 4% increase in oil yield, 
while further temperature increases could cause a decrease in oil yield 
[119].  It  was  also  found  that  the  increase  of  pyrolysis  temperature 
enhanced the concentration of H2 in the gas product, however, there was 
no effect on the formation of CO or CO2 [120]. 

For a two-step pyrolysis-catalysis process, catalytic temperature also 
plays a vital role in product yield and selectivity. It is indispensable for 
driving the catalytic reaction to provide suitable catalytic temperature. 
Zhang et al.’s [121] results indicated that a higher catalytic temperature 

◦

decreased the liquid yield due to the facilitated cracking of the pyrolysis 
vapors  toward  non-condensable  gasses  during  catalytic  pyrolysis  of 
plastic over an activated carbon catalyst. When the catalytic tempera-
C,  approximately  20%  higher 
ture  was  increased  from  430  to  571 
selectivity of C8–C16  linear alkanes was obtained, and mono-ring aro-
matics production also responded with a gradual increase. More gasses 
(mainly C1–C4 hydrocarbons) were also obtained in the ex-situ catalytic 
reforming of plastic pyrolysis vapors, as the catalyst bed temperature 
C  [122].  This  finding  indicated  that  the 
increased  from  500  to  600 
catalytic temperature changed the liquid oil compositions more effec-
tively than the catalyst type. 

◦

Residence time defined for steady-state pyrolysis system is a measure 
of the average time plastic feedstock spends in the pyrolysis reactor and 
can be calculated by considering the total gas flow in the reactor and the 
internal volume of the reactor. It is found to show very similar effects on 
the  PSW  pyrolysis  to  reaction  temperatures.  Generally  speaking,  the 
longer residence time could result in the over-cracking of PSW and in-
crease the chances for secondary reactions (further cracking, isomeri-
zation, aromatization, alkylation, and hydrogenation/dehydrogenation 
reactions, etc.), obtaining higher yield of gas product. Mastral et al. [23] 
studied effect of residence time on HDPE pyrolysis and observed that the 
longer residence times provided enhanced yields of gaseous products. In 
addition,  longer  residence  time  is  favorable  for  the  evolution  of  aro-
matics [118]. More specifically, when pyrolyzing HDPE at a two-stage 
micropyrolysis reactor, low temperature (625 
C) and short residence 
time (1.4 s) produced diesel range hydrocarbons combined with gaso-
◦
C) and short residence time 
line and gasses; moderate temperature (650 
(1.4 s) mainly produced gasoline range hydrocarbons and gasses; high 
◦
temperature (675 
C) and long residence time (5.6 s) primarily produced 
gasses and aromatics. All in all, longer residence time tends to facilitate 
the secondary conversion of the primary products, and generates more 
stable compounds, including aromatics and non-condensable gasses. It 
was  interesting  that  Mastral  et  al.  observed  the  interdependence  of 
temperature and residence time [123]. At a temperature lower than 685 
◦
C, longer residence time inversely resulted in a higher liquid yield for 
◦
HDPE pyrolysis, while at temperatures above 685 
C, the residence time 
had no obvious influence on the liquid and gas yields. 

◦

In order to study the effect of volatiles residence time on the prod-
ucts, two different set-ups were developed, a pyroprobe flash pyrolyzer 
that allows us to study the primary products due to near zero residence 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102110L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

time  and  negligible  secondary  reactions  and  a  fluidized  bed  reactor 
where the extent of the secondary reactions is significant [124]. They 
found  that  the  increase  of  residence  time  can  decrease  the  yields  of 
C4–C7 hydrocarbons in the thermal pyrolysis of HDPE, but the yields of 
C4–C7  hydrocarbons increased with residence time in the presence of 
HZSM-5  catalyst.  During  thermal  degradation,  some  hydrocarbons 
produced  by  primary  reactions  and  by  tar  and  heavy  hydrocarbon 
cracking can be further cracked with the increasing residence time so 
that  the  yields  of  C4–C7  hydrocarbons  decreased.  However,  this 
behavior is not detected under catalytic conditions. It was also reported 
that the liquid yield during LDPE pyrolysis in a closed reactor decreased 
from 91.1 wt.% at zero residence time to 72.4 wt.% at residence time of 
60 min, and further to nearly 61 wt.% with the residence time increasing 
to 120 min [125]. 

Overall, the high temperature and long residence time would pro-
mote the cracking of polymers, leading to the production of more low- 
molecular-weight  hydrocarbons  and  gas  molecules,  and  the  aromatic 
selectivity shows an upward trend with the increasing temperature and 
residence time. Basically, in order to provide maximum liquid products, 
the pyrolysis temperature should be precisely controlled and residence 
time  needs  to  be  minimized.  For  example,  it  is  reported  that  the 
decomposition  temperature  for  PP  is  378–456 
C,  whereas  LDPE  and 
HDPE  degrade  at  437–486 
C,  respectively  [126].  A 
further increase in reaction temperatures would lead to enhanced yields 
of gaseous products. 

C  and  452–489 

◦

◦

◦

3.1.2. Effect of catalysts 

In  a  non-catalytic  pyrolysis  of  PSW,  carbon-carbon  linkage  in  the 
polymer chains can be broken randomly and no rearrangement of the 
fragments occurs, resulting in a wide distribution of products, such as 
light olefins, gasoline range, diesel range, and waxes [67,111]. Although 
increasing temperature can improve the share of lighter hydrocarbons, 
the production of desirable fuels and chemicals with high selectivity is 
still  a  great  challenge.  The  use  of  a  suitable  catalyst  with  desirable 
properties is necessary to narrow the product distribution and enhance 
target product selectivity. On one hand, the addition of a catalyst can 
lower the decomposition temperature of the plastic; on the other hand, 
product selectivity can be modified towards a vast variety of valuable 
oils, such as gasoline [63], diesel [127], aromatics [128], and jet fuel 
[129],  which  are  fairly  different  from  the  product  compositions  for 
non-catalytic pyrolysis. The product distribution from catalytic pyrolysis 
of plastic is controlled by catalyst properties, including acidity and pore 
structure,  as  shown  in  Fig.  8.  With  an  increase  of  catalyst  acidity, 
shorter-chain hydrocarbons would be generated, due to the facilitated 
cracking reaction. 

There is no doubt that catalytic pyrolysis of plastics sometimes shows 
several drawbacks, which may be caused by the inherent nature of the 
catalysts used. For example, one main concern is catalyst deactivation. 
The difficulty of regenerating the catalyst poses another challenge to this 
technology.  In  some  cases,  catalyst  structure  can  be  completely 
destroyed  in  the  catalytic  process,  significantly  increasing  the  capital 
cost.  In  addition,  the  activity  and  selectivity  for  the  catalytic  process 
depends primarily on the catalyst type, and the corresponding reaction 
conditions, such as temperature, velocity, and atmosphere. In the pre-
vious studies, it was found that solid acids, used in the catalytic pyrolysis 
of plastics, have been recognized as the most promising candidates [19, 
130,131].  Therefore,  different  types  of  solid  acids  used  for  catalytic 
pyrolysis of plastics are discussed below. 

Zeolites are very common molecular sieves, which turns out to be 
one of the most suitable candidates for plastic cracking, due to the acidic 
properties and unique shape selectivity. Therefore, a great number of 
studies concerning the screening of effective zeolites, and the investi-
gation  of  the  corresponding  catalytic  fundamentals  have  been  con-
ducted.  The  need  for  screening  zeolite  catalysts  was  highlighted  by 
Manos  et  al.,  who  compared  the  catalytic  performance  of  4  zeolites 
(Ultrastable Y, Y, β, ZSM-5) during catalytic degradation of HDPE in a 

semi-batch reactor [132]. It was found that lighter hydrocarbons can be 
generated over  medium-pore  zeolites,  as  compared to  large-pore zeo-
lites, in the order of (lighter hydrocarbons) ZSM-5 ˂ mordenite ˂ β ˂ Y ˂ 
Ultrastable Y (heavier hydrocarbons). In addition, the same order was 
observed concerning the bond saturation (alkanes or olefins). This in-
dicates that the pore structure of zeolites largely affects product distri-
bution, especially the ratio of alkanes to olefins. US-Y, Y, and β zeolites 
mainly produced alkanes, whereas the major products were alkenes over 
mordenite and ZSM-5, due to rapid bimolecular hydrogen transfer re-
actions, which is responsible for the generation of saturated hydrocar-
bons [133]. A similar study was conducted by Mordi et al., who tested 
the  catalytic  activity  of  H-mordenite,  H-Theta-1,  and  H-ZSM-5  in  the 
catalytic  degradation  of  LDPE  [134].  The  major  degradation  compo-
nents  were  C11–C19  hydrocarbons  (mainly  alkanes/alkenes)  from 
H-mordenite or H-Theta-1, while the carbon chain length was no more 
than  14  (mainly  aromatics)  over  H-ZSM-5.  It  was  interesting  that 
cracking  initiation  could  be  completed  at  the  external  surface  of  the 
zeolite  catalysts,  or  at  the  pore  entrance,  because  polymer  molecules 
were too large to enter the pore structure and access the internal active 
sites. 

One  important  finding  was  that  zeolite  catalysts  tended  to  show 
higher selectivity than other catalysts, towards aromatics in most cases, 
especially HY and ZSM-5. The aromatic formation mechanism mainly 
involves two stages, one of which is catalytic cracking to generate car-
benium  ions  by  Lewis  acid  site  reactions,  or  carbonium  ions  via  pro-
tonation of hydrocarbons on Bronsted acid sites. In the next step, these 
intermediates were converted into aromatics via isomerization, oligo-
merization, cyclization, Diels-Alder, and aromatization reactions on the 
surface of catalysts [135]. In this regard, Akubo et al. observed in the 
catalytic pyrolysis of HDPE, in a fixed, two stage bed that Y zeolites with 
transition  metal  promoters  produced  an  oil  product  with  aromatic 
content  of over  80%  [136]. The share  of  aromatics was  much  higher 
than in the non-catalytic process, where the aliphatic product content 
was  up  to  >99%.  The  single  ring  aromatic  compounds,  including 
toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes were dominate, although 2-ring and 
multiple aromatics were also formed. A high yield of aromatic hydro-
carbons  was  also  obtained  in  the  catalytic  fast  pyrolysis  of  PS  with 
HZSM-5,  Hβ,  HY,  and  ultra-stable  Y  [137].  Ultra-stable  Y  catalyst 
showed  the  best  shape  selectivity  for  ethylbenzene  and  benzene  for-
mation, and maximized the aromatic production. 

Mesoporous aluminosilicates (Al-MCM-41 and Al-SBA-15) with the 
tunable pore size of 1.5–30 nm allow plastic molecules or intermediates 
to  enter  the  catalyst  mesopores  directly,  mitigating  the  steric  and 
diffusional hindrances, and greatly increasing the accessibility of inter-
nal acid sites. It was then used in the catalytic cracking of plastics in 
1996 for the first time, which confirmed the feasibility of this type of 
catalyst  [138].  It  was  proposed  that  the  growth  around  micelles  is 
responsible for the synthesis of the ordered mesoporous aluminosilicates 
[139]. The templates are first formed by aggregating the micelles into 
the hexagonal structures, and then the silica begins to condense around 
these templates. After calcination at high temperature, the templates are 
removed and the ordered mesoporous structure is formed. The uniform 
mesoporous distribution and ultra-high specific surface area enable it to 
show  a  higher  conversion  rate  for  polyolefins,  as  compared  to  amor-
phous  SiO2-Al2O3  [140].  Compared  to  ZSM-5,  the  acid  strength  of 
MCM-41 was lower, leading to the lower catalytic activity for cracking 
of HDPE and LDPE. It was interesting that the severe steric hindrances 
caused  by  the  narrow  pores  of  ZSM-5  resulted  in  the  lower  catalytic 
activity for PP cracking while MCM-41 exhibited 99% conversion due to 
the better accessibility of acid sites located in the mesopores. 

Zhang et al. [19] converted LDPE into a gasoline-type product using 
the shape-selective Al-SBA-15 catalyst and the results showed a great 
potential of Al-SBA-15 catalyst in the catalytic cracking of LDPE. When 
the silicon/aluminum molar ratio of Al-SBA-15 was 5, the temperature 
at  the  50% conversion  was  even lower than  ZSM-5,  regardless of  the 
weaker acid sites. With ZSM-5 catalyst, the product contained a large 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102111L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 8. Effect of different acid catalysts on product distribution during catalytic pyrolysis of polyolefins. (Reprinted from [31] with permission from Elsevier).  

amount of mono-aromatic, such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and 
xylenes,  which  was  completely  different  from  Al-SBA-15  catalyst. 
Al-SBA-15 gave rise to a well-defined gasoline-type product which was 
mainly composed of C4–C10  alkenes/alkanes. The catalytic activity of 
Al-SBA-15 was attributed to the following features: (1) the large pore 
size which allowed LDPE chains to fully access the Brønsted sites of the 
catalyst;  (2)  the  modulated  strength  of  acid  sites  was  favorable  for 
controlling  the  cracking  of  LDPE,  and  generating  more  gas;  (3)  the 
wide-pore system improved the diffusion of gasoline-like hydrocarbons 
and minimized secondary cracking reactions. Similar conclusions were 
drawn by Socci et al. in the catalytic cracking of LDPE over mesoporous 
Al-SBA-15 materials [141]. Due to the higher diffusional efficiency of 
reactants  in  the  mesoporous  structure  of  the  Al-SBA-15  catalysts 
compared  to ZSM-5,  a higher  selectivity  of  the gasoline  range hydro-
carbons  was  obtained.  The  density  and  strength  of  the  Brønsted  acid 
sites, pore structure, and the Al content, had a significant effect on the 
pyrolytic product distribution. 

Although  these  mesoporous  materials  with  high  surface  area  and 
well-defined larger pores show great potential to process bulky plastic 

feedstocks,  the  shape  selectivity  and  long  catalyst  lifetime  cannot  be 
observed [142]. In the catalytic pyrolysis of LDPE, HZSM-5 gave a sig-
nificant  increase  in  the  light  olefins  and  aromatics  by  eliminating 
heavier hydrocarbons, while mesoporous Al-MCM-41 catalyst exhibited 
no shape selectivity with a wide range of hydrocarbons. To improve the 
shape selectivity of mesoporous materials, “relay catalysis process” was 
developed,  in  which  several  catalysts  are  used  in  tandem.  Recently, 
Ratnasari  et  al.  [143]  effectively  converted  waste  plastics  to  gasoline 
range hydrocarbons (C8–C12) over MCM-41/ZSM-5 catalysts. Pyrolysis 
volatiles passed through a mesoporous MCM-41 catalyst layer followed 
by a microporous ZSM-5 zeolite with the aim of controlling the product 
distribution more accurately. Highest selectivity (97.72%) of gasoline 
range hydrocarbons was obtained at the a MCM-41:ZSM-5 ratio of 1:1, 
which was higher than the single use of ZSM-5 or MCM-41. It indicated 
that the high surface and large pore volume were favorable for catalytic 
cracking of the heavy hydrocarbons in the primary pyrolysis vapors to 
lighter molecules, which were then easier to enter into ZSM-5 micro-
pores for further reforming reactions. 

As mentioned above, the catalytic pyrolysis of plastics over zeolites 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102112L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

clays is lower than zeolite catalysts but higher than pure silica. Although 
less active than USY zeolite, clays led to higher liquid yield in the cat-
alytic pyrolysis of PE at around 600 K, with gasoline range hydrocarbons 
being the major products [151]. Alkenes dominated in the oil product 
from the clay-catalyzed process, instead of aromatics. It was due to the 
milder  acidity  as  compared  to  USY  zeolite,  thereby  mitigating  the 
hydrogen-transfer  secondary  reactions.  At  the  same  time,  a  smaller 
amount  of  coke  was  formed  on  the  surface  of  clays.  In  the  catalytic 
pyrolysis of PS, Kaolin was confirmed as an effective catalyst, giving a 
higher  liquid  yield  than  the  non-catalytic  pyrolysis  process  with  aro-
matic hydrocarbons being the main components [152]. 

To further improve the catalytic performance of clays, modification 
techniques change the pore structure and acidity, with the aim of tuning 
or narrowing the resulting hydrocarbons distribution. Although kaolin 
catalyst has a certain cracking ability to convert polymers to diesel range 
hydrocarbons, the HCl modified clay can further crack the diesel frac-
tion into shorter chain hydrocarbons (C6–C11) because HCl modifica-
tion is able to create more active functional groups, resulting in stronger 
acidity  [153].  Stefanis  et  al.  modified  the  smectite  clays  by  acid 
restructuring  or  oxide  intercalation  assembly  and  tested  their  perfor-
mance in the catalytic cracking of PE [154]. The chemical profile and 
yield  of  liquid  product  both  reflected  that  clay-based  catalysts  with 
weaker  acidity  mitigated  the  over-cracking  toward  small  molecules, 
giving higher liquid product yield. Several restructured or pillared clays 
had different structures, leading to an activity different from each other. 
Most  clays  gave  aliphatic  hydrocarbons  as  the  major  products  except 
HSA  (a  modified saponite  clay).  Li  et  al. [22]  also  developed  various 
transition metal pillared clays to produce diesel range hydrocarbons and 
hydrogen from mixed plastics. The high catalytic activity of modified 
clays  was  attributed  to  the  moderate  acidity,  high  surface  area,  and 
uniformly dispersed metal oxide particles on the support. 

In  addition  to  these  materials,  fluidized  catalytic  cracking  (FCC) 
catalysts composed of crystalline zeolites, acid SiO2-Al2O3, and binding 
agents  are  proposed  as  promising  catalysts  for  catalytic  cracking  of 
plastics.  Although  the  spent  equilibrium  FCC  showed  lower  catalytic 
activity than the silica–aluminas, this can be compensated by using more 
spent  FCC  catalysts.  Taking  the  economical  factor  into  account,  the 
negligible cost of the spent FCC catalyst enables it to be more suitable for 
industrial  application.  Rodríguez  et  al.  [155]  conducted  catalytic 
cracking  of  HDPE  pyrolysis  waxes  in  a  CREC  riser  simulator  reactor, 
with the goal to study the effect of the FCC equilibrium catalyst prop-
erties on product distribution. As a whole, three FCC catalysts produced 
similar product compositions, while with less acidic catalyst the naphtha 
fraction  contained  less  aromatics  and  more  olefins.  The  spent  FCC 
catalyst was also used to crack HDPE in a conical spouted bed, restricting 
the formation of aromatics and paraffins and giving rise to the lumps of 
gasoline  fraction  and  light  olefins  [84].  The  spent  catalyst  possesses 
meso‑ and macroporous pores which allow plastic molecules to diffuse 
for cracking and micropores in the zeolite crystals which give a higher 
shape selectivity to gasoline range hydrocarbons and light olefins. 

Metal  oxides,  with  a  multivalent  nature,  and  special  acid–base 
properties, have been widely used in heterogeneous catalysis reactions 
[156,157]. Various metal oxides have been tested in catalytic cracking 
of plastics, showing potential to catalyze the thermal cracking of poly-
mers  and/or  the  reforming  of  pyrolysis  intermediates  in  the  volatiles 
into more stable products (Table 5) [25,158,159]. Ten years ago, Shah 
et al. [160] attempted to achieve the maximum conversion of LDPE into 
chemicals using a wide range of acidic and basic metal oxides and cal-
cium carbide. An interesting finding is that metal oxides, such as MgO, 
Al2O3, and ZnO, are more suitable for the production of polar and aro-
matic products, while CaC2 should be adopted if aliphatic products are 
desirable. 

Al2O3 is a very common catalyst/support in the catalytic pyrolysis of 
solid  wastes.  Fe–Ce@Al2O3  was  used  to  catalytically  convert  poly-
carbonate  (PC)  plastic  waste  into  aromatic  hydrocarbons  at  650 
C 
including  co-precipitation, 
[161].  Three  preparation  methods, 

◦

Fig.  9. Relationship  between  molecular  kinetic  diameter,  pore  diameter  and 
pore ring number of different zeolites. (Reprinted from [150] with permission 
from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 

proceeds initially by the acid sites present in the outer surface or large 
pores,  and  then  the  smaller  intermediates  can  subsequently  enter  the 
zeolite  micropores  for  further  cracking  or  other  secondary  reactions, 
which is controlled by the acidity and the pore channel architecture of 
the zeolites. For example, cyclohexane with a kinetic diameter of 0.6 nm 
is unable to enter the micropores of ZSM-5 zeolite (10 membered ring 
channels with size of 0.56 nm) due to steric hindrance imposed by the 
micropore size, but it can access the acid sites inside the micropores of Y 
zeolite  (12  membered  ring  channels  with  size  of  0.74  nm)  [144]. 
However,  the  C6H3(C3H7)3  possessing  approximately  0.82  nm  pore 
channels can not enter the micropores of Y zeolite, as shown in Fig. 9. 
Theoretically,  strong  Brønsted  acid  sites  that  determines  the  cracking 
performance of zeolites are attributed to the acidic protons linked to the 
Si-O-Al bridge bond inside micropores [145]. Therefore, enhancing the 
accessibility of the zeolite acid sites could improve product distribution 
and catalyst lifetime in the catalytic cracking of polyolefins over zeo-
lites.  Unlike conventional  zeolites  which  are mainly  composed  of  mi-
cropores,  hierarchical  zeolites  are  characterized  by  their  multimodal 
microporous(cid:0) mesoporous-macropore  pore  size  distribution  with  a 
considerable share of mesopores, enabling them to be more active for 
plastic cracking. In this regard, significant advances have come due to 
the application of hierarchical zeolites. Lee et al. [146] compared hi-
erarchical ZSM-5 zeolite with conventional one in the catalytic cracking 
of PE, finding that hierarchical ZSM-5 showed higher catalytic activity 
(about 95% of conversion) due to a high external surface and a rapid 
mass transfer. Caldeira et al. [147] tested two hierarchical Beta zeolites 
obtained from reorganization of the protozeolitic nanounits and the use 
of  a  silanization  agent.  Both  hierarchical  Beta  zeolites  can  achieve 
higher  plastic  conversion  (67.3  wt.%  and  97  wt.%)  than  the  conven-
tional Beta sample. The results obtained indicate that the HDPE cracking 
activity is strongly related with the acid sites within the micropores, so 
the overall catalytic activity largely depends on the accessibility to the 
acid  sites.  Silva  et  al.  [148]  also  confirmed  that  hierarchical  ZSM-23 
demonstrated the higher conversion efficiency and lower energy level 
in  catalytic  cracking  of  PE  compared  to  the  microporous  ZSM-23. 
Quantitative  analysis  of  the  accessibility  of  Brønsted  acid  sites  shows 
that a larger number of accessible Brønsted acid sites exists in hierar-
chical ZSM-5 (64.3%) than the parent ZSM-5 (6.25%) [149]. It enables 
◦
the decomposition temperature of LDPE to decrease to 420 
C, which is 
originally 453  

C with the use of parent ZSM-5. 

◦

Other  materials  used  for  catalytic  cracking  of  PSW  are  clay-based 
catalysts.  The  huge  reserves  and  low  price  of  this  type  of  material 
make these attractive to be used for catalysts in industry. These mate-
rials  are  found  to  have  a  naturally  layered  structure,  between  which 
different metal oxides can be intercalated (pillared clay). The acidity of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102113L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

impregnation,  and  physical  mixing,  were compared.  Experimental re-
sults  showed  that  co-precipitation  gave  rise  to  the  highest  content  of 
monocyclic  aromatic  hydrocarbons.  It  was  attributed  to  weaker  acid 
sites, larger pore volume, higher surface area, and uniformly dispersed 
metal oxides. Transition metals (Fe, Co, and Ni) were able to effectively 
improve  the  basicity  of  the  Al2O3  support  [162].  When  used  in  the 
catalytic  pyrolysis  of  PS,  β-chain-breaking  was  facilitated,  thereby 
leading  to  a  higher  selectivity  of  styrene  monomers.  Different  metal 
species (Ni, Cu, Ce, Co, and La) were also screened in the catalytic py-
◦
rolysis of PS waste foams, at temperatures ranging from 400 to 500 
C to 
obtain the highest conversion of PS, and more desirable product com-
ponents  [163].  Cu/Al2O3  was  found  to  be  the  best  candidate  for  PS 
conversion, with the highest styrene yield of 63.59%. 

Recently, a significant breakthrough was made in the PE conversion 
over Al2O3 supported Pt catalyst [164]. PE was effectively converted to 
valuable long-chain alkyl-aromatics and alkyl-naphthenes by combining 
exothermic  hydrogenolysis  and  endothermic  aromatization  at  a  very 

◦

C. Compared to the conventional long-chain 
low temperature of 280 
alkyl-aromatic  production,  this  one-step  process  is  much  simpler  and 
less energy-intensive and gets rid of organic solvents used in the con-
ventional  process.  More 
to  80  wt.%  of 
low-molecular-weight  liquid/wax  products  was  obtained,  with  negli-
gible  amounts  of  light  gasses  produced.  The  stability  testing  of 
Pt/γ-Al2O3  catalyst  indicates  that  the  intrinsic  activity  of  the  catalyst 
stays  unchanged  regardless  of  the  decreasing  liquid/wax  yield  in  the 
second run. However, the issue for this process is the long reaction time 
in a batch reactor increasing the difficulty in scaling it up. 

importantly,  up 

It is noteworthy that, inspired by the macromolecule deconstruction 
enzymes,  an  artificial  processive  catalyst  (SiO2-supported  Pt  nano-
particles) was designed for PE hydrogenolysis, into diesel and lubricant- 
range alkanes with high selectivity [165]. The key is to develop suffi-
ciently narrow pores to enable the headfirst adsorption of a PE chain and 
accessibility to the active sites (Pt species) positioned near the end of the 
pores, selectively breaking one type of bond at a regular interval from 

Table 5 
Effects of different catalysts on liquid yield and product distribution in the plastic pyrolysis.  

Catalysts 

Feedstock 

Reaction conditions 

Natural zeolite 

PS 

Spent FCC catalyst 

HDPE 

Equilibrium FCC 

catalysts 

Conventional/ 

hierarchical Beta 
Ni/Mo/Fe/Ga/Ru/Co- 

Y-zeolites 

HDPE 
waxes 

HDPE 

HDPE 

MCM-41 and ZSM-5 

HDPE 

MgO 

ZnO 

Ni/CuO 

Sulphated ZrO2 

ZnO 
MgO  
TiO2  
ZrO2  
CaO  
ZnO 

Kaolin clay 

Fe/Al 

oxide-pillared clay 
Sewage sludge derived 

char 

Coconut-shell 

activated carbon 

HDPE 

LDPE 

PS 

PET 

PET 

PS 

PP 

PE 

PE, PP and 
PS 
HDPE 

Coconut sheath 

PS and PP 

activated carbon 

Phosphoric acid- 

LDPE 

activated biomass 
char 

Biomass-derived 

LDPE 

activated carbon/ 
MgO 

ZnCl2-activated 

biochar 

KOH-activated 

biochar 

PE, PP and 
PS 
PE, PP and 
PS 

◦

◦

C, 

C, 

Catalytic pyrolysis temperature of 450 
Reaction time 75 min 
Catalytic pyrolysis temperature of 500 
feeding rate of 1 g/min, 30 g of catalyst 
Catalytic pyrolysis temperature in the 500(cid:0) 560 
◦
C range, catalyst/feedstock ratio fixed at 5 gcat/ 
gwax, contact time of 6 s 
Catalytic pyrolysis temperature of 380 
Plastic to catalyst mass ratio of 100  
Pyrolysis temperature of 600 
◦
temperature of 600 
1:2 
Pyrolysis temperature of 500 
temperature of 500 
1:1, HDPE to catalyst ratio of 1:2 
Pyrolysis temperature of 500 
temperature of 450 
10% ZnO addition, 50 kPa pressure 

C, Catalytic 
C HDPE:MgO of 15:1 

C, HDPE to catalyst ratio of 

C, MCM-41:ZSM-5 ratio of 

C, Catalytic 

C, Catalytic 

C, 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

C, reaction time of 

◦
Pyrolysis temperature of 390 
90 min 
C, residence time 
Pyrolysis temperature of 450 
of 20 s, catalyst to plastic mass ratio of 3 wt.% 
Pyrolysis temperature of 450 
temperature of 700 

C PET:metal oxides of 1:20  

C, Catalytic 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

C, 

C, 60 min heating 

C, plastic to catalyst 

◦
Pyrolysis temperature of 450 
time and 1:0.2 feed to catalyst ratio 
Catalytic pyrolysis at 600 
ratio of 9 
Catalytic pyrolysis at 300 
Reaction time of 3 h 
◦
catalytic temperature at 600 
time of 1 s 
Feed to catalyst ratio of 1:0.6, catalytic pyrolysis 
◦
temperature of 400 
C, operation time of 45 min 
Microwave pyrolysis at 900 W and with a 
polymer to an absorbent ratio of 10:1, reaction 
time of 176 s 
Catalytic pyrolysis at 500 
ratio of 1 

C, catalyst to LDPE 

C with a residence 

◦

◦

C, 

Catalytic pyrolysis temperature of 500 
catalyst to LDPE ratio of 2, and char to MgO ratio 
of 1 
Catalytic pyrolysis temperature of 500 
catalyst to LDPE ratio of 1:4 
Catalytic pyrolysis temperature of 500 
catalyst to LDPE ratio of 1:4 

C, 

C, 

◦

◦

Liquid 
yield (wt. 
%) 

54 

60 

57–80 

31–43 

Product distribution 

91% of aromatics 

–C11 hydrocarbons, 8–10% of 

–C20 hydrocarbons, 10% of wax 

50% of non-aromatic C5
C12
20–30% of C5
hydrocarbons, 2–10% C20+hydrocarbons 

–C12 hydrocarbons, 35–50% C13

–C20 

Around 13% of C5-C12 aromatics, 30% of C5-C12 alkanes, 
25% of olefins 
Around 80–95% of aromatics, 5–20% of aliphatic 
hydrocarbons 

Refs 

[166] 

[84] 

[155] 

[147] 

[136] 

83.15 

97.72% of gasoline range hydrocarbons, 95.85% of aromatics 

[143] 

37 

72 

93.5 

41.4 

84.7 

22 

60 

46.6 

47.59 

84.30 

75.3 

72 

51.8 

42.6 

36% of C5-C12 aromatics, 38% of C5-C12 alkenes, 11% of 
C5-C12 alkanes 
56.2% of 7-C36 alkanes, 30% of C9-C18 alkenes, mainly 
composed of diesel range hydrocarbons 
68.9% of aromatics, 21.29% of olefins, 2.2% of oxygenates 

27.5 wt.% of benzoic acid, 13.9 wt.% of other aromatic 
compounds 
83.9% of aromatics, 16.1% of oxygenates 
38.7% of aromatics, 61.3% of oxygenates 
38.9% of aromatics, 61.1% of oxygenates 
43.9% of aromatics, 56.1% of oxygenates 
99.7% of aromatics, 0.3% of oxygenates 
85.8% of aromatics 

30–40% of aromatics, 25–35% of straight alkenes, 5–10% of 
cycloparaffins, 2–7% of straight alkanes 
No aromatics, 100% of aliphatics 

Monocyclic aromatics of up to 75.3%, styrene of 29.1%, and 
xylene of 12.5% 
1.08% of cycloparaffin, 52.57% of n-paraffin, 32.18% of 
olefin, 4.53% of aromatic 
80.58% of aromatic content (toluene (3.39%), styrene 
(67.58%), ethylbenzene (1.82%) and α-methyl styrene 
(1.71%)) and 11.29% of olefinic content, 
93.13 area% of jet fuel-ranged hydrocarbons, (39.11% of 
C8

–C16 alkanes, 54.02% of ˂C16 aromatics) 

65.3% of C8
hydrocarbons (< C16) 

–C16 alkanes and 33.4% of aromatic 

27% of alkanes, 23.8% of alkenes, 47.5% of aromatics 
(mostly in the diesel range) 
43.1% of alkanes, 2.2% of alkenes, 44.7% of aromatics 
(mostly in the diesel range) 

[25] 

[167] 

[168] 

[169] 

[170, 
171] 

[172] 

[153] 

[154] 

[173] 

[174] 

[86] 

[175] 

[176] 

[177] 

[178]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102114L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

the  chain  end.  The  obtained  shorter  chain  hydrocarbons  will  be  des-
orbed, and released from the shell/core structure. This catalyst enables 
plastics-to-diesel/lubricant technique to be more reliable and promising. 
MgO and CaO are two typical base metal oxides used in the catalytic 
conversion  of  PSW,  which  are  effective  for  enhancing  the  cracking 
process and altering product distribution. In the catalytic pyrolysis of 
LDPE over MgO, 96.0% of gasoline-range hydrocarbons can be obtained, 
with  56.3%  C5–C12  aliphatics  being  the  main  components  [25].  The 
possible mechanism for the MgO-catalyzed upgrading of LDPE pyrolysis 
vapors was also proposed in this study. As mentioned above, the poly-
olefin  cracking  can  generate  long  and  short  chain  radicals  which  are 
converted into stable alkanes or olefins by hydrogen transfer reactions. 
The first step for MgO catalyst is that the base catalyst is able to abstract 
the hydrogen proton attached to the long chain hydrocarbons, forming a 
carbanion. The obtained carbanion is easy to be fragmented into shorter 
chain alkenes via β-scission (Fig. 10). This is the reason why gasoline 
range hydrocarbons can be obtained in the catalytic pyrolysis of LDPE 
over MgO. The β-scission process is terminated by utilizing the proton 
from  the  MgO  surface,  and  long  chain  alkanes  will  be  generated 
(Fig. 10). On the other hand, the free radicals may be recombined into 
long chain alkanes or cracked into smaller fragments which go through 
cyclization  and  dehydrogenation  to  form  aromatics.  Kumagai  et  al. 
[158] investigated the catalytic conversion of PET over CaO, with the 
focus on the CaO deterioration effect. The presence of CaO significantly 
facilitated the decarboxylation reaction, obtaining 83.6% selectivity of 
aromatic  hydrocarbons.  However,  the  catalytic  activity  decreased 
gradually with repeated runs, which means the increase in oxygenates. 
Observed  from  scanning  electron  microscopy  images,  CaO  was  thor-
oughly sintered, resulting in the reduction of its basicity. 

Besides these, transition metals have also been tested for catalytic 
pyrolysis  of  plastics,  with  different  effects  on  the  product  formation. 
Kumagai et al. [170] studied the PET pyrolysis over various metal oxides 
(ZnO, MgO, TiO2, and ZrO2) using tandem µ‑reactor-GC/MS and found 
that benzene-rich aromatic hydrocarbons were the major products. ZnO 
has  the  strongest  basicity, maximizing  the  decarboxylation effect and 
resulting in the 88.8% benzene. In contrast, MgO, TiO2, and ZrO2 with 
lower basicity, exhibits lower catalytic performance for the decarbox-
ylation  reaction,  and  a  higher  decarboxylation  temperature  was  also 
observed,  compared  to  ZnO.  In  a  HDPE  pyrolysis-catalytic  cracking 
process, CuCO3 was used as a catalyst to achieve effective conversion of 
waste  HDPE  into  liquid  hydrocarbons  [179].  The  liquid  hydrocarbon 
fuel collected was mainly composed of paraffins, olefins, and aromatics 
and applied to successfully power a petrol-engine of a bike, showing the 
potential to use in petrol and diesel engines. Wu et al. [180] synthesized 
a Ni-Ce based catalyst where the Ni-Ce core was encapsulated by a silica 
shell,  with  the  hope  of  effectively  mitigating  the  sintering  of  nano-
particles at high temperature. This catalyst showed excellent catalytic 
activity  and  coking  resistance  ability  in  hydrogen  production.  It  was 
reported that sulphated zirconia was an effective catalyst for recovering 
benzoic acid through PET pyrolysis due to its high acidity, with up to 
27–32  wt% benzoic  acid  yield [169].  More  importantly,  catalytic  py-
rolysis  of  PET  in  the  presence  of  sulphated  zirconia  for  benzoic  acid 
production  can  be  achieved  at  temperatures  below  525 
C,  which  is 
much lower than the non-catalytic pyrolysis temperature (600 
C). 

◦

◦

Carbonaceous materials derived from organic solid wastes have been 
recognized  as  a  promising  candidate  for  catalysts,  or  support  in  het-
erogeneous  catalysis,  due  to  excellent  surface  properties,  such  as 
controllable  surface  area  and  porosity,  low  synthesis  cost,  and  high 
stability. Some researchers pay attention to this type of abundant and 
inexpensive material and have developed many different carbonaceous 
materials for use as catalysts. From literature sources regarding carbon- 
based catalysts used in the catalytic pyrolysis of PSW, it can be seen that 
organic solid wastes are the more popular feedstocks for carbon catalyst 
preparation in order to reduce catalyst costs. Although plastic-to-fuels 
technology  has  been  developed  very  well,  the  price  of  plastic  based 
liquid fuels still cannot compete with the existing petroleum industry. 

Generally  speaking,  developing  carbon  materials  from  solid  wastes 
would  be  much  cheaper  than  any  other  sources,  which  is  especially 
important for PSW conversion. This section of the literature review will 
summarize recent progress made in the development of carbonaceous 
materials to be used in the catalytic cracking of PSW to produce valuable 
fuels and/or chemicals. 

Sewage sludge char from direct high temperature carbonization was 
used  to  catalyze  the  conversion  of  waste  plastic  mixture  into  an 
aromatic-rich  oil  [181].  In  this  study,  acid  sites  caused  by  aluminum 
phosphate and dehydrogenation caused by -P = O and sulfides were able 
to promote aromatization; simultaneously, calcium oxide and iron spe-
cies  in  the  char  were  favorable  for  ring-opening  reactions,  thereby 
◦
C 
preventing the formation of heavy aromatics. At a temperature of 600 
and a residence time of 1 s, 75.3% selectivity of monocyclic aromatics 
could be obtained. In the PET pyrolysis, a carbon-supported Pd catalyst 
was  added  to  prevent  the  formation  of  hazardous  materials,  such  as 
polycyclic  hydrocarbons  and  biphenyl  derivatives  [182].  When  the 
carbon-supported Pd catalyst loading ratio was 0.05, the concentrations 
of  2-naphthalenecarboxylic  acid  and  biphenyl-4-carboxylic  acid  were 
reduced by 44% and 79% respectively. 

Considering  that biomass  production  and  processing  industry give 
rise to a lot of low-cost by-products, the synthesis of carbon materials 
from  abundant  biomass  wastes  would  be  feasible,  cost-effective,  and 
promising  [183].  Juliastuti  et  al.  [174]  prepared  an  activated  carbon 
produced  from  coconut  shell  pyrolysis  and  used  it  as  the  pyrolytic 
catalyst in a microwave-assisted pyrolysis of HDPE. Results showed that 
the  total  yield  of  liquid  and  gas  could  reach  99.22%  and  the  main 
components in the oil were cycloparaffins and n-paraffins, accounting 
for  54.09%.  When  activated  carbon  was  used  in  a  microwave  batch 
reactor for catalytic pyrolysis of PS, the highest oil yield was 93.04 wt.% 
with  aromatics  being  the  main  products  [184].  Rex  et  al.  [185]  also 
synthesized different activated carbons from rice husk, corn husk, and 
coconut sheath, respectively, which were used as microwave absorbents 
and  catalysts,  simultaneously  in  the  microwave  pyrolysis  of  a  waste 
plastic mixture. The product oil was mainly composed of gasoline range 
hydrocarbons,  with  the  highest  styrene  recovery  of  67.58%  in  this 
process. 

Lei  and  his  co-workers  have  developed  H3PO4-activated  biomass 
carbon material and studied the effect of acid concentration on heating 
rate and carbonization time, with the ultimate goal of optimizing H3PO4 
concentration  to  obtain  the  optimum  activated  carbon  yield,  and 
textural  characteristics  from  biomass  precursors  [186].  Subsequently, 
they attempted to produce jet fuel range hydrocarbons from PSW over 
the activated carbon [121,175]. It turns out that up to 100% selectivity 
of jet fuel range hydrocarbons (71.8% alkanes and 28.2% aromatics) can 
be obtained at the optimized conditions. The acidity of activated carbon 
plays  a  critical  role  in  determining  the  catalyst  activity,  where  weak 
acidity  is  favorable  for  jet  fuel-ranged  alkane  formation,  and  strong 
acidity increases aromatics. Further, increasing catalytic reaction tem-
perature  can  also  promote  aromatization  reactions,  generating  more 
aromatics, and releasing more hydrogen as well. They also combined 
biomass derived activated carbon and MgO as catalysts in the catalytic 
pyrolysis of LDPE; so, the pyrolysis vapors went through a MgO catalyst 
layer,  followed  by  a  biomass-derived  activated  carbon  layer  [176]. 
Similarly,  100%  jet  fuel  range  hydrocarbons  can  be  obtained  at  the 
desired experimental conditions. The synergy effect between these two 
catalysts,  was  seen  on  the  hydrogen  production,  with  94.8  vol%  of 
hydrogen in the gas product. Catalyst stability testing showed that corn 
stover derived biochar is able to catalyze the LDPE degradation without 
wax formation after 20 regeneration-reuse cycles [187]. 

Using ZnCl2 as an activation agent, enables the specific surface area 
of  biochar  to  increase  significantly,  and  the  Zn  species  leads  to  more 
Lewis  acid  sites,  which  promotes  the  Diels–Alder  reaction,  hydrogen 
transfer, and dehydrogenation progress in the catalytic pyrolysis of PSW 
[177]. ZnCl2-activated biochar increased the selectivity of aromatics to 
47.5%, with two-ring aromatics being significantly enriched. Sun et al. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102115L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 10. The possible mechanism for the MgO-catalyzed upgrading of LDPE pyrolysis vapors. (Adapted from [25] with permission from Elsevier).  

[178]  investigated  the  effect  of  biochar  catalysts,  activated  with 
different chemical agents (ZnCl2, KOH, and H3PO4) on the plastic py-
rolysis. Brønsted and Lewis acid sites created by H3PO4 and ZnCl2 both 
facilitated the aromatization process, leading up to 66% and 47.6% of 
aromatics, respectively. 

Catalyst  deactivation  is  one  of  the  barriers  for  the  PSW  pyrolysis 
process,  which  impacts  the  process  efficiency,  economics,  and  the 
optimization  of  operating  conditions  at  large-scale  production.  It  is 
mainly caused by coke deposition and poisoning of active sites, both of 
which contribute to the loss of catalytic activity in the catalytic cracking 
of plastics. Previous studies stress that the acidity and pore structure of 
cracking  catalysts  are  two  key  factors  to  determine  the  deactivation 
resistance ability [188,189]. Therefore, the next parts will discuss the 
coke deposition and active site poisoning during the catalytic pyrolysis 
of plastics. 

Coke  deposition  means  that  large-molecular-weight  carbonaceous 

species  polymerized  from  the  pyrolytic  volatiles  accumulate  on  the 
catalyst surface, thereby covering the active sites and resulting in cat-
alytic activity loss [190]. It has been reported that olefin oligomerization 
and  condensation  reactions  were  the  main  causes  for  coke  formation 
[191]. As shown in Fig. 11, catalyst deactivation caused by coke depo-
sition  takes  place  through  several  pathways.  In  terms  of  a  supported 
metal  catalyst,  the  first  deactivation  pathway  is  to  form  carbide  by 
strong  chemisorption  as  a  monolayer  or  create  multilayers  by  phys-
isorption, hindering access to the active sites. The metal particles and 
other active sites can even be covered totally, which enables reactants to 
be inaccessible to these active sites. The blockage of catalyst pores is also 
able to prevent reactants from contacting the active site inside the mi-
cropores  of  catalysts.  Generally  speaking,  coke  properties  are  mainly 
studied from the perspective of its content, location, morphology, and 
chemical nature. Temperature programmed oxidation (TPO) technique 
is  able  to  accurately  measure  the  amount  of  coke  deposited  on  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102116L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

catalyst surface. Barbarias et al. tested the coke amount by this tech-
nique, and found that the coke deposition rate in the catalytic reforming 
of  HDPE  pyrolysis  volatiles  over  a  commercial  Ni-Ca/Al2O3  catalyst 
(cid:0) 1
(cid:0) 1  gHDPE
varied  from  0.1  to  6.1  mgcoke  gcat
,  depending  on  the  catalytic 
temperature, space-time and steam/plastic ratio [192]. 

C and a continuous feed of HDPE (1 g min

Ib´anez  et  al.  [194]  identified  coke  in  the  sequenced  pyrolysis–-
cracking of HDPE over an HZSM-5 zeolite catalyst at a temperature of 
(cid:0) 1). They observed that 
◦
500 
waxes are the precursors of coke formation during the initiation period, 
while light olefins could lead to the steady coke formation over time on 
stream by condensation and oligomerization in the subsequent sections. 
Two types of coke were determined by TG-TPO analysis, one of which 
(coke I) was aliphatic hydrocarbons generated from the degradation of 
waxes and located on the outside of mesoporous and microporous pores. 
Another  one  (coke  II)  was  aromatic  hydrocarbons,  either  inside  the 
zeolite pores or in the exterior of the zeolite pores, which were formed 
by degrading coke I or oligomerizing and condensing light olefins. Apart 
from coke I and coke II, wax itself or molten plastic could play a role in 
covering the active sites on the surface of catalysts. If weight hour space 
velocity  for  a  continuous  plastic  pyrolysis  is  too  high,  wax  itself  or 
molten plastic can not be immediately cracked, momentarily or endur-
ingly blocking the mass transfer channel. Considering that TG-TPO is not 
able to analyze the coke type and location, Casta˜no et al. [195] gave 
more in-depth insights into the coke formation in the cracking of HDPE 
in the presence of HZSM-5, Hβ  and HY zeolites. They observed in the 
Raman spectra, that a more graphite-like coke was formed as the pore 
size of the zeolite increased. It was found from UV–vis spectroscopy that 
the  micropore  size  of  the  larger  zeolite,  condensation  of  higher 
poly-condensed  aromatics,  was  also  confirmed  by  solid-state  13C 
CP-MAS  NMR  profiles.  Although  soluble  coke  is  mainly  composed  of 
aromatics, the spent HZSM-5, Hβ, and HY zeolites gave rise to different 
aromatic families. For example, single-ring aromatics with two or more 

aliphatic chains, indane and indene, were the main components in the 
soluble coke, extracted from the spent HZSM-5 catalyst. 

Marcilla et al. [196] studied the effect of temperature on coke for-
mation in the catalytic cracking of LDPE over HZSM-5 and HUSY zeo-
lites. Results showed that the higher the cracking temperature, the lower 
the coke content deposited on the catalyst surface. The amount of coke, 
using the HZSM-5 zeolite (approximately 5%) is much lower than that of 
HUSY zeolite (approximately 15%), which can be due to the difference 
of pore sizes. They also calculated the pore volumes which were inac-
cessible to the adsorbate (VA) and occupied by coke (VR), with the aim of 
determining  the  possible  location  of  the  coke.  VR/VA  ratio  should  be 
about 1 with the simple pore filling, while the ratio would be lower than 
1 with the channels and intersections being blocked. It should be noted 
that  increasing  cracking  temperature  leads  to  a  larger  share  of  coke, 
insoluble 
that  are  chiefly  poly-aromatic 
compounds. 

in  dichloromethane, 

Another cause of catalyst deactivation is the presence of poisons in 
the  catalytic  cracking  of  PSW.  Poisonous  materials  in  the  feedstock 
would cover a part of active sites on the catalyst surface, or compete 
with the reactants, thus suppressing the catalyst activity. In most liter-
ature, the used feedstock is very pure plastic without any poisons, like 
LDPE powder, which is not a problem at all. When a huge amount of 
PSW needs to be handled by pyrolysis, it is inevitable to have a small 
amount of N and S in the PSW. The good news is that, in the catalytic 
cracking  of  plastic  mixtures  with  0.23%  of  N  and  0.07%  of  S,  over 
different zeolite catalysts, the presence of N and S had little influence on 
the  catalytic  cracking  [197].  However,  in  the  catalytic  cracking  of 
LDPE(cid:0) lube  oil  mixture  with  4000  ppm  of  S  and  85  ppm  of  N,  the 
presence of N and S led to lower activities, as compared to the pure LDPE 
pyrolysis [198]. 

With  the  catalyst  deactivation  being  inevitable  in  the  catalytic 
cracking of PSW, regeneration is able to save the catalyst repalcement 

Fig. 11. The deactivation mechanism of a supported metal catalyst caused by coke deposition. (i) carbon chemisorption or physisorption hindering the access to 
reactants; (ii) metal particle encapsulation or full covering of active sites; (iii) pore plugging; (iv) degradation of catalyst structure. (Reprinted from [193] with 
permission from Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102117L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

costs, and thus enable a more cost-effective industrial process. Catalyst 
regeneration  largely  depends  on  the  deactivation  mechanism,  and 
cannot be implemented if an irreversible deactivation happens, such as 
de-alumination and zeolite amorphization [199]. As mentioned above, 
coke deposition is one of the main causes for catalyst deactivation in the 
catalytic cracking of plastics. Serrano et al. [199] explored the deacti-
vation mechanism of nano-crystalline HZSM-5 zeolites in the catalytic 
cracking of PE. He observed a reversible deactivation, caused by coke 
deposition,  and  an  irreversible  or  permanent  deactivation  caused  by 
other factors. It was also found that the coke deposited on the HZSM-5 
catalyst, with larger external surface area, is less aggressive and easier 
to  remove,  than  the  conventional  microporous  nano-crystalline 
HZSM-5.  In  this  case,  a  thermal  decomposition  curve  is  an  effective 
way to acquire information about carbonaceous deposit removal, tem-
perature, and reaction conditions. For example, Xie et al. [200] observed 
that a thermal degradation curve of a used catalyst, derived from cata-
◦
lytic dehydration of glycerol, stayed unchanged after 500 
C, indicating 
coke can be eliminated at 500 
C. Kassargy et al. [201] attempted to 
remove coke, derived from catalytic cracking of PE by combustion at 
500 
C for 3 h, and showed a positive result that the regenerated USY 
zeolite,  after  the  first  8  cycles,  still  possessed  a  comparable  catalytic 
activity to the fresh catalyst. Although the USY zeolite, after 14 cycles of 
regeneration, was still able to catalyze the PE decomposition, the crys-
talline structure was destroyed, and Bronsted sites density significantly 
decreased,  leading  to  the  production  of  the  liquid  hydrocarbons  with 
higher carbon number. 

◦

◦

Another way to determine full combustion of the coke is to detect the 
concentration of CO2 coming out from the combustion system, when 100 
vol%  oxygen  is  used  as  the  inert  atmosphere  [202].  In  the  thermal 
regeneration of a Ni-based commercial catalyst, that was deactivated in 
the catalytic reforming of HDPE pyrolysis volatiles, the sintering of Ni0 
active sites made it impossible to fully recover its initial activity, after 
high temperature calcination [202]. Considering that high temperature 
may increase the possibility of catalyst structure change, non-thermal 
plasma  was  proposed  as  a  regeneration  technique  by  oxidizing  the 
coke on the deactivated catalysts at a very low temperature [203]. With 
the high concentration of ozone induced by plasma, 97.4% of the coke 
can  be  eliminated  at  250 
C.  As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  non-thermal 
plasma  regeneration,  almost  without  destroying  the  catalyst  skeleton 
structure, would be very promising. If the catalytic activity can be suc-
cessfully recovered by this technique, the service life of the catalysts will 
be  largely  extended  in  the  real  industry.  Unfortunately,  it  is  hard  to 
precisely  control  the  temperature  of  plasma  reactor  in  a  long-time 
treatment and the scaling up of the non-thermal plasma technology is 
a challenge requiring more input. 

◦

All  in  all,  zeolites  are  the  most  common  catalysts  in  the  catalytic 
cracking of PSW due to high catalytic activity for gasoline or diesel range 
hydrocarbons production, although metal oxides, carbon materials, and 
clays show good cracking ability. In particular, hierarchical zeolites with 
meso/macro pores are able to improve the diffusion of polymer chains, 
thereby  enhancing  the  activity  and  extending  the  catalyst  lifetime. 
Borrowed from the petroleum industry, this type of catalyst would be the 
most promising candidates for large-scale production. Catalyst deacti-
vation is mainly caused by coke deposition and poisoning of active sites, 
both of which contribute to the loss of catalytic activity during catalytic 
pyrolysis  of  plastics.  In  the  future,  the  focus  should  be  to  design  the 
catalyst structure and regulate the acidity to enable better production of 
desirable hydrocarbons and longer catalyst life. 

3.1.3. Mass and heat transfer 

Mass and heat transfer is always a big issue for the pyrolysis process, 
which depends on the reactor design, although few literature references 
have studied it. It is especially important for PSW due to the low thermal 
conductivity of this material. For plastic pyrolysis, particle temperature 
inside  the  reactor  plays  the  key  role  because  plastic  cannot  start  to 
degrade  until  the  temperature  reaches  a  certain  point.  Obviously, 

different mass and heat transfer rates would alter the plastic conversion 
process, thereby affecting the product distribution and compositions. In 
isothermal and dynamic experiments, PP pyrolysis shows considerable 
discrepancies of parameters, stemming from heat transfer limitations or 
complex degradation mechanisms [204]. Ceamano et al. [205] observed 
significant  longitudinal  temperature  profiles  inside  large  PE  samples 
during  pyrolysis,  and  stressed  that  PE  samples  should  be  melted  and 
then coated onto sand particles in order to maximize the contact surface 
for heat transfer. They also studied the thermal decomposition kinetics 
of HDPE, observing two causes of discrepancies from the experimental 
results [206]. One of them is caused by an imperfect heat transfer be-
tween  plastic  particles  and  reactor/plastic  particles.  Adjusting  the 
amount of feedstock and heating rate was able to potentially resolve the 
heat transfer issues. It should be noted that an excellent gas–solid con-
tact in the spouted bed reactor was also favorable to minimize heat and 
mass  transfer  limitations,  keeping  the  bed  in  an  isothermal  condition 
[207]. In addition, a two-step pyrolysis process was developed by Zassa 
et  al.  with  the  aim  of  mitigating  the  heat  transfer  limitations  of  a 
multiphase reactor system [208]. In this system, the plastic melting and 
pyrolysis are separated, allowing uniform melting of the polymer before 
decomposition.  In  this  way,  the  light  olefins  yield  was  significantly 
improved, with up to 75 wt.% of the gas being ethylene at the optimum 
conditions. 

◦

◦

C to 550 

Aguado et al. [209] used a conical spouted bed reactor to study the 
C 
kinetics of PS pyrolysis at temperatures ranging from 450 
and  compared  the  results  with  data  derived  from  thermogravimetry 
(TGA) and a micro-reactor with extremely high heating rate. The inev-
itable mass and heat transfer limitations between PS and sand at high 
temperatures  led  to  the  lower  activation  energy  in  the  spouted  bed 
reactor as compared to TGA. Non-crystalline PS is not able to coat the 
sand particles uniformly with a fine layer after the glass transition, so 
that  higher  transfer  limitations  would  be  expected.  The  results 
confirmed the highly suitable characteristics of this new reactor for PS 
pyrolysis, stemming from the following advantages: bed isothermicity, 
compatibility with particles of various sizes, excellent gas-solid contact, 
alleviated  particle  agglomeration,  small  segregation, and  shorter resi-
dence time of the pyrolysis volatiles. 

is 

the  degradation  process  where 

The previous reports indicate that the competition between degra-
dation  and  vaporization  during  PSW  pyrolysis  should  be  analyzed 
carefully  [210,211].  Generally  speaking,  polymer  molecules  are  too 
large  to  vaporize,  so  they  should  be  converted  into  small  molecules 
before vaporization [32]. Formed small molecules that are dispersed in 
the bulk phase and generate bubbles would be diffused into the interface 
between condensed bulk and vapor phase. Finally, these small molecules 
are able to move through the interface into the vapor phase. In a small 
scale pyrolysis process,  the rate-determining step in the volatilization 
process  of  polymers 
the 
rate-determining  step  is  the  rate  of  bond  rupture  within  the  polymer 
molecules,  since  the  sample  size  and  thickness  are  so  small  that  the 
diffusion  limitation  can  be  minimized  [210].  However,  in  large-scale 
reactors,  diffusional  limitations  during  the  volatilization  of  polymers 
are expected. On one hand, the surface area plays a vital role in the rate 
of volatilization, since the rate depends on the fraction of molecules in 
the surface layer that have an energy equal to or greater than the min-
imum  kinetic  energy  needed  to  break  away  from  the  surface.  On  the 
other hand, the vaporization rate is also determined by the diffusional 
rate within the bulk phase that is inversely proportional to the sample 
thickness.  It  is  expected  that  solid,  liquid,  and  gas  phases  would  be 
present simultaneously during this process. In light of the multi-phase 
complexity  of  PSW  pyrolysis,  an  extensive  detailed  analysis  of  the 
characteristics of all three phases should account for the mass and heat 
transfer  phenomena  during  PSW  pyrolysis.  However,  the  inherent 
complexity  of  the  problem  of  polymer  pyrolysis  makes  the  imple-
mentation of the multi-phase simulations remarkably challenging. Un-
fortunately, these challenges have not been addressed, so that there is an 
important research gap, yet to be filled, regarding the effect of mass and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102118L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

heat transfer on the degradation behavior of PSW. 

One of the effective ways to investigate the heat and mass transfer is 
making use of dimensionless numbers such as pyrolysis numbers (Py), 
Biot  number  (Bi),  P´eclet  number  (Pe),  and  Lewis  number  (Le) 
[212–215], which are useful in assessing the performance and limita-
tions of pyrolysis reactors (Table 6). Py numbers determine whether the 
pyrolysis process is governed by the reaction kinetics (Py≫ 1) or con-
ductive/convective heat transfer in the particle (Py≪ 1). In the case of 
Bi≫  1,  heat  transfer  through  intraparticle  conduction  is  slower  than 
external heat transfer through convection. In contrast, the external heat 
transfer would dominate the pyrolysis process. If Py≪ 1 and Bi≫ 1 are 
simultaneously obtained, thermal gradients can be observed inside the 
particles  and  thus  the  reaction  rate  inside  the  particle  is  significantly 
lower than the surface of the particle. The case of Pe≫  1 means that 
convective  mass  transfer  from  the  particle  is  much  faster  than  the 
diffusion of volatilizing molecules through the reacting particle. For an 
analogous comparison in the heat transfer phenomena, Le≫ 1 indicates 
that the  intra-particle  heat transfer  occurs much  faster than the  mass 
transfer. 

3.2. Valuable gas from pyrolysis of PSW 

Apart from the production of liquid hydrocarbons by PSW pyrolysis, 
obtaining valuable gas byproducts, such as light olefins and hydrogen, 
with high selectivity, is another feasible recycling method. Apparently, 
light  olefins  can  be  used  to  produce  new  plastic  products,  creating  a 
circular economy for plastic waste. Hydrogen produced from PSW py-
rolysis  can  be  recognized  as  the  “blue  hydrogen”  or  even  “green 
hydrogen” that greatly mitigates carbon emissions as compared to fossil- 
based hydrogen, making a contribution to carbon neutrality. This sec-
tion will discuss the production of light olefins and hydrogen from py-
rolysis of PSW in detail. 

3.2.1. Light olefins 

Light olefins, including ethylene and propylene, are the feedstock for 
the production of plastics and many other downstream chemicals. Ad-
vancements in the PSW-to-light olefins technology have led to a circular 
economy of plastics instead of linear use, enabling the PSW to stay in the 
economy and out of the environment. Kaminsky et al. [216] took the 
lead in light olefins production by pyrolysis of plastics, and successfully 
obtained  high yields  of  light  olefins  consisting  of  approximately  36% 
ethylene, 15% propylene, 9% 1-butene and butadiene. Rather than using 
catalyst  materials,  however,  their  results  was  obtained  based  on  the 
increase of temperature and the addition of steam. This example reveals 
how steam improve the production of light olefins during catalytic py-
rolysis of PSW. 

◦

For catalytic pyrolysis of polyolefins, relatively low yields (˂40 wt%) 
of light olefins were usually reported based on in-situ catalysis mode and 
the  moderate  catalyst  temperature  (around  500 
C).  For  example,  a 
spent fluid catalytic cracking (FCC)catalyst agglomerated with 50 wt% 
◦
bentonite can produce as low as 28 wt% of C2–C4 olefins at 500 
C [84]. 
The  same studies also  assessed  the use  of a  spent FCC catalyst  at the 
moderately catalytic pyrolysis of PSW, finding that 21–38 wt.% of light 
olefins were observed [217–219]. A novel catalytic reactive distillation 
approach based on in-situ catalysis mode was also developed to produce 
light olefins from HDPE [48], where the product can be collected only 
when the molecular weight of the pyrolysis products is low enough to 
exit the cooling coil as a gaseous stream. At the operating temperature of 
500 
C  and  1%  (w/w)  of  HZSM-5  (catalyst  to  polymer  ratio),  almost 
100% of the HDPE can be converted into gaseous products of a specific 
range. The product analysis shows that the volatile products fell into the 
range between C2  to C8, with light olefins accounting for the majority 
(approximately 50 wt%), in particular propylene and butenes. By tuning 
the reaction conditions, the middle olefins within the range of C5 to C11 
can also be produced in this system [220]. This distillation-based py-
rolysis approach provides a proof of concept that promotes a circular 

◦

economy of plastics. However, as we mentioned in the introduction, the 
in-situ catalysis has the shortcoming that the inorganics (in particular 
alkalines) in the real-world PSW would physically block and chemically 
poison acid sites. 

◦

Based on the insufficiency of existing catalytic pyrolysis process for 
production of light olefins, Eschenbacher et al. [221] and Artetxe et al. 
[205,222]  developed  a  two-step  (pyrolysis-catalysis)  system  with  the 
goal of maximizing the yields of waxes (C21+) and C12(cid:0) C21  hydrocar-
bons in the pyrolysis reactor and then effectively cracking the produced 
volatiles in the cracking stage. With a bare steam-treated HZSM-5, at 
higher temperature (700 
C), the total yield of light olefins reached 69 
wt% (19% ethylene, 22% propylene, 10% 1,3-butadiene, and 18% other 
C4 olefins) [221]. The total yield of light olefins (C2–C4) was further 
enhanced to 77 wt.% with the yields of ethylene, propylene, and butene 
◦
being 40.4, 19.5, and 17.5 wt%, respectively, at 900 
C [222]. The high 
yield  of  light  olefins  can  contribute  to  regulating  and  controlling  the 
temperature for each step, where the pyrolysis temperature was opti-
◦
mized at 500 
C to yield 93 wt % of long chain hydrocarbons and further 
tuning the catalytic temperature achieved the desirable outcomes. The 
addition of a HZSM-5 zeolite catalyst in the catalytic reforming stage 
◦
was able to reduce the temperature to below 550 
C [205]. A maximum 
of 62.9 wt.% of light olefins can be obtained with the yields of ethylene, 
propylene and butene being 10.6, 35.6 and 16.7 wt.%, respectively, at 
this  condition.  More  importantly,  the  byproduct  of  aromatics  would 
never  go  beyond  13  wt.%.  Similar  results  were  also  observed  in  the 
catalytic cracking of HDPE pyrolysis waxes over HZSM-5 zeolite cata-
lysts  [223].  The  catalyst  with  a  SiO2/Al2O3  ratio  of  30  showed  the 
highest  light  olefin  yield  (58  wt%),  with  the  yields  of  ethylene,  pro-
pylene, and butenes being 9.5, 32, and 16.5 wt%, respectively. These 
collective  studies  highlight  the importance  of  identifying a  more effi-
cient  catalyst  capable  of  reducing  reaction  temperature  and  tuning 
product distribution. 

Elordi et al. [78] studied the catalytic activity of HZSM-5, HY and Hβ 
zeolite-based catalysts during catalytic pyrolysis of HDPE, with the main 
products being light olefins and fuel range hydrocarbons. HZSM-5 zeo-
lite-based catalyst show a high yield of light olefins of approximately 58 
wt.% once equilibrated. An important finding is that the yield of light 
olefins has a strong relationship with the pore size of the zeolite catalysts 
being used. The HZSM-5 catalyst, with the smallest pore size, gives rise 
to the highest yield of light olefins; then the Hβ and HY zeolites obtain 
higher yield of light olefins due to larger pores. In addition, the com-
ponents of light olefins are also affected by the catalyst pore size. The 
large pore size is favorable for the formation of butenes, whereas pro-
pylene and ethylene are the main components for the HZSM-5 catalyst, 
with the smallest pore size. 

Table 6 
Dimensionless numbers which are useful in assessing reactor performance and 
limitations. (Adapted from [32] with permission from Elsevier).  

Characteristic 
phenomena 

Reaction kinetics 

Heat transfer 

Dimensionless 
number 

PyI =

λ
ρCpL2k 

PyII = h

ρCpLk 

Bi = hL
λ 

Mass transfer 

Pe = PK
Dμ 

Le =

μλ
PKρCp 

Values 

Significance 

Py ≫ 1 

Py ≪ 1 

Bi ≫ 1 

Bi ≪ 1 

Pe ≫ 1 

Pe ≪ 1 

Le ≫ 1 

Le ≪ 1 

Pyrolysis controlled by 
reaction kinetics.  
Pyrolysis controlled by heat 
transfer. 
Heat transfer limitation due to 
intra-particle thermal 
gradients.   
Heat transfer limitation due to 
external convection. 
Release of volatiles controlled 
by diffusion.   
Release of volatiles controlled 
by convective mass transfer.  
Negligible internal heat 
transfer effects.   
Negligible internal mass 
transfer effects.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102119L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

3.2.2. Hydrogen 

Selective production of hydrogen by plastic pyrolysis represents an 
important advance, because hydrogen has a great potential to serve as a 
fuel in future energy supplies. Each year over 50 million tons of H2 need 
to be produced to support the agricultural and chemical industries all 
over  the  world,  96%  of  which  is  currently  obtained  from  steam 
reforming of fossil fuels [224]. Therefore, PSW-to-hydrogen technology 
might be able to address two global challenges: PSW pollution and H2 
fuel production, if this technology can be developed and advanced to the 
commercial stage in the near future. 

◦

◦

◦

C to 900 

Generally speaking, two fixed bed reactors for the two-stage process 
are easier to be designed and operated at the laboratory scale. Approx-
imately 0.2–0.3 g H2/g plastics was obtained in such a two-stage process 
at  the  pyrolysis  temperature  of  500 
C  and  the  catalytic  reforming 
temperatures ranging from 600 
C [225]. Without a catalyst, 
the  H2  yield  was  only  0.015  g  H2/g  plastics,  but  this  H2  yield  was 
significantly  increased  to  0.25  g  H2/g  plastics  by  using  a  Ni–Mg–Al 
catalyst. At the high reforming temperature of 800 
C, the yield of gas 
derived from PS decomposition was still very low (11.2 wt.% related to 
the mass of plastic) without a catalyst and steam; in contrast, a 94.1 wt. 
% yield can be obtained after adding the Ni–Mg–Al catalyst and steam 
[226]. Furthermore, increasing the catalytic reforming temperature and 
the  steam  injection  can  improve  the  hydrogen  production.  However, 
scaling  up  the  fixed  bed  reactor  could  encounter  the  heat  and  mass 
transfer limitation due to the inherent nature of this type of reactor. 

◦

◦

The use of fluidized bed reactors for the two stage process has been 
proposed.  The  pioneering  studies  conducted  by  Czernik  and  French 
combined two fluidized beds to achieve a continuous plastic pyrolysis- 
reforming process, showing clear advantages and yielding hydrogen at 
80%  of  the  stoichiometric  potential,  with  PP  as  the  feedstock  [227]. 
Barbarias et al. [228] tested hydrogen production from different plastics 
in an original two-step reaction system, where the plastic pyrolysis was 
achieved at 500 
C in a conical spouted bed reactor, followed by a cat-
alytic reforming process at 700 
C in a fluidized bed reactor. The good 
mixing during a conical spouted bed enables the PSW feedstock to be 
heated uniformly and timely, thereby minimizing a possibility of partial 
or incomplete pyrolysis, and the subsequent fluidized bed is favorable 
for improving the catalyst utilization efficiency. Based on this reactor, 
polyolefins gave the highest yield of hydrogen (34.8–37.3 wt%) while PS 
and PET were much lower, with hydrogen yields being 29.1 wt.% and 
18.2 wt.% respectively. Based on these results and Table 2, it could be 
hypothesized that the hydrogen production is linearly associated with 
the hydrogen content of plastics. 

◦

◦

◦

C and a reforming temperature of 800 

C. Experi-
temperature of 600 
mental results indicated that CNTs can be formed in quantity, on nickel, 
iron.  and  cobalt  based  catalysts,  while  copper  based  catalyst  had  the 
opposite result, with only trace amounts of CNTs. Of the catalysts tested, 
Fe  based  catalyst  gave  the  highest  hydrogen  yield.  Ni-Fe  bimetallic 
catalyst  was  developed  and  used  in  the  pyrolysis-catalysis  of  waste 
plastics, showing a potential catalytic performance [232]. The presence 
of Ni and Fe was able to play a different role, where Fe showed a higher 
cracking ability, producing more hydrogen and solid carbon, while the 
Ni improved the thermal stability and  graphitization degree of CNTs. 
The  highest  H2  yield  was  7.24  g/100  g  plastic  sample,  with  H2  con-
centration of around 70 vol% and carbon yield was 46 g/100 g plastic 
sample. They compared the results with other studies, confirming the 
superior  catalytic  performance.  By  further  comparing  the  carbon  ma-
terials produced in different catalytic temperatures, it can be found that 
higher  temperature  is  favorable  for  improving  carbon  deposition  and 
high  quality  ordered  carbon  nanotubes  should  be  produced  at  higher 
than 700 
C [233]. That could be due to the fact that complex carbon 
precursors produced at lower temperatures made the dissociation and 
dehydrogenation  more difficult to grow  graphitic layers. Ru/γ(cid:0) Al2O3 
was found to be very effective for steam reforming of PS pyrolysis vapors 
to  hydrogen-rich  gas,  and  lowering  the  temperature  by  200  K  as 
compared to a conventional Ni-based catalyst [234]. Understandably, 
with  a  drop  in  reforming  temperature,  less  thermal  input  would  be 
required,  leading  to  an  increase  of  thermal  efficiency  for  the  whole 
process. 

◦

Although the above-mentioned studies have suggested that two-step 
process  is  able  to  produce  high  purity  hydrogen,  it  has  also  been 
demonstrated that one-step (in-situ catalysis mode) process may also be 
promising  in  the  catalytic  deconstruction  of  PSW  into  hydrogen  and 
high-value carbons [88]. The one-step microwave-initiated process fa-
cilitates catalytic scission of chemical C–H bonds over an active FeAlOx 
◦
catalyst by generating huge temperature gap (over 400 
C) between the 
catalyst  and  substance.  Therefore,  a  high  hydrogen  yield  of 
55.6 mmol/g plastic can be obtained, with over 97% of the theoretical 
mass of hydrogen being extracted from the deconstructed plastic. The 
results are based on very small microwave batch experiments (0.3–0.4 g 
plastics processed for each run), so the largely different mass and heat 
transfer  and  limited  microwave  penetration  depth  for  a  large  scale 
operation could affect the process efficiency and product selectivity. 

3.3. Naphtha production from pyrolysis of PSW 

Recently,  co-production  of  H2  and  high-value  carbon  nanotubes 
(CNTs) by a two-stage process, has also been reported. In this process, 
using a proper catalyst, hydrogen can be produced with high selectivity, 
and carbon nanotubes will be simultaneously deposited on the catalyst. 
Wu  et  al.  [229]  processed  real-world  waste  plastics  through 
pyrolysis-reforming over a Ni-Mn-Al catalyst, with the aim of producing 
hydrogen  and  high  value  CNTs.  The  highest  hydrogen  yield  of  94.4 
(cid:0) 1  plastic can be obtained in the presence of the Ni-Mn-Al 
mmol H2  g
catalyst  and  steam,  and  multi-walled  CNTs  with  parallel  graphene 
layers were clearly observed, based on SEM and TEM images. Unfortu-
nately, the purity of the CNTs were affected by the presence of chloride 
in the waste plastics, even though the polyvinyl chloride content was 
very  low  (0.3  wt.%).  Given  the  importance  of  steam  in  the  catalytic 
reforming of plastic pyrolysis vapors, they studied the effect of steam 
content on the hydrogen production and the quality of CNTs from the 
perspective of purity [230]. For LDPE, PP, and PS, more hydrogen was 
produced  by  increasing  the  steam  injection  rate.  In  terms  of  PS,  the 
highest CNT yield (32 wt.% plastic conversion to CNTs) was achieved 
when the steam injection rate was 0.25 g h

(cid:0) 1. 

Regarding the pyrolysis-reforming of PSW for clean hydrogen pro-
duction  with  high-value  CNTs  as  a  by-product,  catalyst  would  play  a 
vital role in the hydrogen yield and CNTs quality. Acomb et al. [231] 
screened  different  metals  supported  on  Al2O3  at  the  pyrolysis 

Although plastic-to-fuels technology enables the reduction of PSW, 
fuels are currently burned to provide heat or electricity, causing serious 
greenhouse  gas  emission.  In  this  way,  the  demand  for  virgin  plastics 
cannot be offset, and the virgin plastics are still produced from fossil 
sources. Some researchers even claim that this solution is not recycling; 
it is really just another expensive and complicated way to burn fossil 
fuels. However, manufacturers and end-users are challenged to utilize 
recycled plastics instead of fossil based plastics although they hope that 
100% of packaging could be recyclable. As mentioned in the Introduc-
tion part, the current recycling method (melting and remolding) often 
encounters a challenge because the recycled plastics does not perform as 
well  as  virgin  plastics.  Without  a  bold  shift  in  approach,  it  is  very 
difficult to achieve the goal set of plastic circular economy. The good 
news is that emerging and scaling technology is developed to convert 
PSW to naphtha that gets back into circulation as a new feedstock for 
plastic product (Fig. 12). In the petroleum industry, naphtha-to-plastic 
monomers technology (steam cracking) is very mature. If we are able 
to produce naphtha through PSW pyrolysis and ensure it to meet the 
feedstock requirements for petrochemical cracking process, plastic-to- 
plastic  chemical  recycling  could  not  only  be  comparable  to  the  more 
prevalent technique called “mechanical recycling”  but also enable the 
same  quality  to  the  virgin  plastics,  and  be  suitable  for  complicated 
plastic mixtures. To be honest, the PSW-to-naphtha technology is really 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102120L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

accelerating solutions for a more circular recycled plastics supply chain 
at scale. 

It is known that some major companies aim to promote PSW recy-
cling towards increasing the share of recycled plastics in the market. In 
this potential circular-economy, one of the most important sectors is to 
turn PSW into pyrolysis oil used as feedstock for new plastic products. 
The corresponding pilot scale results presented to consumers show that 
the pyrolysis oil (recycled naphtha) based plastics have the same quality 
and application capability as those manufactured from fossil oil. It also 
pointed out that this PSW recycling method is complementary to me-
chanical  recycling,  for  the  time  being,  because  some  sorted  single- 
stream  plastics  can  be  recycled  mechanically.  For  a  plastic  mixture 
which cannot be mechanically sorted efficiently, this chemical recycling 
for converting PSW back to naphtha for new plastic production should 
be more reasonable. It should be noted that this virgin-quality recycled 
plastic from pyrolysis to naphtha could increase availability of plastics 
for food-grade products, because the mechanically recycled plastics are 
not allowed to enter into food packaging. 

Recently, Ruan’s group has licensed continuous microwave-assisted 
pyrolysis technology [94] to a California company for converting PSW to 
low-carbon and low-sulfur fuels and high quality naphtha. That could be 
a  great  step  to  deal  with  the  PSW  by  pyrolysis  technology.  More 
importantly, the system is modular, compact, and portable so that it can 
be fixed on small boats and large ships, making it flexible in a number of 
ocean  cleaning  scenarios.  The  California  company  has  also  been 
expanding its processing capability, currently (2021) with a capacity of 
1–5 t/day PSW. Another big company in Skive, Denmark is also working 
hard to develop technology which can recover naphtha from PSW, with 
the goal of creating a circular value chain. What makes this company 
unique is that they designed an effective catalyst for hydrocracking of 
plastic pyrolysis volatiles. It turns out that the catalyst could alter the 
molecular structure of hydrocarbons, obtaining desirable components. 
This  company  built  the  first  testing  facility  in  2014,  confirming  that 
pyrolysis of PSW to produce desirable products by the unique technol-
ogy was feasible. By now, they have started the first production facility 
in Skive, Denmark and the factory was successfully scaled to 20,000 tons 
of PSW per year. In the future, they plan to build more and larger fa-
cilities across Europe, or even the world. 

In order  to further  advance the plastic-to-naphtha technology, the 

◦

clear demand is to expand capacity and improve technologies to create a 
circular economy for plastics. These practical examples indicate that it is 
totally possible to return more PSW to supply chains than is currently in 
play today, giving the credit to the innovation developed and scaled by 
technology providers. Unfortunately, the scientific community has not 
yet been devoted to this technology too much. Based on current litera-
tures, the main components of liquid oil produced from PSW pyrolysis 
are  unsaturated  hydrocarbons  and  aromatics  [16,19,220,236].  In  the 
petroleum industry, the steam cracking for light olefins production re-
quires the C5–C12  saturated hydrocarbons as much as possible, with a 
minimum amount of aromatic. It was found that in the in-situ catalytic 
C (Al2O3  pillared montmorillonite clay and 
pyrolysis of HDPE at 500 
HDPE  mixture  with  the  ratio  of  1:1),  over  50%  C5–C12  alkanes  and 
about 15% of aromatics can be obtained, with the liquid yield of 60–70 
wt.% [237]. However, in light of the drawbacks of the in-situ catalysis 
including fast deactivation of catalyst caused by the impurities in the 
real-world  plastics,  discontinuous  process,  higher  operation  cost,  and 
low heat and mass transfer, ex-situ catalytic reforming of plastic pyrol-
ysis volatiles for naphtha production was developed [238]. That was an 
ex-situ tandem catalysis process, where the first catalytic reforming zone 
was  intended  to  improve  the  cracking  of  plastic  pyrolysis  wax  into 
shorter  chain  olefins,  and  the  second  lower-temperature  catalytic 
reforming zone was intended for the hydrogenation process to convert 
olefins to alkanes without high pressure or the use of external hydrogen 
(Fig. 13). In the first catalytic zone, polyolefin cracking proceeded via 
free  radicals,  mainly  consisting  of  initiation,  chain  propagation,  and 
termination. Initiation reactions primarily include random cracking and 
end chain cracking, which break C–C bonds of the long chains of poly-
olefins,  generating  free  radicals and  molecules.  The formation of  car-
benium  ions  in  the  initiation  reactions  was  demonstrated  to  work  by 
abstraction  of  a  hydride  ion  on  the  acid  site  of  the  catalyst.  Then, 
propagation reactions occurred, to keep the cracking  reactions going, 
meaning that the free radicals generated during the initiation reactions, 
broke off during the β-scission reactions. β-scission reactions enable the 
large free radicals generated from the initiation reactions, to be cracked 
into C5–C12 olefins and smaller free radicals. Finally, the chain propa-
gation reaction is terminated by desorbing the surface carbenium ions, 
forming C5–C12  olefins and hydrions. The main function of Al2O3  pil-
lared  M(cid:0) clay  in  the  second  catalytic  zone  would  be  to  convert  the 

Fig. 12. Plastic-to-naphtha technology roadmap. (Reprinted from [235] with permission from Elsevier).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102121L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

obtained short chain olefins to C5–C12  paraffins via hydrogen transfer 
reactions.  Most  of  the  olefins  were  converted  into  paraffins  with  the 
simultaneous formation of aromatics. The issue for this process is that 
the low cracking ability of the first catalytic zone shortens the process 
lifetime, thereby highlighting the importance of new cracking catalysts 
with higher stability. 

In terms of plastic-to-naphtha technology, the top priority right now 
should be to increase the selectivity of naphtha range aliphatic hydro-
carbons  by  developing  better  cracking  catalysts  and  simultaneously 
mitigate the aromatic formation. Generally speaking, aromatic forma-
tion could be promoted by a synergic effect between Brønsted acid sites 
(aromatization) and Lewis acid sites (dehydrogenation), while catalytic 
cracking process largely relies on the Brønsted acid sites [239,240]. In 
this regard, the isolation of Lewis acid sites will suppress the aromatic 
formation without  affecting the catalytic  cracking ability of catalysts. 
Further  research  should  focus  on  the  catalyst  or  catalytic  system 
development  and  process  optimization.  This  plastic-to-naphtha  tech-
nology is an important strategy for a bio-based circular plastics econ-
omy. However, an effective production process for high alkane content 
naphtha that is able to attract industrial partners is still missing. It is also 
difficult to recover plastics containing oxygen or nitrogen, because the 
catalytic  reforming process  for oxygen and nitrogen removal requires 
higher cost. At a time when the plastic-to-naphtha technology is strug-
gling to make money, manufacturers would like to feed clean polyolefins 
to  existing facilities  to  produce  high  quality  naphtha  for  downstream 
vendors. 

4. Techno-economic analysis 

The costs of PSW pyrolysis recycling, which will determine if it can 
be commercialized in the market, can be affected by many factors, such 
as  labor,  maintenance,  transportation,  capital  investment,  electricity, 
heat, and other plant utilities. The techno-economic evaluation of this 
process  is  essential  to  reduce  the  underlying  costs  of  the  process  and 
improve the corresponding supply chain. This assessment and resulting 
recommendations will be beneficial to establish a sound strategic design 
for the production of fuels or chemicals from PSW pyrolysis. The return 
on investment (ROI) and total capital investment (TCI) are two impor-
tant factors used to evaluate the performance of a PSW pyrolysis plant 
(Table 7). Jiang et al. [241] conducted a techno-economic evaluation of 
the molten solar salt pyrolysis of PSW, and found that the TCI and ROI of 
a 8000 t/yr plant would be USD 3.63 million and 27.6%, respectively, 
with the pyrolysis gas being used to power the plant. When it is scaled up 
to  a  16,000  t/yr  plant,  the  TCI  and  ROI  could  increase  to  USD  6.44 

◦

million and 49.1%, respectively. If the concentrated solar power is used 
as an energy source, the TCI would present a 20% increase and the ROI 
would  decrease  by  11%.  Westerhout  et  al.  [242]  compared  different 
reactors  from  the  perspective  of  the  techno-economic  analysis.  They 
drew  a  conclusion  that  the  ROIs  of  a  bubbling  fluidized  bed  reactor 
operated at 740 
C and a circulating fluidized bed reactor operated at 
◦
840 
C are 21.7% and 29.5%, respectively, which are both higher than a 
◦
rotating cone reactor operated at 625 
C with the ROI of 14.2%. They 
also estimated the TCI for a 50,000 t/yr pyrolysis plant would be be-
tween USD 7.84 and 11.2 million. The specific production cost of the 
plastic oil was estimated, based on a plastic-to-heavy fuel plant with a 
capacity of 100 kg PSW/h [13]. At this scale, the cost of plastic based 
heavy fuel oil was about £0.87/kg, which is much higher than the price 
of the market product, whereas the value can be reduced significantly by 
further scaling up, showing improved economic feasibility. If the pro-
cessing capacity of the pyrolysis plant is able to reach 100,000 kg/h, it 
will be profitable within a year. 

A waste HDPE refinery for processing 500 tons/day was designed, 
and the corresponding techno-economic analysis was conducted [243]. 
As shown in Fig. 14, the products obtained from the refinery process, 
with four sections, would include plastic monomers (ethylene and pro-
pylene),  aromatics,  low-  and  high-molecular  weight  hydrocarbon 
(MWHC) mixtures. According to the capital cost estimation, including 
the fixed capital investment, total project investment and total installed 
cost, and indirect costs (engineering, consulting, construction, etc.) are 
the highest for both the base and heat integrated cases. In this study, the 
net  present  value  (NPV) obtained  from  discounted  cash  flow  analysis 
was  used  as  an  indicator  to  estimate  the  economic  feasibility  of  the 
HDPE refinery process. Results showed that the heat integrated refinery 
had  the  NPV  of  383.1  MM  USD  while  the  NPV  of  the  base  case  was 
366.75 MM USD. Sensitivity analysis was also conducted to study the 
effect of ten parameters (total project investment, internal rate of return, 
corporate tax rate, HDPE cost, electricity cost, ethylene price, propylene 
price, aromatics mixture price, low MWHC price, and high MWHC price) 
on NPV. It was found that the NPV decreased with the increase of the 
HDPE cost, electricity cost, and federal + State corporate tax linearly. 
More importantly, when the HDPE cost goes beyond 460 USD/tonne, the 
NPV  would  be  negative,  enabling  the  project  to  be  economically  un-
feasible. However, it was suggested that the HDPE refinery process, with 
economic sustainability, was quite promising. 

As described in the study by Larrain et al. [244], PSW pyrolysis can 
be  classified  into  open-loop  and  closed-loop  recycling  processes.  A 
closed-loop recycling process represents a plastic-to-naphtha technology 
as naphtha is a feedstock for new plastic production; while an open-loop 

Fig. 13. Reaction mechanism for catalytic reforming of HDPE pyrolysis volatiles by a tandem catalysis. (Reprinted from [238] with permission from Elsevier).  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102122L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

recycling process means that PSW will be converted into waxes used for 
other applications. They compared the economic performance of the two 
processes. The economic assessment indicates that open-loop recycling 
presents a better economic performance when compared to close-loop 
recycling,  with  the  higher  price  of  output  product.  To  enable  these 
recycling processes to be feasible and cost-effective, the minimum PSW 
processing capacity for open-loop and close-loop recycling should be 70, 
000 t/year and 115,000 t/year, respectively. The supply of PSW feed-
stock must be ensured as well. 

Designing for circularity has gained wide interest in the plastic in-
dustry,  requiring  manufacturers  and  users  to  rethink  how  to  recycle 
PSW. Recovering ethylene monomer via pyrolysis of polyolefins is an 
emerging  field,  which  follows  the  principles  of  a  circular  economy. 
Somoza-Tornos  et  al.  [245]  explored  the  economic  benefits  of  this 
technical route in the chemical industry. The main contributors to the 
capital cost of the PE-to-ethylene process include the installation of the 
pyrolysis  reactor  (accounting  for  12%),  the  compressors  of  the  main 
process (accounting for 18%), the energy used for the refrigeration cycle 
(accounting for 32%), and the heat exchanger network (accounting for 
15%).  Economic  assessment  results  showed  that  ethylene  recovered 
from PE pyrolysis was able to offer a highly competitive cost of 0.386 
€/kg that is much lower than the standard naphtha-based cost (0.835 €/ 
kg). They drew a conclusion that converting waste PE to ethylene via 
pyrolysis seems feasible based on the proposed market assumptions in 
this assessment. 

5. Environmental considerations 

Life cycle assessment (LCA) plays an important role in identifying the 
environmental impacts of a product throughout its life cycle [247,248]. 
This  tool  can  be  used  to  compare  different  life  cycles  for  alternative 
products and processes. As shown in Fig. 15, four stages (the goal and 
define the system boundary, mass and energy flows, life cycle impact 
assessment for all processes, and sensitive analysis) need to be imple-
mented.  The  final  results  obtained  are  beneficial  to  the  product 
improvement  and  to  minimize  the  underlying  impact  of  the  process. 
Alston et al. [249] evaluated the environmental impact of the pyrolysis, 
incineration, and landfill of waste electrical and electronic equipment, 
containing up to 25% plastics via LCA analysis. They found that the main 
impact for landfill was in terms of requirements for huge land space and 
pollutants emission. In addition, persistent organic pollutants, such as 
polycyclic  aromatic  hydrocarbons  and  polychlorinated  biphenyls,  can 
be released from landfilling [250]; what is worse is that pollution and 
soil contamination may serve as breeding ground for pests and diseases 

[251]. However, pyrolysis can significantly reduce the greenhouse gas 
emissions, pollutants emission, and requirement for landfill space; it also 
provides much greater resource savings than landfill and a comparable 
level to those for incineration [252,253]. According to an LCA study, 
integrating carbon nanotubes production to the plastic pyrolysis process 
is  favorable  for  further  reduction  of  climate  change  impact,  fossil 
depletion, radiation potentials, and human toxicity [254]. Furthermore, 
a higher PET share in the PSW feedstock, can increase the impact to the 
environment. 

Greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions  are  the  major  environmental 
burden  for  PSW  pyrolysis.  Many  years  ago,  the  first  study  of  GHG 
emissions  from  PSW  pyrolysis  was  conducted,  based  on  a  British  Pe-
troleum polymer cracking process (BP process) with a mixture of poly-
ethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyolefins as a feedstock [255]. This 
study found that the GHG emissions were 1.7 kg CO2 equiv/kg plastics, 
which was lower than other processes, such as landfill, combustion, and 
hydrocracking. Similar results that the pyrolysis process produced less 
GHG  emissions  were  obtained  from  other  studies  [256,257].  These 
studies also pointed out that GHG emission savings can be improved by 
suppressing the use of fossil based raw materials. Iribarren et al. [258] 
conducted  the  LCA  of  a  pyrolysis  process,  coupled  with  catalytic 
reforming,  and  targeting  gasoline  and  diesel  production  within  the 
cradle-to-gate scope. In this study, the GHG emissions were 2.44 kg CO2 
equiv/kg  gasoline.  On  the  other  hand,  Gracida-Alvarez  et  al.  [259] 
analyzed  the  life  cycle  carbon  footprint  of  a  HDPE  refinery  design  in 
detail,  and  provided  the  effect  of  regional  electricity  grids  on  GHG 
emissions.  This  study  indicates  that  the  proposed  refinery  process  of 
HDPE is able to produce high quality plastic monomers and aromatics 
with less GHG emissions as compared to those from fossil oil, assuming 
American average grid electricity. 

Apart from the emissions in the pyrolysis process, the GHG emission 
during  the  conversion  of  plastic  pyrolysis  oil,  is  another  aspect  for 
environmental considerations. By comparing the GHG emissions of fuels 
obtained  from  PSW  pyrolysis  and  crude  oil  refinery,  Gracida-Alvarez 
et al. found that pyrolysis fuels caused 8% lower emissions per mega-
joule  [260].  A  similar  conclusion  was  also  observed in  another  study 
[261]. Life-cycle GHG emissions of plastic-derived ultralow sulfur diesel 
were reduced by 1% to 14%, compared to petroleum diesel, depending 
on  the  co-product  utilization  technology.  But  the  study  by  Kalargaris 
et al. showed that all measured emissions (NOx, HC, CO, CO2) experi-
enced an increase with the addition of plastic pyrolysis oil in the diesel 
fuel  [262].  In  this  regard,  creating  a  circular  economy  by  converting 
PSW into naphtha or light olefins could significantly reduce the GHG 
emission. 

Table 7 
literature reports on economic evaluation of pyrolysis of PSW.  

Reactors 

Products 

Plant scale (ton/ 
yr) 

TCI (USD 
million) 

Molten salt reactor powered by pyrolysis gas 

Molten salt reactor powered by concentrated solar 

power 

Bubbling fluidized bed 

Circulating fluidized bed 

Rotating cone reactor 

Fluidised bed reactor 

Fluidised bed reactor 

Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Pyrolysis oil/wax 

Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Ethylene and 
propylene 
Ethylene and 
propylene 
Ethylene and 
propylene 
Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Pyrolysis oil/wax 
Gasoline/diesel 
Gasoline/diesel 
Gasoline/diesel 

4000 
8000 
16,000 
4000 

8000 
16,000 
50,000 

50,000 

50,000 

7000 
70,000 
700,000 
10,000 
60,000 
120,000 

3.63 
4.41 
6.44 
4.34 

5.40 
8 
8.2 

10.4 

7.3 

5.40 
15.1 
91.8 
16.0 
42.4 
63.3 

ROI 

10.7% 
27.6% 
49.1% 
9.4% 

24.1% 
41.2% 
21.7% 

1.76 
2.51   
3.55  
1.74   

2.38   
3.34  
4.3 

14.2% 

5.4  

29.5% 

4.5  

25% 
50% 
100% 
4.17% 
23.8% 
35.7% 

2.9 
5.7   
34  
5.9 
29.3   
56.2   

Production cost (USD million/ 
yr) 

Refs 

[241]  

[242] 

[13]  

[246]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102123L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig.  14. The  detailed  HDPE  refinery  process.  A-100  represents  pyrolysis  section.  A-200  represents  monomer  separation  section.  A-300  represents  aromatics 
extraction section. A-400 represents hydrotreatment section. (Reprinted from [243] from permission from ACS Publications). 

Fig. 15. The life cycle assessment framework.  

6. Challenges 

From an industrial level, many start-ups have been taking action on 
the PSW pyrolysis technology, and have built several promising facil-
ities, with the hope of keeping more PSW out of landfills and our envi-
ronment.  In  the  scientific  community,  the  constantly  updated  plastic 
decomposition/reforming  mechanism  and  advanced  catalysts/systems 
demonstrate the potential feasibility of high-quality products produced 
from PSW. The coming years will tell whether the pyrolysis technology 
is able to make a real change for PSW recycling/upcycling. To achieve 

breakthroughs  and  advance  the  plastic  pyrolysis  technology  into  the 
commercial  stage,  continued  efforts  are  suggested  to  address  the 
following challenges.  

(1)  Theoretically,  the  pyrolysis  system  and  technology  can  be 
customized  to  produce  a  product  based  on  the  needs  of  cus-
tomers, ranging from heavy oil to gasoline, naphtha, or jet fuels. 
However, the real world PSW is extremely complicated, probably 
containing pigments, dyes, coatings, paper, metal foils, glass and 
metal fragments etc., which might affect the quality and purity of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102124L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

fuels. Accepting the fact that mixed PSW will, in reality, normally 
contain some level of PVC, more advanced systems are required 
to separate the PVC from the real-world plastic mixture or remove 
the hydrochloric acid in the final liquid product. In this regard, 
the  scientific  and  industrial  community  has  been  developing 
commercial PVC and other impurities removal system based on 
multi-spectral sorting machinery with artificial intelligence. For 
other potential contaminants in the real world plastic waste that 
can not be identified by the spectroscopic technology, a variety of 
technologies can be applied to further purify the plastic waste, 
such  as  air  separation  systems,  hydrocyclones  for  separating 
liquid  from  solid,  and  integrated  water/acid/alkaline/solvent 
washing systems.  

(2)  In terms of catalyst material, what restricts its development is the 
steric and diffusional hindrance of the large polymer molecules 
within the zeolite micropores, which is inspiring new consider-
ation for mesoporous or hierarchical materials, such as MCM-41 
and  SBA-15.  Although  hierarchical  zeolites  are  expected  to 
improve the catalytic activity and product selectivity by tailoring 
the  porosity  and  acidity,  increasing  catalyst  stability  and 
regeneration-reaction  cycles  is  still  a  great  challenge.  In  cases 
where  mesoporous  materials  show  superior  diffusion  to  micro-
porous counterparts, evidence of longer lifetime for mesoporous 
materials during catalytic pyrolysis of PSW is generally lacking.  
(3)  The high percentage of olefins in the pyrolysis oil also limits the 
economic feasibility, whether used as fuels or a raw material for 
new plastics manufacturing. When the pyrolysis oil is planned to 
be used in the transportation fuel industry, an excessive amount 
of olefin is not permissible since they may lead to the formation of 
unwanted gums inside engines. With regard to the steam cracking 
in the petroleum industry, the most desirable compositions are 
C5–C12  paraffins,  with  less  amounts  of  olefins  and  aromatics. 
Until  now,  there  are  no  reports  for  producing  plastic-derived 
naphtha  with  the  same  quality  as  fossil  naphtha.  So,  selective 
production of naphtha-range alkanes, with minimal amounts of 
olefins and aromatics, can be considered a significant  step for-
ward  for  PSW  pyrolysis.  But  continued  research  efforts  may 
achieve  expected  results  by  developing  promising  catalysts.  If 
plastic-based  naphtha  can  be  used  as  an  alternative  to  fossil 
naphtha  for  plastic  monomers,  without  any  changes  needed  in 
the existing petrochemical infrastructure, pyrolysis is expected to 
open up new possibilities for closed-loop recycling PSW on a large 
scale.  In light  of  the production  of  plastic-derived naphtha, PE 
and PP could be the most attractive feedstock because catalytic 
cracking  of  PE  and  PP  with  the  linear  molecular  structure  is 
favorable for paraffinic naphtha production, but aromatic plastics 
will  mainly  produce  aromatics.  Certainly,  advanced  collection 
and sorting systems may be possible to separate PE and PP out 
from plastic mixture, but processing industrial plastic waste, such 
as  automobile  units  and  agricultural  films,  which  are  mostly 
composed of PE and PP, into naphtha is more promising and cost- 
effective.  

(4)  Another option for PSW pyrolysis is to maximize the light olefins 
and/or hydrogen, which is absolutely advantageous over incin-
eration or direct landfill. However, unlike the plastic-to-naphtha 
technology, this strategy is unable to match the current facilities 
in  the  petrochemical  industry.  It  requires  a  big  capital  invest-
ment,  making  marginally  profitable  PSW  recycling  even  less 
practical.  Although  researchers  have  verified  the  feasibility  of 
hydrogen production from PSW via pyrolysis, some issues, such 
as  expensive  catalysts,  the  hydrogen  storage  dilemma,  and 

hydrogen separation, are still hampering this potential industrial 
application.  Therefore,  compared  to  plastic-to-fuels  or  naphtha 
technologies, valuable gas production seems to be less popular for 
investors, partners, and customers due to the need of developing 
new  downstream  process  (separation  and  purification  of  the 
complicated gas).  

(5)  Besides, it should be noted that converting aromatic PSW back to 
aromatic monomers by pyrolysis, is also highly recommended for 
a circular economy. In this pathway, the selective decomposition 
of aromatic PSW into desirable monomers requires an effective 
and unique catalyst, which facilitates the cleavage of C–O or C–C 
bonds  between aromatic rings.  Recently,  Jing et  al.  [263]  pro-
vided the first example of selectively producing aromatic mono-
mers  from  PS,  PET,  PC,  or  their  mixtures,  via  catalytic 
hydrogenolysis,  achieving  75–85%  monomers  yield.  But  this 
process  involved  an  expensive  catalyst  (Ru/Nb2O5),  high 
hydrogen pressure, and toxic octane as a solvent. If the recom-
mended pyrolysis-catalysis process can obtain the similar results, 
it should be quite promising and favored by the industry from the 
standpoint  of  process  economic  and  environmental  consider-
ation. Additional research and development are needed to further 
develop new catalysts and optimize the process, in order to make 
it suitable for commercial grade aromatic monomers production 
from aromatic plastic wastes. 

7. Concluding remarks and outlook 

This review shows that research in catalytic pyrolysis of plastics is very 
attractive, especially in recent years when the government and the public 
are aware of the hazards of ever-increasing plastic pollution. Although 
encouraging progress has been made, recent changes in the collection and 
sorting of complex PSW and longer-term trends in the demand for creating 
a plastic circular economy require further developments in the areas of the 
plastic pyrolysis oil characterization, reactor designs, and catalysts. From 
the perspective of oil characterization, distillation coupled with a com-
bination of GC-FID/MS, FTIR, NMR, SEC is recommended to strengthen 
fundamental understanding of complicated pyrolysis oil product. 

Although different reactors have been developed, there is no direct 
way to compare their performance based on the current studies. Heat 
and mass transfer limitation should be evaluated by establishing accu-
rate kinetic models, which allow to successfully simulate the real tem-
perature  and  product  distributions, to  better describe  the  three-phase 
nature  of  PSW  pyrolysis.  It  should  be  noted  that  a  two-step  process 
composed  of  pyrolysis  followed  by  catalytic  reforming  is  expected  to 
open up new possibilities for large-scale treatment of PSW, since it al-
lows  a  higher  activity  and  product  selectivity.  After  much  effort  is 
focusing on the catalyst development and process optimization for high 
quality  fuel  production,  the  plastic-to-fuels  technology  has  been 
demonstrated in the commercial stage, which will provide a reference 
for the development of plastic circular economy. 

Recently  different  studies  have  been  conducted  on  catalyst  devel-
opment for PSW pyrolysis, but the catalyst lifetime and detailed coke 
formation  mechanism  are  unclear  during  the  process.  Firstly,  it  is 
important  to  make  use  of  extensive  product  information  (dry  gas, 
liquified petroleum gas, gasoline, diesel, and wax) for evaluating cata-
lyst performance based on the carbon efficiencies of each group. Sec-
ondly, in-depth characterization should be performed for analyzing the 
structure changes and macromolecule species present in the structure 
with time on stream. Furthermore, the identification of initiator frag-
ments for coke formation by in-situ reaction monitoring would enable 
the analysis of coke species evolvement. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102125L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

In  order  to  create  a  plastic  circular  economy  by  recovering  raw 
materials from PSW pyrolysis for manufacturing new plastic products, 
an important field of research calls for more input. That is to develop 
advanced catalysts and processes to convert PSW to naphtha, light ole-
fins,  and  aromatic  monomers  as  alternatives  to  the  current  fossil  re-
sources for new plastic production. Future development of selectively 
catalytic  pyrolysis  of  PSW  would  greatly  benefit  from  more  in-depth 
knowledge  of  fundamental  mechanisms.  This  urges  us  to  place  more 
emphasis on experimental studies to go beyond observational findings 
toward efforts that address how changes to each catalyst characteristic 
(acid/active  site  distribution,  pore  connectivity,  framework  architec-
tures, etc.) alter the reaction pathways and its corresponding impact on 
product  selectivity.  In  light  of  the  complexity  of  the  polymer  chains 
pyrolysis, the model compounds, for example eicosane, can be used for 
reaction  mechanism  explanation.  In  situ  characterization  techniques 
would capture the reaction intermediates that are useful information for 
determining  reaction  pathways  and  increase  our  understanding  of 
catalyst deactivation as well. Regarding the steric and diffusional hin-
drance  of  the  polymer  chains  during  catalytic  reactions,  the  effective 
solution for further improving the performance of hierarchical zeolites is 
to finely balance the interplay between the catalytic active sites located 
in  the  micropores and  the  accessibility  of  these  sites  provided  by  the 
mesopores. It is also necessary to develop a reliable strategy to evaluate 
the  effectiveness  of  hierarchical  zeolites  by  comprehensively  consid-
ering the influence of absolute porosity values and active sites. These 
insights will guide us to predict the chain length distribution of products 
and fine-tune the catalyst structure to meet different product demands. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  solution  to  a  complicated  PSW  mixture  is 
suggested to be separated into polyolefins, aromatic plastics, and others, 
and  then  a  proper  waste  plastics  decontamination  process  may  be 
implemented  to  meet  the  requirement  for  the  target  downstream 
application of pyrolysis oil. In this regard, polyolefins are suitable for 
naphtha and light olefins/hydrogen production, while aromatic plastics 
should be targeted to produce aromatic monomers. However, if the PSW 
mixture sorting is not realistic or economical, the mixture of naphtha, 
light olefins, and aromatic monomers can be directly produced from the 
plastic mixture, following by an aromatic extraction process to separate 
aromatic monomersfrom naphtha. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgments 

We acknowledge the financial support from National Natural Science 
Foundation  of  China  (No.  21766019,  21878137),  China  Scholarship 
Council  (CSC),  Xcel  Energy,  Resynergi,  and  University  of  Minnesota 
MnDrive Environment Program (MNE12) and Center for Biorefining. 

References 

[1] Geyer R, Jambeck J, Law K. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Sci 

Adv 2017;3:e1700782. 

[2] Gigault J, Halle A, Baudrimont M, Pascal P, Gauffre F, Phi T, et al. Current 

opinion: what is a nanoplastic? Environ Pollut 2018;235:1030–4. 

[3] Rillig M, Lehmann A. Microplastic in terrestrial ecosystems. Science 2020;368: 

1430–1. 

[4] Sharma D, Bapat S, Brandes W, Rice E, Castaldi M, Valorization B. Technical 
feasibility of zero waste for paper and plastic wastes. Waste Biomass Valoriz 
2019;10:1355–63. 

[5] Singh N, Hui D, Singh R, Ahuja I, Feo L, Fraternali F. Recycling of plastic solid 
waste: a state of art review and future applications. Composites Part B 2017;115: 
409–22. 

[6] Al-Salem S, Lettieri P, Baeyens J. The valorization of plastic solid waste (PSW) by 
primary to quaternary routes: from re-use to energy and chemicals. Prog Energy 
Combust Sci 2010;36:103–29. 

[7] Al-Salem S, Lettieri P, Baeyens J. Recycling and recovery routes of plastic solid 

waste (PSW): a review. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2009;29:2625–43. 

[8] Wei R, Tiso T, Bertling J, O’Connor K, Blank L, Bornscheuer U. Possibilities and 
limitations of biotechnological plastic degradation and recycling. Nat Catal 2020; 
3:867–71. 

[9] Kunwar B, Cheng H, Chandrashekaran S, Sharma B. Plastics to fuel: a review. 

Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;54:421–8. 

[10] Wang Z, Li J, Burra K, Liu X, Li X, Zhang M, et al. Synergetic Effect on CO2- 

Assisted Co-Gasification of Biomass and Plastics. J Energy Res Technol 2021;143: 
031901. 

[11] Singh P, D´eparrois N, Burra K, Bhattacharya S, Gupta A. Energy recovery from 
cross-linked polyethylene wastes using pyrolysis and CO2  assisted gasification. 
Appl Energy 2019;254:113722. 

[12] Gerasimov G. Comparative analysis of PCDD/Fs formation during pyrolysis and 

incineration of medical waste. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and 
Environmental Science. IOP Publishing; 2019, 022116. 

[13] Fivga A, Dimitriou I. Pyrolysis of plastic waste for production of heavy fuel 
substitute: a techno-economic assessment. Energy 2018;149:865–74. 

[14] Al-Salem S. Feedstock and optimal operation for plastics to fuel conversion in 

pyrolysis. Plastic to Energy 2019:117–46. 

[15] Elordi G, Olazar M, Artetxe M, Casta˜no P, Bilbao J. Effect of the acidity of the 

HZSM-5 zeolite catalyst on the cracking of high density polyethylene in a conical 
spouted bed reactor. Appl Catal A 2012;415-416:89–95. 

[16] Park K, Jeong Y, Guzelciftci B, Kim J. Two-stage pyrolysis of polystyrene: 

pyrolysis oil as a source of fuels or benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes. 
Appl Energy 2020;259:114240. 

[17] Klaimy S, Ciotonea C, Dhainaut J, Royer S, Casetta M, Duquesne S, et al. Flash 

Catalytic Pyrolysis of Polyethylene over (Alumino)silicate Materials. 
ChemCatChem 2020;12:1109–16. 

[18] Zhao D, Wang X, Miller J, Huber G. The Chemistry and Kinetics of Polyethylene 
Pyrolysis: a Feedstock to Produce Fuels and Chemicals. ChemSusChem 2020;13 
(7):1764–74. 

[19] Zhang Z, Gora-Marek K, Watson J, Tian J, Ryder M, Tarach K, et al. Recovering 
waste plastics using shape-selective nano-scale reactors as catalysts. Nature 
Sustainab 2019;2:39–42. 

[20] Gaurh P, Pramanik H. Production of benzene/toluene/ethyl benzene/xylene 

(BTEX) via multiphase catalytic pyrolysis of hazardous waste polyethylene using 
low cost fly ash synthesized natural catalyst. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2018;77: 
114–30. 

[21] Elordi G, Olazar M, Lopez G, Casta˜no P, Bilbao J. Role of pore structure in the 
deactivation of zeolites (HZSM-5, Hβ and HY) by coke in the pyrolysis of 
polyethylene in a conical spouted bed reactor. Appl Catal B 2011;102:224–31. 

[22] Li K, Lei J, Yuan G, Weerachanchai P, Wang J-Y, Zhao J, et al. Fe-, Ti-, Zr- and Al- 
pillared clays for efficient catalytic pyrolysis of mixed plastics. Chem Eng J 2017; 
317:800–9. 

[23] Mastral FJ, Esperanza E, Garcı́a P, Juste M. Pyrolysis of high-density polyethylene 
in a fluidised bed reactor. Influence of the temperature and residence time. J Anal 
Appl Pyrolysis 2002;63:1–15. 

[24] L´opez A, de Marco I, Caballero BM, Laresgoiti MF, Adrados A. Influence of time 
and temperature on pyrolysis of plastic wastes in a semi-batch reactor. Chem Eng 
J 2011;173:62–71. 

[25] Fan L, Zhang Y, Liu S, Zhou N, Chen P, Liu Y, et al. Ex-situ catalytic upgrading of 
vapors from microwave-assisted pyrolysis of low-density polyethylene with MgO. 
Energy Convers Manage 2017;149:432–41. 

[26] Arabiourrutia M, Elordi G, Lopez G, Borsella E, Bilbao J, Olazar M. 

Characterization of the waxes obtained by the pyrolysis of polyolefin plastics in a 
conical spouted bed reactor. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2012;94:230–7. 

[27] Xue Y, Johnston P, Bai X. Effect of catalyst contact mode and gas atmosphere 
during catalytic pyrolysis of waste plastics. Energy Convers Manage 2017;142: 
441–51. 

[28] Wang K, Johnston P, Brown R. Comparison of in-situ and ex-situ catalytic 
pyrolysis in a micro-reactor system. Bioresour Technol 2014;173:124–31. 

[29] Shafaghat H, Lee H, Tsang F, Oh D, Jae J, Jung S, et al. In-situ and ex-situ 

catalytic pyrolysis/co-pyrolysis of empty fruit bunches using mesostructured 
aluminosilicate catalysts. Chem Eng J 2019;366:330–8. 

[30] Anuar Sharuddin S, Abnisa F, Wan Daud W, Aroua M. A review on pyrolysis of 

plastic wastes. Energy Convers Manage 2016;115:308–26. 

[31] Lopez G, Artetxe M, Amutio M, Bilbao J, Olazar M. Thermochemical routes for 
the valorization of waste polyolefinic plastics to produce fuels and chemicals. A 
review. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2017;73:346–68. 

[32] Dogu O, Pelucchi M, Van de Vijver R, Van Steenberge P, D’Hooge D, Cuoci A, 

et al. The chemistry of chemical recycling of solid plastic waste via pyrolysis and 
gasification: state-of-the-art, challenges, and future directions. Prog Energy 
Combust Sci 2021;84:100901. 

[33] Rahimi A, García J. Chemical recycling of waste plastics for new materials 

production. Nat Rev Chem 2017;1:1–11. 

[34] Rajmohan K, Yadav H, Vaishnavi S, Gopinath M, Varjani S. Perspectives on bio-oil 
recovery from plastic waste. Current Develop Biotechnol Bioengin 2020:459–80. 
[35] Encinar J, Gonz´alez J. Pyrolysis of synthetic polymers and plastic wastes. Kinetic 

study. Fuel Process Technol 2008;89:678–86. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102126L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[36] Mendes L, da Costa, Pereira P. Optical microscopy as a tool to correlate 

[65] Murata K, Brebu M, Sakata Y. The effect of silica–alumina catalysts on 

morphology and thermal properties of extruded PET/PC reactive blends. Mater 
Sci Applic 2011;99:1033–40. 

degradation of polyolefins by a continuous flow reactor. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 
2010;89:30–8. 

[37] Shah J, Jan M. Effect of polyethylene terephthalate on the catalytic pyrolysis of 
polystyrene: investigation of the liquid products. J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2015; 
51:96–102. 

[66] Zhang Y, Ji G, Ma D, Chen C, Wang Y, Wang W, et al. Exergy and energy analysis 
of pyrolysis of plastic wastes in rotary kiln with heat carrier. Process Saf Environ 
Prot 2020;142:203–11. 

[38] Zannikos F, Kalligeros S, Anastopoulos G, Lois E. Converting Biomass and Waste 

[67] Zhang Y, Ji G, Chen C, Wang Y, Wang W, Li A. Liquid oils produced from 

Plastic to Solid Fuel Briquettes. J Renew Energy 2013;2013:360368. 

[39] Awad A, Abd El-Wahab A, El-Gamsy R, Abdel-latif M. A study of some thermal 

and mechanical properties of HDPE blend with marble and granite dust. Ain 
Shams Engin J 2019;10:353–8. 

[40] Xu F, Wang B, Yang D, Hao J, Qiao Y, Tian Y. Thermal degradation of typical 

plastics under high heating rate conditions by TG-FTIR: pyrolysis behaviors and 
kinetic analysis. Energy Convers Manage 2018;171:1106–15. 

[41] Pan Y, Castillo-Rodríguez M, Wang D. Mesoporous metal oxide/pyrophosphate 

hybrid originated from reutilization of water treatment resin as a novel fire 
hazard suppressant. Mater Chem Phys 2018;203:49–57. 

pyrolysis of plastic wastes with heat carrier in rotary kiln. Fuel Process Technol 
2020;206:106455. 

[68] Rackl M, Günthner W. Experimental investigation on the influence of different 

grades of wood chips on screw feeding performance. Biomass Bioenergy 2016;88: 
106–15. 

[69] Aramideh S, Xiong Q, Kong S, Brown R. Numerical simulation of biomass fast 

pyrolysis in an auger reactor. Fuel 2015;156:234–42. 

[70] Jung S, Cho M, Kang B, Kim J. Pyrolysis of a fraction of waste polypropylene and 
polyethylene for the recovery of BTX aromatics using a fluidized bed reactor. Fuel 
Process Technol 2010;91:277–84. 

[42] Vollmer I, Jenks M, Roelands M, White R, van Harmelen T, de Wild P, et al. 

[71] Park K, Jeong Y, Kim J. Activator-assisted pyrolysis of polypropylene. Appl 

Beyond mechanical recycling: giving new life to plastic waste. Angew Chem Int 
Ed 2020;59(36):15402–23. 

[43] Li X, Zhang H, Li J, Su L, Zuo J, Komarneni S, et al. Improving the aromatic 

production in catalytic fast pyrolysis of cellulose by co-feeding low-density 
polyethylene. Appl Catal A 2013;455:114–21. 

[44] Gersten J, Fainberg V, Hetsroni G, Shindler Y. Kinetic study of the thermal 
decomposition of polypropylene, oil shale, and their mixture. Fuel 2000;79: 
1679–86. 

[45] Kassargy C, Awad S, Burnens G, Kahine K, Tazerout M. Gasoline and diesel-like 
fuel production by continuous catalytic pyrolysis of waste polyethylene and 
polypropylene mixtures over USY zeolite. Fuel 2018;224:764–73. 
¨
Ozsin G, Pütün A. Insights into pyrolysis and co-pyrolysis of biomass and 
polystyrene: thermochemical behaviors, kinetics and evolved gas analysis. Energy 
Convers Manage 2017;149:675–85. 

[46]

[47] Praveen Kumar K, Srinivas S. Catalytic Co-pyrolysis of Biomass and Plastics 

(Polypropylene and Polystyrene) Using Spent FCC Catalyst. Energy Fuels 2020; 
34:460–73. 

[48] Santos E, Rijo B, Lemos F, Lemos M. A catalytic reactive distillation approach to 
high density polyethylene pyrolysis – Part 1 – Light olefin production. Chem Eng 
J 2019;378:122077. 

[49] Elordi G, Olazar M, Lopez G, Artetxe M, Bilbao J. Product Yields and 

Compositions in the Continuous Pyrolysis of High-Density Polyethylene in a 
Conical Spouted Bed Reactor. Ind Engin Chem Res 2011;50:6650–9. 

[50] Kumar S, Panda AK, Singh RK. A review on tertiary recycling of high-density 

polyethylene to fuel. Resour Conserv Recycl 2011;55:893–910. 

[51] Ueno T, Nakashima E, Takeda K. Quantitative analysis of random scission and 

chain-end scission in the thermal degradation of polyethylene. Polym Degrad 
Stab 2010;95:1862–9. 

[52] Kruse T, Woo O, Wong H, Khan S, Broadbelt L. Mechanistic modeling of polymer 

degradation:  a comprehensive study of polystyrene. Macromolecules 2002;35: 
7830–44. 

[53] Zhou J, Qiao Y, Wang W, Leng E, Huang J, Yu Y, et al. Formation of styrene 

monomer, dimer and trimer in the primary volatiles produced from polystyrene 
pyrolysis in a wire-mesh reactor. Fuel 2016;182:333–9. 

[54] Kruse T M, Sang Woo O, Broadbelt L J. Detailed mechanistic modeling of polymer 

degradation: application to polystyrene. Chem Eng Sci 2001;56:971–9. 

[55] Dean L, Groves S, Hancox R, Lamb G, Lehrle R. Pyrolysis-GC and MS applied to 

study oligomer formation in the degradation of polystyrene and styrene 
copolymers. Polym Degrad Stab 1989;25:143–60. 

[56] Ohtani H, Yuyama T, Tsuge S, Plage B, Schulten H. Study on thermal degradation 

Energy 2019;253:113558. 

[72] Park K, Jeong Y, Guzelciftci B, Kim J. Characteristics of a new type continuous 

two-stage pyrolysis of waste polyethylene. Energy 2019;166:343–51. 

[73] Milne BJ, Behie L, Berruti F. Recycling of waste plastics by ultrapyrolysis using an 
internally circulating fluidized bed reactor. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1999;51: 
157–66. 

[74] Compo P, Pfeffer R, Tardos G. Minimum sintering temperatures and 

defluidization characteristics of fluidizable particles. Powder Technol 1987;51: 
85–101. 

[75] Siegell J. High-temperature de fluidization. Powder Technol 1984;38:13–22. 
[76] Chaivatamaset P, Sricharoon P, Tia S, Bilitewski B. The characteristics of bed 
agglomeration/defluidization in fluidized bed firing palm fruit bunch and rice 
straw. Appl Therm Eng 2014;70:737–47. 

[77] Lu H, Cao J, Macri D, Guo X, Liu H, Gong X. Experimental study on defluidization 

behaviours and its influence factors during gas switching fluidization. Powder 
Technol 2021;380:106–14. 

[78] Elordi G, Olazar M, Lopez G, Amutio M, Artetxe M, Aguado R, et al. Catalytic 

pyrolysis of HDPE in continuous mode over zeolite catalysts in a conical spouted 
bed reactor. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2009;85:345–51. 

[79] Neto J, Duarte C, Murata V, Barrozo M. Effect of a draft tube on the fluid 

dynamics of a spouted bed: experimental and CFD studies. Drying Technol 2008; 
26:299–307. 

[80] Nagashima H, Ishikura T, Ide M. Effect of the tube shape on gas and particle flow 
in spouted beds with a porous draft tube. Can J Chem Eng 2009;87:228–36. 

[81] Lopez G, Artetxe M, Amutio M, Elordi G, Aguado R, Olazar M, et al. Recycling 

poly-(methyl methacrylate) by pyrolysis in a conical spouted bed reactor. Chem 
Eng Process 2010;49:1089–94. 

[82] Artetxe M, Lopez G, Amutio M, Barbarias I, Arregi A, Aguado R, et al. Styrene 
recovery from polystyrene by flash pyrolysis in a conical spouted bed reactor. 
Waste Manage (Oxford) 2015;45:126–33. 

[83] Elordi G, Olazar M, Lopez G, Artetxe M, Bilbao J. Continuous Polyolefin Cracking 
on an HZSM-5 Zeolite Catalyst in a Conical Spouted Bed Reactor. Ind Engin Chem 
Res 2011;50:6061–70. 

[84] Elordi G, Olazar M, Casta˜no P, Artetxe M, Bilbao J. Polyethylene Cracking on a 
Spent FCC Catalyst inn a Conical Spouted Bed Reactor. Ind Engin Chem Res 2012; 
51:14008–17. 

[85] Foong S, Liew R, Yang Y, Cheng Y, Yek P, Mahari W, et al. Valorization of biomass 
waste to engineered activated biochar by microwave pyrolysis: progress, 
challenges, and future directions. Chem Eng J 2020;389:124401. 
[86] Rex P, Masilamani I, Miranda L. Microwave pyrolysis of polystyrene and 

of polystyrenes by pyrolysis-gas chromatography and pyrolysis-field ionization 
mass spectrometry. Eur Polym J 1990;26:893–9. 

polypropylene mixtures using different activated carbon from biomass. J Energy 
Inst 2020;93(5):1819–32. 

[57] Gui B, Qiao Y, Wan D, Liu S, Han Z, Yao H, et al. Nascent tar formation during 

[87] Jiang H, Liu W, Zhang X, Qiao J. Chemical recycling of plastics by microwave- 

polyvinylchloride (PVC) pyrolysis. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:2321–9. 
[58] Zhou J, Gui B, Qiao Y, Zhang J, Wang W, Yao H, et al. Understanding the 

pyrolysis mechanism of polyvinylchloride (PVC) by characterizing the chars 
produced in a wire-mesh reactor. Fuel 2016;166:526–32. 

assisted high-temperature pyrolysis. Global Challe 2020;4:1900074. 

[88] Jie X, Li W, Slocombe D, Gao Y, Banerjee I, Gonzalez-Cortes S, et al. Microwave- 
initiated catalytic deconstruction of plastic waste into hydrogen and high-value 
carbons. Nat Catal 2020;3(11):902–12. 

[59] Levchik S, Weil E. A review on thermal decomposition and combustion of 

[89] Voiry D, Yang J, Kupferberg J, Fullon R, Lee C, Jeong H, et al. High-quality 

thermoplastic polyesters. Polym Adv Technol 2004;15:691–700. 

[60] Samperi F, Puglisi C, Alicata R, Montaudo G. Thermal degradation of poly 

(ethylene terephthalate) at the processing temperature. Polym Degrad Stab 2004; 
83:3–10. 

[61] Artetxe M, Lopez G, Amutio M, Elordi G, Olazar M, Bilbao J. Operating conditions 
for the pyrolysis of poly-(ethylene terephthalate) in a conical spouted-bed reactor. 
Ind Eng Chem Res 2010;49:2064–9. 

[62] Kassargy C, Awad S, Burnens G, Kahine K, Tazerout M. Experimental study of 

catalytic pyrolysis of polyethylene and polypropylene over USY zeolite and 
separation to gasoline and diesel-like fuels. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2017;127:31–7. 
[63] Ding K, Liu S, Huang Y, Liu S, Zhou N, Peng P, et al. Catalytic microwave-assisted 
pyrolysis of plastic waste over NiO and HY for gasoline-range hydrocarbons 
production. Energy Convers Manage 2019;196:1316–25. 

[64] Inayat A, Klemencova K, Grycova B, Sokolova B, Lestinsky P. Thermo-catalytic 
pyrolysis of polystyrene in batch and semi-batch reactors: a comparative study. 
Waste Manag Res 2021;39(2):260–9. 

graphene via microwave reduction of solution-exfoliated graphene oxide. Science 
2016;353:1413–6. 

[90] Zhou N, Zhou J, Dai L, Guo F, Wang Y, Li H, et al. Syngas production from 
biomass pyrolysis in a continuous microwave assisted pyrolysis system. 
Bioresoure Technol 2020;314:123756. 

[91] Wang Y, Zeng Z, Tian X, Dai L, Jiang L, Zhang S, et al. Production of bio-oil from 
agricultural waste by using a continuous fast microwave pyrolysis system. 
Bioresour Technol 2018;269:162–8. 

[92] Wang Y, Wu Q, Yang S, Yang Q, Wu J, Ma Z, et al. Microwave-assisted catalytic 

fast pyrolysis coupled with microwave-absorbent of soapstock for bio-oil in a 
downdraft reactor. Energy Convers Manage 2019;185:11–20. 

[93] Zhou J, Liu S, Zhou N, Fan L, Zhang Y, Peng P, et al. Development and application 

of a continuous fast microwave pyrolysis system for sewage sludge utilization. 
Bioresour Technol 2018;256:295–301. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102127L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[94] Zhou N, Dai L, Lv Y, Li H, Deng W, Guo F, et al. Catalytic pyrolysis of plastic 

wastes in a continuous microwave assisted pyrolysis system for fuel production. 
Chem Eng J 2021;418:129412. 

[125] Onwudili J, Insura N, Williams P. Composition of products from the pyrolysis of 
polyethylene and polystyrene in a closed batch reactor: effects of temperature and 
residence time. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2009;86:293–303. 

[95] Shah S, Khan Z, Raja I, Mahmood Q, Bhatti Z, Khan J, et al. Low temperature 

[126] Anene A, Fredriksen S, Sætre K, Tokheim L. Experimental study of thermal and 

conversion of plastic waste into light hydrocarbons. J Hazardour Mater 2010;179: 
15–20. 

catalytic pyrolysis of plastic waste components. Sustainability 2018;10:3979. 

[127] Mangesh VL, Padmanabhan S, Tamizhdurai P, Ramesh A. Experimental 

[96] Das P, Tiwari P. Valorization of packaging plastic waste by slow pyrolysis. 

Resources, Conserv Recycl 2018;128:69–77. 

investigation to identify the type of waste plastic pyrolysis oil suitable for 
conversion to diesel engine fuel. J Cleaner Prod 2020;246:119066. 

[97] Campuzano F, Brown R, Martínez J. Auger reactors for pyrolysis of biomass and 

[128] Sun K, Themelis N, Bourtsalas A, Huang Q. Selective production of aromatics from 

wastes. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;102:372–409. 

[98] Al-Salem S, Yang Y, Wang J, Leeke G. Pyro-oil and wax recovery from reclaimed 

plastic waste in a continuous auger pyrolysis reactor. Energies 2020;13:2040. 

[99] Sharifzadeh M, Sadeqzadeh M, Guo M, Borhani T, Murthy Konda N, Garcia M, 

et al. The multi-scale challenges of biomass fast pyrolysis and bio-oil upgrading: 
review of the state of art and future research directions. Prog Energy Combust Sci 
2019;71:1–80. 

[100] Wong S, Ngadi N, Abdullah T, Inuwa I. Current state and future prospects of 
plastic waste as source of fuel: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;50: 
1167–80. 

[101] del Remedio Hern´andez M, García 

´
A, Marcilla A. Catalytic flash pyrolysis of HDPE 

in a fluidized bed reactor for recovery of fuel-like hydrocarbons. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2007;78:272–81. 

[102] Beneroso D, Monti T, Kostas E, Robinson J. Microwave pyrolysis of biomass for 
bio-oil production: scalable processing concepts. Chem Eng J 2017;316:481–98. 
[103] Foong S, Liew R, Yang Y, Cheng Y, Yek P, Wan Mahari W, et al. Valorization of 
biomass waste to engineered activated biochar by microwave pyrolysis: progress, 
challenges, and future directions. Chem Eng J 2020;389:124401. 

[104] Luque R, Men´endez J, Arenillas A, Cot J. Microwave-assisted pyrolysis of biomass 

feedstocks: the way forward? Energy Environ Sci 2012;5:5481–8. 

[105] Stelmachowski M. Thermal conversion of waste polyolefins to the mixture of 
hydrocarbons in the reactor with molten metal bed. Energy Convers Manage 
2010;51:2016–24. 

[106] Stelmachowski M. Feedstock recycling of waste polymers by thermal cracking in 
molten metal: thermodynamic analysis. J Mater Cycles Waste Manage 2014;16: 
211–8. 

[107] Tang L, Huang H, Hao H, Zhao K. Development of plasma pyrolysis/gasification 
systems for energy efficient and environmentally sound waste disposal. 
J Electrostat 2013;71:839–47. 

[108] Gabbar H, Aboughaly M, Stoute C. DC thermal plasma design and utilization for 

the low density polyethylene to diesel oil pyrolysis reaction. Energies 2017;10: 
784. 

[109] Karaba A, Dvoˇr´akov´a V, Patera J, Z´amostný P. Improving the steam-cracking 

efficiency of naphtha feedstocks by mixed/separate processing. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2020;146:104768. 

[110] Liu S, Kots P, Vance B, Danielson A, Vlachos D. Plastic waste to fuels by 

hydrocracking at mild conditions. Sci Adv 2021;7:eabf8283. 

[111] Baena-Gonz´alez J, Santamaria-Echart A, Aguirre J, Gonz´alez S. Chemical 

recycling of plastic waste: bitumen, solvents, and polystyrene from pyrolysis oil. 
Waste Manage (Oxford) 2020;118:139–49. 

[112] Fan H, He K, Wang J. Study of sewage sludge pyrolysis liquids using 

comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography/time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry. Fuel 2016;185:281–8. 

[113] Tessarolo N, dos Santos L, Silva R, Azevedo D. Chemical characterization of bio- 

oils using comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography with time-of- 
flight mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 2013;1279:68–75. 

[114] Chandrasekaran S, Sharma B. 7 - Fuel properties associated with catalytic 

conversion of plastics. editor. In: Al-Salem SM, editor. Plastics to energy. William 
Andrew Publishing; 2019. p. 173–220. 

[115] Nakaji Y, Tamura M, Miyaoka S, Kumagai S, Tanji M, Nakagawa Y, et al. Low- 
temperature catalytic upgrading of waste polyolefinic plastics into liquid fuels 
and waxes. Appl Catal, B 2021;285:119805. 

[116] Faussone G. Transportation fuel from plastic: two cases of study. Waste Manage 

(Oxford) 2018;73:416–23. 

[117] Diaz Silvarrey L, Phan A. Kinetic study of municipal plastic waste. Int J Hydrogen 

Energy 2016;41:16352–64. 

[118] Gracida-Alvarez U, Mitchell M, Sacramento-Rivero J, Shonnard D. Effect of 

temperature and vapor residence time on the micropyrolysis products of waste 
high density polyethylene. Ind Eng Chem Res 2018;57:1912–23. 

[119] Miandad R, Nizami A, Rehan M, Barakat M, Khan M, Mustafa A, et al. Influence of 
temperature and reaction time on the conversion of polystyrene waste to pyrolysis 
liquid oil. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2016;58:250–9. 

[120] Singh R, Ruj B. Time and temperature depended fuel gas generation from 

pyrolysis of real world municipal plastic waste. Fuel 2016;174:164–71. 
[121] Zhang Y, Duan D, Lei H, Villota E, Ruan R. Jet fuel production from waste plastics 

waste plastic pyrolysis by using sewage sludge derived char catalyst. J Cleaner 
Prod 2020;268:122038. 

[129] Huo E, Lei H, Liu C, Zhang Y, Xin L, Zhao Y, et al. Jet fuel and hydrogen produced 
from waste plastics catalytic pyrolysis with activated carbon and MgO. Sci Total 
Environ 2020;727:138411. 

[130] Serrano D, Aguado J, Escola J. Developing Advanced catalysts for the conversion 
of polyolefinic waste plastics into fuels and chemicals. ACS Catal 2012;2: 
1924–41. 

[131] Maity A, Chaudhari S, Titman J, Polshettiwar V. Catalytic nanosponges of acidic 
aluminosilicates for plastic degradation and CO2 to fuel conversion. Nat Commun 
2020;11:1–12. 

[132] Manos G, Garforth A, Dwyer J. Catalytic degradation of high-density polyethylene 
over different zeolitic structures. Ind Eng Chem Res 2000;39:1198–202. 
[133] Manos G, Garforth A, Dwyer J. Catalytic degradation of high-density polyethylene 
on an ultrastable-Y Zeolite. Nature of Initial polymer reactions, pattern of 
formation of gas and liquid products, and temperature effects. Ind Eng Chem Res 
2000;39:1203–8. 

[134] Mordi R, Fields R, Dwyer J. Thermolysis of low density polyethylene catalysed by 

zeolites. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1994;29:45–55. 

[135] Liu R, Sarker M, Rahman MM, Li C, Chai M, Nishu, et al. Multi-scale complexities 
of solid acid catalysts in the catalytic fast pyrolysis of biomass for bio-oil 
production – a review. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;80:100852. 

[136] Akubo K, Nahil M, Williams P. Aromatic fuel oils produced from the pyrolysis- 
catalysis of polyethylene plastic with metal-impregnated zeolite catalysts. 
J Energy Inst 2019;92:195–202. 

[137] Wang J, Jiang J, Sun Y, Zhong Z, Wang X, Xia H, et al. Recycling benzene and 
ethylbenzene from in-situ catalytic fast pyrolysis of plastic wastes. Energy 
Convers Manage 2019;200:112088. 

[138] Aguado J, Serrano D, Romero M. Catalytic conversion of polyethylene into fuels 

over mesoporous MCM-41. Chem Commun 1996:725–6. 

[139] Soler-Illia G, Sanchez C, Lebeau B, Patarin J. Chemical strategies to design 

textured materials: from microporous and mesoporous oxides to nanonetworks 
and hierarchical structures. Chem Rev 2002;102:4093–138. 

[140] Aguado J, Sotelo J, Serrano D, Calles J, Escola J. Catalytic conversion of 
polyolefins into liquid fuels over MCM-41:  comparison with ZSM-5 and 
amorphous SiO2(cid:0) Al2O3. Energy Fuels 1997;11:1225–31. 

[141] Socci J, Osatiashtiani A, Kyriakou G, Bridgwater T. The catalytic cracking of 

sterically challenging plastic feedstocks over high acid density Al-SBA-15 
catalysts. Appl Catal, A 2019;570:218–27. 

[142] Serrano D, Aguado J, Escola J, Rodríguez J, San Miguel G. An investigation into 
the catalytic cracking of LDPE using Py–GC/MS. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2005;74: 
370–8. 

[143] Ratnasari D, Nahil M, Williams P. Catalytic pyrolysis of waste plastics using 

staged catalysis for production of gasoline range hydrocarbon oils. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2017;124:631–7. 

[144] Zhokh A, Serebrii T, Strizhak P. Diffusion of C6 cyclic hydrocarbons in ZSM-5 

zeolite: from single nanocrystal to packed pellet. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 
2020;292:109773. 

[145] Katada N, Suzuki K, Noda T, Sastre G, Niwa M. Correlation between brønsted acid 

strength and local structure in Zeolites. J Phys Chem C 2009;113:19208–17. 

[146] Lee J, Park S, Saha S, Cho S, Seo G. Liquid-phase degradation of polyethylene (PE) 
over MFI zeolites with mesopores: effects of the structure of PE and the 
characteristics of mesopores. Appl Catal, B 2011;108-109:61–71. 

[147] Caldeira V, Peral A, Linares M, Araujo A, Garcia-Mu˜noz R, Serrano D. Properties 
of hierarchical beta zeolites prepared from protozeolitic nanounits for the 
catalytic cracking of high density polyethylene. Appl Catal, A 2017;531:187–96. 

[148] Silva B, Sousa L, Sarmento L, Alencar S, Quintela P, Silva A. Kinetic study of 
thermocatalytic degradation of UHMWPE over microporous and hierarchical 
ZSM-23 zeolite. Appl Catal, B 2020;267:118699. 

[149] Zang Y, Wang J, Gu J, Qu J, Gao F, Li M. Cost-effective synthesis of hierarchical 

HZSM-5 with a high Si/TPA+ ratio for enhanced catalytic cracking of 
polyethylene. J Solid State Chem 2020;291:121643. 

[150] Shi J, Wang Y, Yang W, Tang Y, Xie Z. Recent advances of pore system 

construction in zeolite-catalyzed chemical industry processes. Chem Soc Rev 
2015;44:8877–903. 

via catalytic pyrolysis with activated carbons. Appl Energy 2019;251:113337. 

[151] Manos G, Yusof IY, Papayannakos N, Gangas NH. Catalytic Cracking of 

[122] Onwudili J, Muhammad C, Williams P. Influence of catalyst bed temperature and 
properties of zeolite catalysts on pyrolysis-catalysis of a simulated mixed plastics 
sample for the production of upgraded fuels and chemicals. J Energy Inst 2019; 
92:1337–47. 

[123] Mastral F, Esperanza E, Berrueco C, Juste M, Ceamanos J. Fluidized bed thermal 
degradation products of HDPE in an inert atmosphere and in air–nitrogen 
mixtures. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2003;70:1–17. 
´
AN, Agull´o J, Marcilla A. Effect of 

[124] del Remedio Hern´andez M, G´omez A, García 

the temperature in the nature and extension of the primary and secondary 
reactions in the thermal and HZSM-5 catalytic pyrolysis of HDPE. Appl Catal, A 
2007;317:183–94. 

Polyethylene over Clay Catalysts. Comparison with an Ultrastable Y Zeolite. Ind 
Engin Chem Res 2001;40:2220–5. 

[152] Hadi B, Sokoto A, Garba M, Muhammad A. Effect of neat kaolin and CuO/Kaolin 

on the yield and composition of products from pyrolysis of polystyrene waste. 
Energy Sources Part A 2017;39:148–53. 

[153] Luo W, Hu Q, Fan Z, Wan J, He Q, Huang S, et al. The effect of different particle 
sizes and HCl-modified kaolin on catalytic pyrolysis characteristics of reworked 
polypropylene plastics. Energy 2020;213:119080. 

[154] De Stefanis A, Cafarelli P, Gallese F, Borsella E, Nana A, Perez G. Catalytic 

pyrolysis of polyethylene: a comparison between pillared and restructured clays. 
J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2013;104:479–84. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102128L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[155] Rodríguez E, Palos R, Guti´errez A, Vela FJ, Arandes J, Bilbao J. Effect of the FCC 
equilibrium catalyst properties and of the cracking temperature on the production 
of fuel from HDPE pyrolysis waxes. Energy Fuels 2019;33:5191–9. 

[184] Prathiba R, Shruthi M, Miranda L. Pyrolysis of polystyrene waste in the presence 
of activated carbon in conventional and microwave heating using modified 
thermocouple. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2018;76:528–36. 

[156] Wang Y, Arandiyan H, Scott J, Bagheri A, Dai H, Amal R. Recent advances in 

[185] Rex P, Masilamani I, Miranda L. Microwave pyrolysis of polystyrene and 

ordered meso/macroporous metal oxides for heterogeneous catalysis: a review. 
J Mater Chem A 2017;5:8825–46. 

polypropylene mixtures using different activated carbon from biomass. J Energy 
Inst 2020;93:1819–32. 

[157] Wang S, Dai G, Yang H, Luo Z. Lignocellulosic biomass pyrolysis mechanism: a 

state-of-the-art review. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;62:33–86. 

[158] Kumagai S, Yamasaki R, Kameda T, Saito Y, Watanabe A, Watanabe C, et al. 

Aromatic hydrocarbon selectivity as a function of CaO basicity and aging during 
CaO-catalyzed PET pyrolysis using tandem µ-reactor-GC/MS. Chem Eng J 2018; 
332:169–73. 

[159] Ji M, Chen L, Que J, Zheng L, Chen Z, Wu Z, et al. Effects of transition metal 

oxides on pyrolysis properties of PVC. Process Saf Environ Prot 2020;140:211–20. 

[160] Shah J, Jan MR, Mabood F, Jabeen F. Catalytic pyrolysis of LDPE leads to 

valuable resource recovery and reduction of waste problems. Energy Convers 
Manage 2010;51:2791–801. 

[161] Wang J, Jiang J, Meng X, Li M, Wang X, Pang S, et al. Promoting aromatic 

hydrocarbon formation via catalytic pyrolysis of polycarbonate wastes over Fe- 
and Ce-loaded aluminum oxide catalysts. Environ Sci Technol 2020;54:8390–400. 
[162] Jing L, Yu Y, Zhou X, Hu C. Study on the catalytic pyrolysis of polystyrene. Chem 

Res Appl 2009:10. 

[163] Çelikg¨o˘güs Ç, Karaduman A. Thermal-catalytic pyrolysis of polystyrene waste 
foams in a semi-batch reactor. Energy Sources Part A 2015;37:2507–13. 

[164] Zhang F, Zeng M, Yappert R, Sun J, Lee Y, LaPointe A, et al. Polyethylene 

upcycling to long-chain alkylaromatics by tandem hydrogenolysis/aromatization. 
Science 2020;370:437–41. 

[165] Tennakoon A, Wu X, Paterson A, Patnaik S, Pei Y, LaPointe A, et al. Catalytic 
upcycling of high-density polyethylene via a processive mechanism. Nat Catal 
2020;3(11):893–901. 

[166] Miandad R, Barakat M, Rehan M, Aburiazaiza A, Ismail I, Nizami A. Plastic waste 
to liquid oil through catalytic pyrolysis using natural and synthetic zeolite 
catalysts. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2017;69:66–78. 

[167] Tekade S., Gugale P., Gohil M., Gharat S., Patil T., Chaudhari P., et al. Pyrolysis of 
waste polyethylene under vacuum using zinc oxide. Energy Sourc, Part A. 2020: 
1–15. 

[168] Nisar J, Ali G, Shah A, Shah M, Iqbal M, Ashiq M, et al. Pyrolysis of expanded 
waste polystyrene: influence of nickel-doped copper oxide on kinetics, 
thermodynamics, and product distribution. Energy Fuels 2019;33:12666–78. 
[169] Diaz-Silvarrey L, McMahon A, Phan A. Benzoic acid recovery via waste poly 

(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) catalytic pyrolysis using sulphated zirconia 
catalyst. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2018;134:621–31. 

[170] Kumagai S, Yamasaki R, Kameda T, Saito Y, Watanabe A, Watanabe C, et al. 

Catalytic pyrolysis of poly(ethylene terephthalate) in the presence of metal oxides 
for aromatic hydrocarbon recovery using tandem μ-reactor-GC/MS. Energy Fuels 
2020;34:2492–500. 

[171] Kumagai S, Yamasaki R, Kameda T, Saito Y, Watanabe A, Watanabe C, et al. 

Tandem μ-reactor-GC/MS for online monitoring of aromatic hydrocarbon 
production via CaO-catalysed PET pyrolysis. React. Chem. Eng 2017;2:776–84. 
[172] Adnan Shah J, Jan M. Thermo-catalytic pyrolysis of polystyrene in the presence of 

zinc bulk catalysts. J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2014;45:2494–500. 

[186] Villota E, Lei H, Qian M, Yang Z, Villota S, Zhang Y, et al. Optimizing microwave- 
assisted pyrolysis of phosphoric acid-activated biomass: impact of concentration 
on heating rate and carbonization time. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2018;6:1318–26. 

[187] Wang C, Lei H, Qian M, Huo E, Zhao Y, Zhang Q, et al. Application of highly 
stable biochar catalysts for efficient pyrolysis of plastics: a readily accessible 
potential solution to a global waste crisis. Sustain Energy Fuels 2020;4:4614–24. 

[188] Yu Q, Sun H, Sun H, Li L, Zhu X, Ren S, et al. Highly mesoporous IM-5 zeolite 
prepared by alkaline treatment and its catalytic cracking performance. 
Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2019;273:297–306. 
˜
˜
A3. Zeolite catalysts with 
A©rez-Ram
tunable hierarchy factor by pore-growth moderators. Adv Funct Mater 2009;19: 
3972–9. 

˜
A-rez J, Verboekend D, Bonilla A, Sn Abell

[189] P

[190] Argyle M, Bartholomew C. Heterogeneous catalyst deactivation and regeneration: 

a review. Catalysts 2015;5:145–269. 

[191] Barbarias I, Lopez G, Amutio M, Artetxe M, Alvarez J, Arregi A, et al. Steam 

reforming of plastic pyrolysis model hydrocarbons and catalyst deactivation. Appl 
Catal, A 2016;527:152–60. 

[192] Barbarias I, Artetxe M, Lopez G, Arregi A, Bilbao J, Olazar M. Influence of the 

conditions for reforming HDPE pyrolysis volatiles on the catalyst deactivation by 
coke. Fuel Process Technol 2018;171:100–9. 

[193] Ochoa A, Bilbao J, Gayubo A, Casta˜no P. Coke formation and deactivation during 

catalytic reforming of biomass and waste pyrolysis products: a review. Renew 
Sustain Energy Rev 2020;119:109600. 

[194] Ib´a˜nez M, Artetxe M, Lopez G, Elordi G, Bilbao J, Olazar M, et al. Identification of 
the coke deposited on an HZSM-5 zeolite catalyst during the sequenced 
pyrolysis–cracking of HDPE. Appl Catal, B 2014;148-149:436–45. 

[195] Casta˜no P, Elordi G, Olazar M, Aguayo A, Pawelec B, Bilbao J. Insights into the 
coke deposited on HZSM-5, Hβ and HY zeolites during the cracking of 
polyethylene. Appl Catal, B 2011;104:91–100. 

[196] Marcilla A, G´omez-Siurana A, Vald´es F. Influence of the final “ageing” 

temperature on the regeneration behaviour and location of the coke obtained in 
the HZSM-5 and USY zeolites during the LDPE cracking. Appl Catal, A 2008;334: 
20–5. 

[197] Wei T, Wu K, Lee S, Lin Y. Chemical recycling of post-consumer polymer waste 
over fluidizing cracking catalysts for producing chemicals and hydrocarbon fuels. 
Resour Conserv Recycl 2010;54:952–61. 

[198] Serrano D, Aguado J, Escola J, Garagorri E. Performance of a continuous screw 
kiln reactor for the thermal and catalytic conversion of polyethylene–lubricating 
oil base mixtures. Appl Catal, B 2003;44:95–105. 

[199] Serrano D, Aguado J, Rodríguez J, Peral A. Catalytic cracking of polyethylene 

over nanocrystalline HZSM-5: catalyst deactivation and regeneration study. 
J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2007;79:456–64. 

[200] Xie Q, Li S, Gong R, Zheng G, Wang Y, Xu P, et al. Microwave-assisted catalytic 
dehydration of glycerol for sustainable production of acrolein over a microwave 
absorbing catalyst. Appl Catal, B 2019;243:455–62. 

[173] Sun K, Themelis N, Bourtsalas A, Huang Q. Selective production of aromatics from 

[201] Kassargy C, Awad S, Burnens G, Upreti G, Kahine K, Tazerout M. Study of the 

waste plastic pyrolysis by using sewage sludge derived char catalyst. J Cleaner 
Prod 2020;268:122038. 

effects of regeneration of USY zeolite on the catalytic cracking of polyethylene. 
Appl Catal, B 2019;244:704–8. 

[174] Juliastuti S, Hisbullah M, Abdillah M. High density Polyethylene plastic waste 
treatment with microwave heating pyrolysis method using coconut-shell 
activated carbon to produce alternative fuels. Mater Sci Engin 2018;334:012015. 
[175] Wan K, Chen H, Zheng F, Pan Y, Zhang Y, Long D. Tunable production of jet-fuel 
range alkanes and aromatics by catalytic pyrolysis of LDPE over biomass-derived 
activated carbons. Ind Eng Chem Res 2020;59:17451–61. 

[176] Huo E, Lei H, Liu C, Zhang Y, Xin L, Zhao Y, et al. Jet fuel and hydrogen produced 
from waste plastics catalytic pyrolysis with activated carbon and MgO. Sci Total 
Environ 2020;727:138411. 

[177] Sun K, Huang Q, Chi Y, Yan J. Effect of ZnCl2-activated biochar on catalytic 
pyrolysis of mixed waste plastics for producing aromatic-enriched oil. Waste 
Manage (Oxford) 2018;81:128–37. 

[178] Sun K, Huang Q, Ali M, Chi Y, Yan J. Producing aromatic-enriched oil from mixed 
plastics using activated biochar as catalyst. Energy Fuels 2018;32:5471–9. 

[179] Singh MV, Kumar S, Sarker M. Waste HD-PE plastic, deformation into liquid 

hydrocarbon fuel using pyrolysis-catalytic cracking with a CuCO3  catalyst. 
Sustain Energy Fuels 2018;2:1057–68. 

[180] Wu S-L, Kuo J, Wey M. Thermal degradation of waste plastics in a two-stage 
pyrolysis-catalysis reactor over core-shell type catalyst. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 
2019;142:104641. 

[181] Sun K, Themelis N, Bourtsalas A, Huang Q. Selective production of aromatics from 

waste plastic pyrolysis by using sewage sludge derived char catalyst. J Cleaner 
Prod 2020;268:122038. 

[182] Park C, Kim S, Kwon Y, Jeong C, Cho Y, Lee C, et al. Pyrolysis of polyethylene 
terephthalate over carbon-supported Pd catalyst. Catalysts 2020;10:496. 
[183] Zhou Y, Haynes R. Sorption of heavy metals by inorganic and organic components 
of solid wastes: significance to use of wastes as low-cost adsorbents and 
immobilizing agents. Crit Rev Environ Sci Technol 2010;40:909–77. 

[202] Barbarias I, Artetxe M, Lopez G, Arregi A, Santamaria L, Bilbao J, et al. Catalyst 
performance in the HDPE pyrolysis-reforming under reaction-regeneration cycles. 
Catalysts 2019;9:414. 

[203] Li X, Lv Z, Shao S, Zhu Y, Cheng J, Dong W. Regeneration of deactivated 

hierarchical La/Hi-ZSM-5 for catalytic pyrolysis of rape straw assisted by ozone 
from nonthermal plasma. Energy Fuels 2020;34(11):14159–68. 

[204] Bockhorn H, Hornung A, Hornung U, Jakobstr¨oer P. Modelling of isothermal and 
dynamic pyrolysis of plastics considering non-homogeneous temperature 
distribution and detailed degradation mechanism. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1999;49: 
53–74. 

[205] Artetxe M, Lopez G, Amutio M, Elordi G, Bilbao J, Olazar M. Light olefins from 

HDPE cracking in a two-step thermal and catalytic process. Chem Eng J 2012; 
207-208:27–34. 

[206] Ceamanos J, Mastral J, Millera A, Aldea M. Kinetics of pyrolysis of high density 
polyethylene. Comparison of isothermal and dynamic experiments. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2002;65:93–110. 

[207] Niksiar A, Sohrabi M, Pyrolysis A. Mathematical modeling of waste plastic 

pyrolysis in conical spouted beds: heat, mass, and momentum transport. J Anal 
Appl Pyrolysis 2014;110:66–78. 

[208] Della Zassa M, Favero M, Canu P. Two-steps selective thermal depolymerization 
of polyethylene. 1: feasibility and effect of devolatilization heating policy. J Anal 
Appl Pyrolysis 2010;87:248–55. 

[209] Aguado R, Olazar M, Gais´an B, Prieto R, Bilbao J. Kinetics of polystyrene pyrolysis 

in a conical spouted bed reactor. Chem Eng J 2003;92:91–9. 

[210] Wall L, Madorsky S, Brown D, Straus S, Simha R. The depolymerization of 
polymethylene and polyethylene. J Am Chem Soc 1954;76:3430–7. 

[211] Simha R, Wall L. Some aspects of depolymerization kinetics. J Polym Sci 1951;6: 

39–44. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102129L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

[212] Van Geem K, Faravelli T, Manenti F, Ranzi E. Chapter 6 - Kinetic modeling of the 
pyrolysis chemistry of fossil and alternative feedstocks. Computer Aided Chemical 
Engineering: Elsevier; 2019. p. 295–362. 

[242] Westerhout R, Van Koningsbruggen M, Van Der Ham A, Kuipers J, Van 

Swaaij WPMJCER. Design. Techno-economic evaluation of high temperature 
pyrolysis processes for mixed plastic waste. Chem Eng Res Des 1998;76:427–39. 

[213] Di Blasi C. Modeling and simulation of combustion processes of charring and non- 

[243] Gracida-Alvarez U, Winjobi O, Sacramento-Rivero J, Shonnard D. System 

charring solid fuels. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1993;19:71–104. 

[214] Pyle D, Zaror C. Heat transfer and kinetics in the low temperature pyrolysis of 

solids. Chem Eng Sci 1984;39:147–58. 

[215] L´ed´e J. Reaction temperature of solid particles undergoing an endothermal 

volatilization. Application to the fast pyrolysis of biomass. Biomass Bioen 1994;7: 
49–60. 

[216] Kaminsky W, Schlesselmann B, Simon C. Olefins from polyolefins and mixed 

plastics by pyrolysis. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1995;32:19–27. 

[217] Ali S, Garforth A, Harris D, Rawlence D, Uemichi Y. Polymer waste recycling over 

“used” catalysts. Catal Today 2002;75:247–55. 

analyses of high-value chemicals and fuels from a waste high-density 
polyethylene refinery. part 1: conceptual design and techno-economic 
assessment. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2019;7:18254–66. 

[244] Larrain M, Van Passel S, Thomassen G, Kresovic U, Alderweireldt N, Moerman E, 
et al. Economic performance of pyrolysis of mixed plastic waste: open-loop versus 
closed-loop recycling. J Cleaner Prod 2020;270:122442. 

[245] Somoza-Tornos A, Gonzalez-Garay A, Pozo C, Graells M, Espu˜na A, Guill´en- 
Gos´albez G. Realizing the potential high benefits of circular economy in the 
chemical industry: ethylene monomer recovery via polyethylene pyrolysis. ACS 
Sustain Chem Eng 2020;8:3561–72. 

[218] Lin Y, Yang M. Catalytic pyrolysis of polyolefin waste into valuable hydrocarbons 

[246] Sahu J, Mahalik K, Nam H, Ling T, Woon T, bin Abdul Rahman M, et al. 

over reused catalyst from refinery FCC units. Appl Catal, A 2007;328:132–9. 

[219] Mertinkat J, Kirsten A, Predel M, Kaminsky W. pyrolysis A. Cracking catalysts 
used as fluidized bed material in the Hamburg pyrolysis process. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 1999;49:87–95. 

[220] Santos E, Rijo B, Lemos F, Lemos M. A catalytic reactive distillation approach to 

high density polyethylene pyrolysis – Part 2 – middle olefin production. Catal 
Today 2021;379:212–21. 

[221] Eschenbacher A, Varghese R, Abbas-Abadi M, Van Geem K. Maximizing light 

olefins and aromatics as high value base chemicals via single step catalytic 
conversion of plastic waste. Chem Eng J 2022;428:132087. 

[222] Artetxe M, Lopez G, Elordi G, Amutio M, Bilbao J, Olazar M. Production of light 
olefins from polyethylene in a two-step process: pyrolysis in a conical spouted bed 
and downstream high-temperature thermal cracking. Ind Eng Chem Res 2012;51: 
13915–23. 

[223] Artetxe M, Lopez G, Amutio M, Elordi G, Bilbao J, Olazar M. Cracking of high 

density polyethylene pyrolysis waxes on HZSM-5 catalysts of different acidity. Ind 
Eng Chem Res 2013;52:10637–45. 

[224] Iulianelli A, Liguori S, Wilcox J, Basile A. Advances on methane steam reforming 

to produce hydrogen through membrane reactors technology: a review. Cataly 
Rev 2016;58:1–35. 

[225] Wu C, Williams P. Pyrolysis–gasification of post-consumer municipal solid plastic 
waste for hydrogen production. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:949–57. 
[226] Wu C, Williams P. Pyrolysis–gasification of plastics, mixed plastics and real-world 
plastic waste with and without Ni–Mg–Al catalyst. Fuel 2010;89:3022–32. 
[227] Czernik S, French R. Production of hydrogen from plastics by pyrolysis and 

catalytic steam reform. Energy Fuels 2006;20:754–8. 

[228] Barbarias I, Lopez G, Artetxe M, Arregi A, Bilbao J, Olazar M. Valorisation of 
different waste plastics by pyrolysis and in-line catalytic steam reforming for 
hydrogen production. Energy Convers Manage 2018;156:575–84. 

[229] Wu C, Nahil M, Miskolczi N, Huang J, Williams P. Processing real-world waste 
plastics by pyrolysis-reforming for hydrogen and high-value carbon nanotubes. 
Environ Sci Technol 2014;48:819–26. 

Feasibility study for catalytic cracking of waste plastic to produce fuel oil with 
reference to Malaysia and simulation using ASPEN Plus. Environ Prog Sustain 
Energy 2014;33:298–307. 

[247] Guinee J, Heijungs R, Huppes G, Zamagni A, Masoni P, Buonamici R, et al. Life 
cycle assessment: past, present, and future45. Environ Sci Technol; 2011. p. 90–6. 

[248] Khoo H, Conservation Recycling. LCA of plastic waste recovery into recycled 

materials, energy and fuels in Singapore. Resour Conserv Recycl 2019;145:67–77. 

[249] Alston S, Arnold J. Environmental Impact of pyrolysis of mixed WEEE plastics 

part 2: life cycle assessment. Environ Sci Technol 2011;45:9386–92. 
[250] Melnyk A, Dettlaff A, Kukli´nska K, Namie´snik J, Wolska L. Concentration and 
sources of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs) in surface soil near a municipal solid waste (MSW) landfill. Sci 
Total Environ 2015;530-531:18–27. 

[251] Cheng H, Hu Y. Municipal solid waste (MSW) as a renewable source of energy: 

current and future practices in China. Bioresour Technol 2010;101:3816–24. 

[252] Alston S, Arnold J. Environmental impact of pyrolysis of mixed WEEE plastics 

part 2: life cycle assessment. Environ Sci Technol 2011;45:9386–92. 

[253] Antelava A, Damilos S, Hafeez S, Manos G, Al-Salem S, Sharma B, et al. Plastic 
solid waste (PSW) in the context of life cycle assessment (LCA) and sustainable 
management. Environ Manage 2019;64:230–44. 

[254] Ahamed A, Veksha A, Yin K, Weerachanchai P, Giannis A, Lisak G. Environmental 
impact assessment of converting flexible packaging plastic waste to pyrolysis oil 
and multi-walled carbon nanotubes. J Hazard Mater 2020;390:121449. 
[255] Perugini F, Mastellone M, Arena U. A life cycle assessment of mechanical and 

feedstock recycling options for management of plastic packaging wastes. Environ 
Prog 2005;24:137–54. 

[256] Gear M, Sadhukhan J, Thorpe R, Clift R, Seville J, Keast M. A life cycle assessment 
data analysis toolkit for the design of novel processes–a case study for a thermal 
cracking process for mixed plastic waste. J Cleaner Prod 2018;180:735–47. 

[257] Al-Salem S, Evangelisti S, Lettieri P. Life cycle assessment of alternative 

technologies for municipal solid waste and plastic solid waste management in the 
Greater London area. Chem Eng J 2014;244:391–402. 

[230] Acomb J, Wu C, Williams P. Control of steam input to the pyrolysis-gasification of 

[258] Iribarren D, Dufour J, Serrano D, Management W. Preliminary assessment of 

waste plastics for improved production of hydrogen or carbon nanotubes. Appl 
Catal, B 2014;147:571–84. 

plastic waste valorization via sequential pyrolysis and catalytic reforming. 
J Mater Cycles Waste Manage 2012;14:301–7. 

[231] Acomb J, Wu C, Williams P. The use of different metal catalysts for the 

[259] Gracida-Alvarez U, Winjobi O, Sacramento-Rivero J, Shonnard D. System 

simultaneous production of carbon nanotubes and hydrogen from pyrolysis of 
plastic feedstocks. Appl Catal, B 2016;180:497–510. 

[232] Yao D, Wu C, Yang H, Zhang Y, Nahil M, Chen Y, et al. Co-production of hydrogen 
and carbon nanotubes from catalytic pyrolysis of waste plastics on Ni-Fe 
bimetallic catalyst. Energy Convers Manage 2017;148:692–700. 

[233] Yao D, Li H, Dai Y, Wang C. Impact of temperature on the activity of Fe-Ni 

catalysts for pyrolysis and decomposition processing of plastic waste. Chem Eng J 
2021;408:127268. 

[234] Namioka T, Saito A, Inoue Y, Park Y, Min T, Roh S, et al. Hydrogen-rich gas 

production from waste plastics by pyrolysis and low-temperature steam reforming 
over a ruthenium catalyst. Appl Energ 2011;88:2019–26. 

[235] Dai L, Zhou N, Li H, Wang Y, Liu Y, Cobb K, et al. Catalytic fast pyrolysis of low 
density polyethylene into naphtha with high selectivity by dual-catalyst tandem 
catalysis. Sci Total Environ 2021;771:144995. 

[236] L´opez A, de Marco I, Caballero B, Laresgoiti M, Adrados A, Aranzabal A. Catalytic 
pyrolysis of plastic wastes with two different types of catalysts: ZSM-5 zeolite and 
Red Mud. Appl Catal, B 2011;104:211–9. 

[237] Dai L, Zhou N, Lv Y, Cheng Y, Wang Y, Liu Y, et al. Chemical upcycling of waste 
polyolefinic plastics to low-carbon synthetic naphtha for closing the plastic use 
loop. Sci Total Environ 2021;782:146897. 

[238] Dai L, Zhou N, Lv Y, Cobb K, Cheng Y, Wang Y, et al. Pyrolysis-catalysis for waste 
polyolefin conversion into low aromatic naphtha. Energy Convers Manage 2021; 
245:114578. 

[239] Gao P, Wang Q, Xu J, Qi G, Wang C, Zhou X, et al. Brønsted/Lewis Acid Synergy 
in Methanol-to-Aromatics Conversion on Ga-Modified ZSM-5 Zeolites, As Studied 
by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy. ACS Cataly 2018;8:69–74. 

[240] Yarulina I, De Wispelaere K, Bailleul S, Goetze J, Radersma M, Abou-Hamad E, 

et al. Structure–performance descriptors and the role of Lewis acidity in the 
methanol-to-propylene process. Nat Chem 2018;10:804–12. 

[241] Jiang G, Wang J, Al-Salem S, Leeke G. Molten solar salt pyrolysis of mixed plastic 
waste: process simulation and technoeconomic evaluation. Energy Fuels 2020;34: 
7397–409. 

analyses of high-value chemicals and fuels from a waste high-density 
polyethylene refinery. Part 2: carbon footprint analysis and regional electricity 
effects. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2019;7:18267–78. 

[260] Gracida-Alvarez U, Keenan L, Sacramento-Rivero J, Shonnard D. Resource and 

greenhouse gas assessments of the thermochemical conversion of municipal solid 
waste in Mexico. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2016;4:5972–8. 

[261] Benavides P, Sun P, Han J, Dunn J, Wang M. Life-cycle analysis of fuels from post- 

use non-recycled plastics. Fuel 2017;203:11–22. 

[262] Kalargaris I, Tian G, Gu S. Combustion, performance and emission analysis of a DI 
diesel engine using plastic pyrolysis oil. Fuel Process Technol 2017;157:108–15. 
[263] Jing Y, Wang Y, Furukawa S, Xia J, Sun C, Hülsey M, et al. Towards the circular 

economy: converting aromatic plastic waste back to arenes over Ru/Nb2O5 
catalyst. Angew Chem Int Ed 2021;133(10):5587–95.  

Leilei Dai is a PhD candidate at the University of Minnesota. 
His  research  interests  include  catalytic  microwave-assisted 
pyrolysis  of  soild  wastes  for  the  production  of  fuels,  chem-
icals, and materials. He has 20 publications with a Google H 
index of 30. He also served as a peer reviewer for many jour-
nals, such as Bioresource Technology, Applied Thermal Engi-
neering, Science of the Total Environment, Fuel. .  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102130L. Dai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Nan Zhou (1992) received his BS (2013) in Energy and Power 
Engineering  at  Xi’an  Jiaotong  University  and  MSc  (2015)  in 
Biosystems  Engineering  at  Oklahoma  State  University.  He  is 
currently  a  PhD  candidate  at  University  of  Minnesota.  His- 
research interests include energy and material recovery from 
organic solid wastes, and applications of non-thermal plasma 
technology and microwave technology. He has co-authored 38 
publications with an h-index of 16 .  

Dr. Yuancai Lv is a teacher at Fuzhou University. He got her 
Ph.D from South China University of Technology, and M.S, B.S 
from Fuzhou University.  He has been part of Center for Bio-
refining at University of Minnesota as a visiting scholar since 
2019. Since 2012, he has been focusing on the development of 
environmental materials and the recycling of solid waste. So 
far,  he  has  obtained  5  grants  including  the  National  Natural 
Science  Foundation  of  China  and  Fujian  Natural  Science 
Foundation  National,  gained  5 Chinese  invention  patent and 
published 33 research articles. Currently, he has been the re-
viewers  of  several  journals  including  Chemical  Engineering 
Journal,  Water  Research,  Journal  of  Hazardous  Materials, 
Chemosphere  and  Energy  &  Fuel.  His-interests  involves  syn-
thesis of biomass materials, nitrogen fixation with non-thermo plasma and water pollution 
control .  

Dr.  Yanling  Cheng  is  an  adjunct  associate  professor  at  the 
University of Minnesota, USA, a professor at the Beijing Union 
University, China. She got her Ph.D from China University of 
Mining  and  Technology  (Beijing),  and  M.S,  B.S  from  Chang-
chun University of Technology. Dr. Cheng’s research focuses 
on value-added processes and systems development for various 
by-products,  residues  and  wastes  from  food  and  agricultural 
productions, sustainable development, renewable energy and 
wastewater treatment. Dr. Cheng has published over 90 papers 
in  refereed  journals,  co-authored  three  books,  and  holds  9 
patents. She has supervised over 60 undergraduate and grad-
uate  students  at  Beijing  Union  University  (BUU).  She  has 
received over 20 grants totaling over 10 million Chinese yuan 
in various funding for research, including major funding from Chinese Ministry of S&T, 
Beijing City Government, and industries since 2010. She has served as an editorial board 
member of 1 journal, and peer reviewer for several journals .  

Dr.  Wang  Yunpu  is a  professor  at  Nanchang  University.  He 
received MSc (2012) and PhD (2020) at Nanchang University. 
His-research interests include energy conversion and efficient 
utilization of agricultural and forestry biomass and other solid 
wastes.  He  has  published  more  than  100  scientific  research 
papers in the past 5 years, with an h-index of 25, i10-index of 
51, and over 1800 citations .  

Dr.  Yuhuan  Liu  is  a  professor  at  Nanchang  University.  He 
received  his  B.S.  from  Fujian  Agriculture  and  Forestry  Uni-
versity  and  Ph.D.  from  Nanchang  University.  He  has  been 
working with solid waste utilization, biobased product devel-
opment,  waste  management,  environment  protection,  and 
sustainable  agriculture.  He  has  published  over  200  peer- 
reviewed  journal  articles  and  book  chapters.  He  serves  as  a 
reviewer for international peer-reviewed journals in the past 
15 years .  

Kirk Cobb is a retired chemical process design engineer, after 
working for 45 years, primarily in the oleo-chemicals industry. 
He completed a B.S. in Chemical Engineering at Ohio Univer-
sity  during  1968–1972,  and  completed  an  M.S.  in  Chemical 
Engineering at Michigan State University in 1973. He worked 
in  the  pharmaceutical  and  detergent  industries,  early  in  his 
career,  and  then  spent  more  than  20  years  working  for  the 
chemical division of a large paper company, focusing on crude 
tall  oil  and  fatty  acid  distillation  projects,  and  downstream 
projects that converted distilled pine rosin and distilled fatty 
acids  into  commercial  products  such  as  polymers,  adhesive 
resins,  and  printing  ink  resins.  Process  design  work,  both 
domestic and international, always included mass and energy 
balance evaluations, plant utilities, and related environmental issues. During the last 15 
years  of  his  career,  Kirk  felt  compelled  to  use  his  engineering  expertise  to  address  the 
growing concern of global climate change, and took his experience in the oleo-chemicals 
industry to the expanding biofuels industry. While doing consulting work in the biofuels 
industry, he recommended a process technology to a client, which had been used for de-
cades in oleo-chemicals, as a unique process method for methyl ester production. Although 
the client later received a patent for this technology, Kirk was named in the corporate sale 
of that client, as having rights to future use of that technology. Kirk has written numerous 
technical articles which have been published in industrial periodicals, such as Biodiesel 
Magazine,  Biomass  Magazine,  and  Render  Magazine.  Even  in  retirement,  Kirk  remains 
enthusiastically focused on issues related to climate change, has written numerous letters 
to the editor on this topic, which have been published in the Minneapolis Star Tribune. For 
many years, Kirk has remained a member of the American Chemical Society, and served as 
the chairman of a local ACS section (many years ago!). To reduce his carbon footprint, he 
now drives an EV .  

Dr.  Paul  Chen  is  a  research  professor  at  the  University  of 
Minnesota, USA. He also serves as the Program Director of the 
Center  for  Biorefining  at  the  University  of  Minnesota.  He 
earned his BSc and MSc degrees from South China Agricultural 
University  in  1983  and  1983  respectively,  and  obtained  his 
PhD degree at the Queen’s University of Belfast, UK, in 1994. 
His-main  research  interests  include  biological  material  and 
food  processing,  biomass  conversion,  alternative  biomass  re-
sources, biorefining, and biobased product development, waste 
mitigation and utilization, environment protection, sustainable 
agriculture,  food  safety,  and  healthy  foods.  He  is/was  an 
investigator of numerous USDA, DOE, and DOT funded projects 
related bioenergy production. He has more than 230 papers, 2 
books, 13 book chapters published with Google Scholar metrics of citations: 12,870, h- 
index: 59, and i10-index: 172 .  

Dr.  Hanwu  Lei  is  an  Associate  Professor  of  Bioenergy  and 
Bioproducts Engineering of Biological Systems Engineering at 
Washington State University. He received his B.S. from Jian-
gnan  University  and  M.S.  and  Ph.D.  from  the  University  of 
Minnesota, Twin Cities, in Biosystems and Agricultural Engi-
neering. Dr. Lei has been working with biomass-derived car-
bon, activated carbon, carbon catalyst production, carbon and 
zeolite  catalysis,  syngas  and  hydrogen  production,  bio  aro-
matics, and bio-jet fuels. His-research investigates the mecha-
nisms responsible for the generation of fuel components and 
high-value  chemicals  and  bioproducts  from  biomass  and 
municipal  solid  wastes  including  plastic  wastes,  and  address 
fundamental and applied questions in conversions. Dr. Lei has 
published over 137 peer-reviewed journal articles and book chapters with an h-index of 
40, i10-index of 95, and over 5336 citations. He is co-editing with international partners 
for international peer-reviewed journals for the past 13 years .  

Dr. Roger Ruan is a professor at the University of Minnesota, 
USA.  He  received  his  from  University  of  Illinois  at  Urbana- 
Champaign.  He  is  a  fellow  of  ASABE  and  a  fellow  and  IFT. 
He  has  published  over  500  papers  in  refereed  journals,  two 
books, and 20 book chapters, and holds 18 US patents. He is 
also a top cited author in the area of agricultural and biological 
sciences  with  an  h-index  of  74,  i10-index  of  350,  and  over 
21,000  citations.  He  has  received  over  180  projects  totaling 
over US$45 million in various funding for research, including 
major funding from USDA, DOE, DOT, DOD, and industries. He 
has served as Editor-in-Chief, associate editor, guest editor or 
editorial board member of many journals. He has given over 
300 keynote lectures, invited symposium presentations, com-
pany seminars, and short courses, and has been a consultant for government agencies, and 
many local, national, and international companies and agencies in bioprocess engineering, 
food engineering, and renewable energy and environment areas . 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102131