Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Progress in beam-down solar concentrating systems

Evangelos Bellos

Thermal Department, School of Mechanical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Zografou, Heroon Polytechniou 9, 15780, Athens, Greece

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Christof Schultz

Keywords:
Solar concentrating power
Solar fuel
Beam-down concentrator
Optical design
Thermochemical process
Splitter reflector

Concentrating  solar  technologies  are  promising  renewable  energy  systems  for  exploiting  incident  beam  solar
irradiation with high exergy efficiency values. These systems provide the possibility for producing useful heat at
high temperatures that can be utilized by highly efficient power cycles or producing directly solar fuels with
receiver reactor technology. In the last years, the concept of beam-down concentrating solar technology gains
more and more attention due to a series of advantages associated with this idea. This concept is based on the use
of two-stage reflectors for concentrating solar irradiation close to the ground, something that leads to a more
compact  system  with  reduced  height.  Furthermore,  the  high-temperature  heat  production  and  the  chemical
processes take place on the ground and not at a great height, increasing the safety levels of the system. Moreover,
this design leads to compact configurations with lower materials use, lower wind loads and without the need to
move the receiver for tracking the sun.

The objective of this review is to present the recent progress on beam-down solar concentrating technology
and  to  highlight  the  need  for  giving  attention  to  this  direction.  Critical  advantages  of  this  technology  are
demonstrated and the associated limitations are discussed. The emphasis is on the presentation of the different
technologies  that  can  be  coupled  with  the  beam-down  technology.  Thermodynamic  power  cycles  (Brayton,
Rankine and Stirling), photovoltaics, thermochemical processes, as well as other applications are included and
discussed. Practically, power production and solar fuels are the major useful outputs that can be generated by
beam-down solar concentrating configurations. The reviewed technologies are critically discussed and compared
in terms of energy, economic and environmental aspects. Future steps in the field are suggested based on the
existing literature.

1. Introduction

The energy sector faces a series of important challenges in the last
decades due to many reasons and therefore a lot of effort has been given
to the direction for facing this situation. More specifically, the energy
demand  has  an  increasing  trend  [1]  due  to  the  new  lifestyle  and  the
population  increase  [2].  Moreover,  climate  change  which  is  mainly
associated with high CO2 emissions has started to create obstacles in life
due to the abrupt weather phenomena, the increasing worldwide tem-
perature, the rising sea levels and the changes in the ecosystem [3]. Also,
decarbonization, which is based mainly on renewable energy develop-
ment [4], has not been yet completed and the transient period of our
days leads to issues of electricity availability, high electricity cost and
fuel availability issues.

technologies which presents a series of advantages named: i) thermal
energy storage solutions [5], ii) the possibility for production of both
useful heat of variable temperature levels and electricity, iii) coupling
with high efficient power blocks [6], and iv) possibility for producing
solar fuels [7]. Regarding thermal storage, it can lead to grid flexibility
[8] and so the supplementary power production during the peak solar
potential can be shifted later, when there is electricity demand. Also,
thermal storage can be designed with high efficiency, adding an extra
advantage  compared  to  other  renewable  technologies  (e.g.,  PV)  [8].
Also, the combination of CSP with other renewables (e.g., wind turbines)
makes possible 100% flexibility [9]. Another critical advantage of solar
irradiation as an energy source is its high potential which is about 120,
000 TW which is about 5 times higher than the worldwide energy de-
mand [10].

In this direction, a lot of research has been conducted on new and
alternative  ways  of  producing  clean  electricity.  Concentrating  solar
power  (CSP)  consists  one  of  the  most  rising  renewable  energy

However, the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) for the CSP remains
higher  than  the  other  renewable  technologies  and  this  fact  does  not
permit the acceleration of this technology. Specifically, according to the

E-mail address: bellose@central.ntua.gr.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101085
Received 19 November 2022; Received in revised form 26 January 2023; Accepted 21 February 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)101085Availableonline21April20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

E. Bellos

IRENA [11], the LCOE for the CSP was 0.114 €/kWhel, while for the PV
0.048 €/kWhel. Regarding the other renewable technologies, the LCOE
for hydropower is 0.048 €/kWhel, for onshore winds is 0.033 €/kWhel,
for offshore winds is 0.075 €/kWhel, for bioenergy is 0.067 €/kWhel and
for geothermal energy 0.068 €/kWhel [11]. Moreover, it is important to
state that the growth of the PV market in the last decade has reduced
significantly  PV  costs  [12],  something  that  makes  the  situation  to  be
beneficial  for  PV.  However,  the  aforementioned  advantages  of  CSP,
regarding the thermal storage solutions and the grid flexibility, make the
CSP  a  critical  pillar  for  achieving  the  further  decarbonization  of  our
society.

1.1. Current technologies for concentrating solar systems

Solar  concentrating  power  plants  can  be  found  in  various  designs
which are mainly varied in the solar field. There are several established
solar concentrating technologies that can provide useful heat in medium
and  high-temperature  levels  for  feeding  the  power  blocks.  In  all  the
designs, the basic idea is to use mirrors for reflecting properly the solar
irradiation  in  a  specific  area,  called  the  receiver,  and  thus  high  tem-
peratures can be achieved in the region. A working fluid passes from the
receiver  and  absorbs  useful  heat  of  high  temperature  which  can  be
further utilized in the power block.

A critical parameter of solar concentrating technologies is the con-
centration  ratio  (CR)  which  is  defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  solar  field
aperture (Afield) to the receiver area (Areceiver), as below [13]:

CR =

Afield
Areceiver

Fig. 1. Conventional solar concentrating technologies [21].

(1)

The concentration ratio plays a significant role in the overall system
performance, and it determines the global system efficiency (ηglob). The
theoretical analysis of a solar concentrating system coupled to an ideal
power  engine  (Carnot  Cycle)  indicates  that  the  optimum  operating
temperature of the receiver (Tr,opt) can be found below, for the ideal case
[14]:

Tr,opt = Tam

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
CR Gb ηopt
UL Tam

1 +

(2)

Where the ambient temperature (Tam), the direct beam irradiation (Gb)
and the collector thermal loss coefficient (UL) which is assumed constant
are used in the aforementioned calculation. Equation (2) indicates that a
higher concentration ratio leads to a higher optimum receiver temper-
ature and according to the literature [15], the global system efficiency
increases  with  the  increase  of  the  optimum  receiver  temperature.
Therefore,  the  design  of  the  solar  concentrating  systems  is  associated
with the concentration ratio which acts as a critical parameter.

Solar concentrating technologies are mainly separated into two great

classifications, according to the concentrating image geometry:

a)  Linear  concentrating  systems:  The  concentration  of  the  solar
irradiation is performed in a linear region with small width and also
the  primary  field  of  the  mirrors  has  a  linear  pattern.  The  most
representative solar concentrating technologies with linear concen-
tration are the parabolic trough collector (PTC) and the linear Fres-
nel reflector (LFR).

b)  Point focal concentrating systems: The concentration of the solar
irradiation is done in a relatively small region, compared to the solar
field, aiming to maximize the concentration ratio and the operating
temperature  levels.  The  primary  reflectors  have  usually  a  circular
pattern and the most representative technologies are the solar towers
(ST) and the solar dishes (SD), while there are usual designs with
dishes coupled to Stirling engines.

Fig. 1 depicts the main conventional solar concentrating technolo-
gies.  The  linear systems  are  given  in subfigures 1a  and  1b,  while the

point focal systems are at 1c and 1d. It is critical to state that all the
concentrating technologies with a CR > 5 [16] are practically imaging
solar systems which exploit only the direct solar beam irradiation. The
concentration  ratio  for  linear  technologies  is  usually  in  the  range  of
10–50 [17], while the focal point systems operate in higher concentra-
tion ratios up to 1000 [18]. Regarding the operating temperature range,
C  with  thermal  oil  as  the
linear  technologies  can  operate  up  to  400
◦
working fluids [17], while they can reach up to 600
C with molten salts
[19]. On the other hand, point focal systems, especially solar towers, can
◦
operate at significantly higher temperatures up to 900
C or more [20].
The proper operation of the concentrating systems needs the use of a
tracking mechanism to follow properly the sun’s path. The linear tech-
nologies need a single-axis tracking system, while the focal point units
need a two-axis tracking mechanism.

◦

1.1.1. Parabolic trough collector

Parabolic  trough  solar  collector  is  the  most  mature  solar  concen-
trating technology [22] which is used for power production [23], as well
as for a series of applications like solar cooling [24], desalination [25],
industrial  processes  [26]  and  chemical  processes  [27].  This  collector
type consists of a bent reflector in a linear parabolic shape, while the
receiver  is usually  an  evacuated tube  placed at  the  focal point of  the
parabola. Practically, the evacuated tube makes possible the reduction
of the convection thermal losses between the absorber tube and the glass
cover,  something  that  enables high  performance for  operation  at  me-
dium  and  high  temperatures.  The  operation  with  thermal  oil  (e.g.,
Therminol VP-1 [28]) makes possible the safe operation up to 400
C
[29],  while  the  use  of  molten  salts  makes  possible  the  operation  in
◦
higher temperatures up to 550–600
C [19]. Also, the use of molten salts
can  be  combined  with  the  respective  thermal  storage  system  which
usually includes two storage tanks, one cold and one hot tank [30]. PTC
operates with a tracking system that is based on axial tracking of the sun
(single-direction  tracking).  There  are  also  designs  with  two-axis
tracking, but they are seldom, and they can be applied to small-scale
applications.

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010852

E. Bellos

1.1.2. Linear Fresnel reflector

Linear Fresnel reflector is a linear concentrating technology that is
competitive with PTC. LFR can be used in similar applications as the PTC
due to the operation in similar operating temperatures, while the con-
centration  ratio  of  these  technologies  ranges  in  similar  ranges.  LFR
technology is based on the use of primary segmented reflectors (flat or
curved [31]) which concentrates the incident solar irradiation on the
receiver which is placed a few meters over the ground [16]. Usually, a
secondary reflector (or cavity) [32] is placed around the absorber (one
or more tubes, while there is the possibility of the evacuated tube) to
catch the maximum possible fraction of the incoming reflected solar rays
and redirect them in the absorbing area. LFR presents solar advantages
and  disadvantages  compared  to  the  PTC  due  to  the  different  design
principles of both designs.

The main disadvantage of the LFR is the reduced efficiency compared
to the PTC due to the high optical losses. Specifically, the existence of
segmented  primary  receivers  creates  some  extra  optical  losses  due  to
blocking  and  shading  effects  [33,34].  Also,  the  need  for  using  a  sec-
ondary  reflector  introduces  some  extra  losses  in  the  system.  Another
issue is the higher optical end losses of the LFR compared to the PTC
because the distance of the receiver from the ground is greater than the
respective  distance  (receiver–down  parabola  point)  in  the  PTC  [35].
However, there are interesting solutions in the literature regarding the
treatment of this issue with the displacement of the receiver [36] or the
inclination  of  the  primary  reflectors  [37].  Also,  alternative  and
advanced  tracking  techniques  can  be  used  for  enhanced  optical  effi-
ciency in small-scale LFR [38].

On the other hand, the LFR presents a series of advantages that make
them  a  promising  technology.  The  major  advantage  is  the  lower  in-
vestment cost compared to the PTC. In the literature, it is found that the
investment cost of the LFR has to be up to 67% of the PTC investment
cost for the LFR to be an economically viable choice [39]. Moreover, the
LFR faces lower wind loads because the primary reflectors are placed
close to the ground [40]. Another advantage is based on the use of a
stable receiver that does not move, as in the PTC. This fact reduces the
complexity  of  the  system,  something  that  also  reduces  the  risk  of
working fluid leakage [41].

1.1.3. Solar tower

A  solar  tower  (or  central  system)  is  a  focal  point  concentrating
technology that is used mainly in power production applications with
high operating temperature levels [42]. It is usually applied in appli-
cations with relatively high-power capacity, and it needs a significant
land amount. Also, it is notable that this technology can operate with a
high concentration ratio which can reach up to 1000 [43] and this fact
justifies the possibility of operation in high temperatures.

Specifically,  there  are  primary  segmented  reflectors  that track  the
sun in two directions to follow properly its path. All the primary mirrors
concentrate  the  incident  beam  irradiation  into  a  region  at  the  solar
tower, where high temperatures are created. The selection of the proper
heliostat field (primary reflectors) is a critical issue because they consist
of 40–50% of the system investment cost [44]. The most usual materials
for heliostats are mirrored glasses and reflective films [45]. Moreover,
the small heliostats present the benefits of high optical performance due
to low shading and blocking effects, while they present relatively low
wind loads [46].

Usually, tubular receivers are used with incorporated vertical pipes
in their internal region which act as heat exchangers [47]. Practically,
the heat exchangers are responsible for transferring the absorbed solar
energy into the heat transfer fluid aiming the useful heat production. It is
useful to state that the tower has a relatively high height which can be in
the range of 100–300 m [48].

The operation in very high temperatures with the solar tower is a
critical issue that needs the selection of the proper working fluids. The
molten salts or water/steam working fluids are usually used for opera-
◦
tion up to 550
C and coupling the system with a Rankine cycle [49]. For

temperature  levels  in  higher  temperatures,  gas-working  fluids  or
particle-based systems have to be selected and in these cases, Brayton
cycles are used as the power blocks [49].

1.1.4. Solar dish

Solar dish concentrators are focal point designs that can operate up
to  very  high  concentration  rates  of  up  to  1000  or  more  [50].  They
include a concentrator with a paraboloid 3D geometry and a receiver
that is placed either lower or higher than the focal point to achieve a
relatively uniform heat flux distribution [51]. The usual choice of solar
dishes is to be coupled the concentrator with a highly efficient Stirling
engine for power production [52].

Moreover, there is plenty of other applications for solar dishes with
the use of cavity receivers for useful heat production [53]. Cavity re-
ceivers  aim  to  capture  the  solar  irradiation  and  redirect  it  into  the
receiver, after many reflections. Also, they keep high temperatures in
the region close to the receiver, something that reduces thermal losses.
Their outer area is usually insulated to keep inside the thermal energy.
Moreover, the cavity receiver improves the uniformity of the heat flux
distribution  over  the  absorber  [54].  Cavity  receivers  are  properly
designed by optimizing their geometry and so there are different designs
named hemispherical [55], cylindrical [56], conical [57], rectangular
[58],  hetero-conical  [59],  cylindro-conical  [60],  etc.  Coil  tubes  are
placed inside the cavity receivers and every coil has a relatively small
diameter. Applications for power production [61], solar cooling [62],
heating  production  [63]  and  desalination  [64]  can  be  found  in  the
literature.

1.2. Need for developing new solar concentrating technologies

In  the  last  decade,  the  mean  LCOE  for  the  CSP  has  significantly
reduced from 0.36 to 0.11 €/kWh presenting and 68% reduction [11].
However, CSP is not a financially optimum choice compared with other
renewables  like  PV  with  an  LCOE  of  around  0.5  €/kWh  and  onshore
wind energy at 3.3 €/kWh [11]. Thus, a critical factor for the further
development  of  CSP  is  cost  reduction.  Another  option  for  the  further
development  of  CSP  is  the  possibility  of  solar  fuel  production  (e.g.
hydrogen [65]) aiming to substitute fossil fuels. This strategy will help a
lot of seasonal storage by producing solar fuels in the summer period and
exploiting them all year. Therefore, this option is a critical one to expand
the CSP in the next years.

Therefore, a lot of research has begun on the direction of developing
alternative CSP designs, and the interesting part of this research regards
solar system improvement. Some of the critical aspects that have to be
taken into consideration in the new designs are i) the reduction of the
utilized material, ii) the increase of the performance, iii) the reduction of
the wind loads, iv) the reduction of the thermal stresses which can lead
to components’ failure, v) the increase of the safety levels by minimizing
various  dangers  (e.g.,  fire  danger,  leakage  danger,  etc.),  and  vi)  the
development  of  novel  and  efficient  storage  techniques  for  long-term
(seasonal) operation.

A direct response to the aforementioned critical challenges that the
CSP faces is the design of the beam-down CSP. The idea of this tech-
nology is not new and it was based on the old technology of the “Cas-
segrain  reflector”  which  has  an  application  in  telescopes  [66].
Specifically, this idea uses two or three reflecting surfaces to redirect the
solar  beam  irradiation  in  the  receiver  which  is  placed  close  to  the
ground. This technology can be applied by modifying the existing solar
concentrating  technologies  and  so  new  generation  CSP  can  be  devel-
oped. Also, this technology gives the important potential for application
with concentrating photovoltaics (CPV), especially with the cooperation
of the solar filtering idea.

The advantages of this technology are critical and they can lead to
more sustainable CSP which can compete with other renewable tech-
nologies, as well as be more effective in some cases. More specifically,
the  beam-down  (BD)  design  concentrates  the  solar  irradiation  in  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010853

E. Bellos

ground, so the heat transfer fluid flows close to the ground in a stable
configuration that does not move. So, high safety standards exist that
can lead to a reliable and low-cost design. Besides the safety increase,
the pumping demand is reduced because the working fluid has not to be
transferred to a great height but it remains close to the ground, some-
thing with economic and design benefits [67]. Also, the total height of
the total system is lower, and the solar unit is more compact. The result
is the use of lower materials (e.g., lower need for construction support,
etc.), something that reduces the cost of the system. Moreover, the lower
height  leads  to  lower  wind  loads  something  that  leads  to  lightweight
construction with higher reliability. It is also valuable to add that the
beam-down  concept  can  lead  to  a  relatively  more  uniform  heat  flux
distribution over the absorber due to the multiple reflections and the
suitable  design  possibility.  Another  critical  advancement of  this  tech-
nology is the possibility of using fluidized beds and chemical reactors in
the  receiver  location  aiming  to  produce  solar  fuels  or  other  chemical
products. This idea is a very attractive one, especially for the production
of solar fuels that can help seasonal storage, something very important
for  the  further  development  of  renewables.  The  aforementioned  ad-
vances in down-beam technologies indicate the strong potential of these
technologies for the acceleration of CSP penetration in the worldwide
energy sector.

The literature includes numerous investigations of systems based on
this idea, while there are also and real applications of this technology.
The most representative example is the under-construction real CSP in
China called “Yumen Xinneng/Xinchen 50 MW Beam-down CSP” [68]
and it is given in Fig. 2. This plant will use molten salt of 570
C for
feeding a water/steam Rankine cycle of 50 MWel nominal capacity. It is
estimated that the LCOE will be around 0.11 €/kWh, which is a very
competitive  value  for  the  first  real  plant  in  this  category.  Another
characteristic example is the beam-down solar platform of 100 kW at the
Masdar Institute of Science and Technology [69], as it is given in Fig. 3
◦
[70]. This unit uses molten salt of 250–550
C and it can reach up to 600
suns concentration ratio. Additionally, a well-known unit is located at
the campus of the University of Miyazaki [71] and it is a beam-down
technology  coupled  to  a  thermochemical  water-splitting  reactor,  as
Fig. 4 illustrates. The solar heat flux on the absorber reaches up to 110

◦

kWth at the noon, while it can be around 90 kWth for 3 h per day.

In  the  literature,  review  papers  are  scarce  regarding  beam-down
solar  concentrating  technologies,  while  there  are  plenty  of  studies
regarding conventional concentrating solar systems. The study by Faez
Ali et al. [73] in 2018 was a mini review regarding the optical analysis of
solar systems with secondary concentrators. They focused on the com-
pound parabolic concentrators (CPC), and they reviewed designs with
and without tracking mechanisms. In another work, Bursha and Hart-
mann  [74]  in  2019  reviewed  the  two-stage  concentrating  systems  by
emphasizing the presentation of different geometries, while they gave
minor  importance  to  the  applications  of  the  two-stage  concentrating
solar systems. The present work comes to cover the existing literature
gap by performing a holistic review approach of the beam-down tech-
nologies  by  giving  emphasis  both  on  geometrical  aspects  and  on  the
respective  applications  of  these  solar  systems.  Expect  the  CSP,  other
critical  aspects  include  the  concentrating  PV,  the  industrial  processes
and the thermochemical processes which lead to the production of solar
fuels.  This  investigation  includes  a  critical  discussion  of  the  different
beam-down  designs  in  terms  of  performance  and  sustainability.  The
latest trends of the examined technologies are presented, and the future
steps are given to provide useful guidelines for designing highly efficient
and sustainable CSP.

1.3. Basic index definitions for the concentrating solar power systems

The characterization of the CSP systems and subsystems is performed
by  the  use  of  the  suitable  performance  indexes  which  are  briefly
described in the present section.

The collector optical efficiency (ηopt) is defined as the ratio of the
absorbed  solar  irradiation  (Qabs)  by  the  receiver  to  the  solar  beam
irradiation in the solar field (Qsol):

ηopt =

Qabs
Qsol

(3)

The optical efficiency (ηopt) can be calculated as a product of various
indexes and a typical expression for a collector with two reflectors, a
cover glass and a receiver is given below:

Fig. 2. The beam-down CSP in Yumen Xinneng/Xinchen [72].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010854

E. Bellos

Fig. 3. The beam-down platform at the Masdar Institute of Science and Technology (a) heliostats, (b) secondary reflector, (c) total configuration [70].

Fig. 4. The beam-down setup at the University of Miyazaki with a thermochemical water-splitting reactor [71].

ηopt = K γ ρ1 ρ2 τ a

(4)

expressed as below:

Where the intercept factor (γ), the reflectance of the first reflector (ρ1),
the  reflectance  of  the  second  reflector  (ρ2),  the  transmittance  of  the
cover (τ) and the absorbance of the receiver (α) are used in the afore-
mentioned formula. The intercept factor is the ratio of the solar energy
that reaches the receiver opening (before the cover) to the reflected from
the last mirror. Also, it is important to state that the parameter (K) is the
incident  angel  modifier  of  the  collector  which  takes  into  account  the
impact of the solar angles on the collector aperture [75].

The collector solar thermal efficiency (ηth) is defined as the ratio of
the useful heat production (Qu) to the solar beam irradiation in the solar
field (Qsol):

ηth =

Qu
Qsol

(5)

ηst =

Qin
Qu

(7)

The system efficiency (ηsys) can be defined as the produced electricity

(Pel) to the solar beam irradiation in the solar field (Qsol):

ηsys =

Pel
Qsol

Moreover, by combining equations (5)–(8), it can be written:

ηsys = ηth ηst ηcycle

(8)

(9)

Lastly, it is useful to state that the electrical efficiency of a PV (ηel) is
defined as the ratio of the produced electricity (Pel) to the solar beam
irradiation in the solar field (Qsol):

The thermodynamic cycle efficiency (ηcycle) that utilizes the useful
heat from the solar system is defined as the ratio of the produced elec-
tricity (Pel) to the heat input from the solar field in the system (Qin).

ηel =

Pel
Qsol

(10)

ηcycle =

Pel
Qin

The storage system can introduce some thermal losses to the system.
Neglecting  the  storage  capacity,  the  storage  efficiency  (ηst)  can  be

2. Operating principles of beam-down concentrating systems

(6)

The  idea  of  beam-down  solar  concentrating  technology  was  first
introduced by Rabl [76] in 1976 who presented the basic geometrical
aspects of using an upper reflector for redirecting the solar rays into the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010855

E. Bellos

ground. He called this idea a “tower reflector”  and he stated that this
design leads to easier heat transfer because the receiver is placed close to
the  ground,  avoiding  the  movement  of  the  working  fluid  at  a  great
height, as in the conventional solar tower design. The next steps in the
literature were the extension of the beam-down idea in different solar
concentrating categories and so the next generation of the CSP started its
development. However, the greatest interest in these technologies has
flourished over the last few years due to the need for improving CSP
designs. The present section presents the different geometrical designs of
the beam-down configurations based on a) the solar towers, b) the disc
concentrators, c) the PTC and d) the LFR.

2.1. Beam-down solar towers

The solar tower is one of the most usual solar concentrating tech-
nologies for power production and the idea of beam-down technology
has been extensively applied to them. The great advantage of this idea is
the reduction of the solar tower height, something critical for the sys-
tem’s  sustainability.  Also,  the  location  of  the  absorber  close  to  the
ground gives the critical opportunity of reducing dramatically the piping
length and the pressure losses, as well as increasing the safety standards.
Moreover, the beam-down designs can achieve high concentration ra-
tios, something that makes possible the operation at high-temperature
levels [77].

One  of  the  most  important  questions  regarding  beam-down  tech-
nology  is  the  performance  comparison  with  the  conventional  solar
tower. The study of Segal and Epstein [78] compared these technologies
and they concluded that in great solar fields, the beam-down technology
is the most efficient choice. Also, Kribus [79] conducted one of the first
studies regarding the optical analysis of beam-down solar tower units. It
was stated that the tower height is a critical parameter that can be used
for properly dimensioning the problem. Also, it highlighted the need for
extra  optimization  parameters, compared  to conventional  solar  tower
fields due to the complexity of the beam-down design.

The next important question regarding the design of the beam-down
solar tower was the shape of the “upper reflector” or “tower reflector”.
The most relative designs were the Ellipsoidal (Fig. 5a) and the Hyper-
boloidal (Fig. 5b). A comparative study [80] proved that the hyperbo-
loid design has significant advantages such as the lower height of the
system and the use of smaller primary reflectors. Also, it was found that
the superior point of the optical axis in the hyperboloid design is tilted
towards the south, while it is tilted to the north for the elliptical design.
The next steps in the development of this technology were moved to
the proper design of the cavity of the receiver close to the ground. The
cavity is important to catch as much as possible solar rays and redirect
them to the receiver. Moreover, it can help in the reduction of thermal

losses. However, some important design aspects have to be taken into
consideration in this design to optimize the system. More specifically,
the reduction of the reflector tower height leads the sun image on the
receiver  to  increase  and  consequently  the  cavity  aperture  has  to  be
greater  [81].  However,  the  increase  of  the  cavity  aperture  leads  to
greater  cost  and  reduces  the  final  concentration  on  the  receiver;  two
critical  aspects  that  have  to  be  taken  into  consideration  in  the  final
design of the overall system. An effective solution in this direction is the
proper truncation of the cavity, which is usually of a compound para-
bolic concentrator (CPC) shape, with a small sacrifice in efficiency [82].
More specifically, it was reported that the 10% decrease in the tower
reflector area leads to a 2.7% reduction in the absorbed energy, while a
37%  reduction  in  the  cavity  reflector  (CPC)  area  leads  to  a  1.1%
reduction in the absorbed energy by the receiver [82]. So, it is clear that
it  is  more  efficient  to  reduce  the  CPC  area  to  have  a  relatively  small
reduction in energy absorption. This fact is supported also by the high
specific cost of the CPC, which is about 4–5 times higher compared to the
heliostat costs [82] because there is usually a need for active cooling on
the  mirror  surface  [83].  Thus,  for  optimizing  economically  and
geometrically  the  beam-down  system,  a  critical  optimization  process
regarding the cavity absorber area has to be performed. Another critical
design aspect of the CPC is its placement compared to the focal point of
the incoming solar rays. Traditionally, the CPC inlet was located at the
focal  point,  but  it  has  been  reported  that  optimization  of  its  location
inside the CPC can lead to higher energy absorption in the range of 20%
[84] to 26% [85]. Regarding the size of the heliostats, it has been re-
ported that the use of a lower number of heliostats with greater aperture
makes  possible  the  design  of  a  hyperboloid  reflector  of  lower  eccen-
tricity, something that increases the concentration ratio and reduces the
system height [86].

Moreover,  the  literature  includes  studies  with  alternative  designs
that aim for the optical optimization of beam-down solar towers. The use
of  flat  tower  reflectors [87]  has  been  studied  as  a  different  choice  to
reduce the radiation spread of solar irradiation. Recently, the design of
the  tower  reflector  geometry  with  an  etendue-matched  approach  has
been suggested by Cannavaro et al. [88]. This design aims to redirect
into  the  absorber  without  numerous
properly  the  solar  rays
re-reflections and it was found to be a promising choice for locations
with low latitudes with a yearly optical efficiency of up to 52%. The idea
of a rotating tower reflector has been recently suggested by Li et al. [89]
and it is depicted in Fig. 6. This system can lead to an instantaneous
optical efficiency of 51%, while the yearly optical efficiency ranges from
37% to 46% depending on the tilt angle of the tower reflector.

A typical design of a receiver with a CPC cavity is depicted in Fig. 7.
This design has been developed for operation with molten salt and it
includes insulation, while the molten salt flows in the proper channels.

Fig. 5. Comparison of different design scenarios of the beam-down solar tower: (a) Ellipsoidal mirror, (b) Hyperboloidal mirror (TR: tower reflector, AP: aim point
height, LF: lower focus) [80].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010856

E. Bellos

proper thermal mixing element and an interesting idea is the use of an
origami-inspired design according to the literature [92].

Another interesting reported design in the literature is the use of a
hexagon CPC receiver, as it is depicted in Fig. 8 [93]. This design is an
ideal choice for a system with a smaller capacity (e.g., 30 MWth) and
system height of up to 50 m. This system can operate with an optical
efficiency  of  57%  and  an  electrical  to  solar  efficiency  of  20%  with  a
supercritical CO2  power cycle [93]. However, the hexagon CPC design
presents lower optical efficiency compared to conventional configura-
tions [70], but it has a performance enhancement margin [93].

Fig. 6. A beam-down solar tower configuration with a rotating tower reflector
and fours absorbers with CPC cavity [89].

◦

The next part of the literature is focused on studies that investigate
the thermal performance of a beam-down solar system. Mokhtar et al.
[95]  studied  a  100  kWth  system  by  using  a  model  with  experimental
inputs. They found that the daily collector thermal efficiency is 28% for
operation at 300
C, while its performance is reduced to 24% for oper-
◦
ation at 600
C. These results indicate that the present system can lead to
high  thermal  conversion  efficiency  in  relatively  high  operating  tem-
peratures  and  thus  it  is  a  suitable  choice  for  applications  that  need
high-temperature levels. In a recent study, Calvet et al. [96] examined
experimentally a 100 kWth  beam-down solar tower system coupled to
thermal energy storage operating with molten salt. They concluded that
their configuration leads to 66.4% thermal efficiency which is a satis-
fying value for operation around 450

C.

◦

2.2. Beam-down solar dish collectors

Beam-down reflector coupled with a dish (hyperboloid) concentrator
is a usual choice in the literature. The history of this technology starts in
1979 with the study of Mauk [97] where a furnace was placed in the
down  part  of  a  hyperboloid  dish  primary  concentrator,  while  a  sec-
ondary upper reflector redirects the sun rays to the furnace. A detailed
mathematical formulation modeling was presented in this work, and it
was concluded that this design is an ideal choice for low-scale applica-
tions. The most usual designs in the literature regarding the secondary
upper reflector are with hyperbolic or elliptic geometries [98], as Fig. 9
shows.  Similar  results  are  reported  for  both  configurations  with
concentrating ratios up to 5800 with the elliptical design having a slight
advantage.  However,  the  most  usually  examined  design  is  the  hyper-
bolic one [99] and the use of convex reflectors (e.g., with a hyperbolic
shape)  has  been  reported  to  be  the  most  ideal  choice  [100].  So,  it  is
obvious that the geometrical design of the secondary reflector is a crit-
ical  issue  of  the  literature  and  in  this  direction,  Cheng  et  al.  [101]
developed a tailored-made technique for designing it. They concluded
that both convex (hyperbolic) and concave (elliptic) geometries can lead
to a relatively uniform heat flux distribution over a flat absorbing area.

Fig. 7. Typically insulated receiver with CPC cavity for operation with molten
salt [90].

This design was developed in the Solar Hybrid Fuel Project of Japan [90]
and according to the results, the receiver efficiency was calculated at
90% which is a very promising value. Usually, the operation with the
molten salt is performed by using two temperature levels, at 280 and
550
C [91]. The proper design of the salt receiver usually includes a

◦

Fig. 8. Hexagon CPC receiver design for the beam-down solar tower [93,94].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010857

E. Bellos

Fig. 9. Design of beam-down dish collectors with (a) hyperbolic reflector and (b) elliptic reflector [98].

They stated that the increase in the concentration ratio is a factor that
influences negatively the uniformity due to spillage effects. Another idea
that is found in the literature regards the use of flat secondary reflectors
(see  Fig.  10)  [102]  which  can  lead  to  a  relatively  uniform  heat  flux
distribution on a flat receiver with a non-uniformity index of up to 5%.
Except for the design of the secondary reflector, another important
design aspect regards the design of the receiver with a cavity, something
that  was  also  examined  for  the  tower  reflector  configuration.  Cavity
presents significant advantages and more specifically it can increase the
concentration  ratio,  reduce  thermal  losses  and  increase  the  heat  flux
uniformity  over  the  absorbing  area.  In  this  direction,  a  study  with  a
cavity  acting  as  a  homogenizer  [103]  proved  that  the  system  perfor-
mance can be kept in acceptable values for misalignment angles up to
1.5
, but with an important sacrifice in the nominal efficiency value. It
was also reported that the measurements indicate significantly reduced
performance  compared  to  the  theoretical  simulations  due  to  the  not
ideal manufacturing and therefore it was recommended to give critical
care  during  the  manufacturing  process  of  reflecting  surfaces.  In  a
comparative study of different cavity designs [104], the refractive pyr-
amid was proved to be a better choice compared to the reflective pyr-
amid  and  the  refractive  cone.  Moreover,  a  double  pyramid  over  the
absorber has been suggested by Zhang et al. [105]. Fig. 11 shows this

◦

design which is an answer to the problem of the “dark image” over the
receiver.

Alternative designs have been also reported aiming to improve the
system  performance  and  face  operating  problems  in  the  system.  The
double-primary reflector design has been studied by Wang et al. [106]
and Yang et al. [107]. Fig. 12 depicts this concept which presents higher
solar  to  thermal  efficiency  compared  to  the  conventional  design.  The
optical efficiency of the proposed design  is 77.8%, while the conven-
◦
C is
tional design is 72%. The thermal efficiency (heat to solar) at 883
found to be 68.6% with the double-primary reflector, while it is 61.3%
with the conventional design. The enhancement of 12% is justified by
the  higher  optical  performance  and  the  lower  thermal  losses  of  the
proposed configuration.

Another interesting idea is the use of a beam-down dish configura-
tion with a fixed focus suggested by Xu et al. [108] (see Fig. 13). This
idea  is  based  on  a  novel  tracking  procedure  of  rotating  the  primary
reflector platform and finally, it was reported that the optical efficiency
can reach close to 79% with a power production of around 8 kW. On the
other hand, Yang et al. [109] examined the idea of a rotating secondary
reflector of hyperboloid geometry. The concept of this idea is given in
Fig. 14 where it is obvious that the secondary reflector changes position
when the sun is not vertical to the dish aperture. It was found that a

Fig. 10. Design principle of a double flat secondary receiver in a beam-down dish collector [102].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010858

E. Bellos

which  absorbs  solar  irradiation  [110]  and  this  idea  is  illustrated  in
Fig. 15. This is a simple design which found to have an optical efficiency
of 60%, while its upper limit was calculated at 82%. The concentration
of  the  sun  was  calculated  in  the  range  of  2700–5000  suns.  Another
interesting idea is based on the placement of the receiver under the dish
to be close to the ground. Fig. 16 depicts this design [111] which is a
promising idea for achieving high performance. More specifically, this
design presents 87% optical efficiency, while the total system efficiency
was found to be ranged from 58.9% to 63.7% for operating temperatures
from 628 to 673

C, respectively.

◦

The last issue regarding the operation and the design of the beam-
down dish system concerns the tracking mechanism and the respective
control  system.  It  was  found,  for  the  double-dish  primary  reflector
design, that the system has higher stability to errors compared to the
conventional designs [112]. New components for the structure of the
dish systems have been developed like the robotic arm design with three
freedom degrees as it is given in Fig. 17. This design [113] is based on
the use of a genetic algorithm and it is a novel one that makes possible
the operation of the system with optical efficiency values of around 80%.

2.3. Beam-down parabolic trough collectors

The  idea  of  beam-down  concentration  has  been  extended  also  to
linear concentrating technologies. PTC collector can be easily coupled
with the beam-down idea and therefore there are some studies in the
literature. However, these studies are limited and thus there is a great
margin for extra investigations in the future. Recently, a design with a
tubular absorber located in the center of the parabolic trough was sug-
gested by Uzair and Rehman [114] which is illustrated in Fig. 18. This
design presents significantly reduced concentrating ratios, compared to
the focal point configurations. Specifically, for concentration ratios of
10, 50 and 100, the intercept factor of the suggested design was calcu-
lated at 90%, 89% and 77% respectively. It is useful to define here the
intercept factor as the ratio of the absorbed rays by the receiver to the
reflected  rays  from  the  reflector.  Practically  this  index  expresses  the
optical performance, but it does not take into consideration the reflec-
tance of the mirrors.

Another interesting approach for the beam-down PTC was suggested
by Wu et al. [115] which is based on the location of o flat receiver be-
tween  the  primary  and  the  secondary  reflectors.  Fig.  19  shows  this
concept which has been examined for four different secondary reflector
configurations  named  flat,  hyperbolic,  elliptic  and  parabolic  shapes.
Among the examined designs, the parabolic-shaped secondary reflector
was  found  to  be  the  most  efficient  choice  when  the  tracking  error  is
non-zero; a result that indicates it is a reliable choice. Moreover, it is
notable that the literature includes a study [116] for the optical analysis
of a beam-down PTC with a hyperbolic-shaped secondary concentrator
which suggested approximation models for the prediction of the system
efficiency. However, all the aforementioned studies do not include any
data regarding the thermal performance of the PTC-based systems and
this  fact  indicates  the  important  scientific  gap  in  this  scientific  area.
Practically, two interesting designs have been suggested and the basic
optical studies have been reported up to today.

2.4. Beam-down linear Fresnel reflectors

The beam-down concept can be ideal coupled with the LFR because
both ideas aim to reduce the complexity of the total configuration by
putting  the  key  components  close  to  the  ground.  Thus,  the  BD-LFR
concept  puts  both  the  primary-moving  reflectors  and  the  receiver  on
the ground, while only the upper-stable reflector is located some meters
over the ground. Fig. 20 displays the basic concept that includes a flat
upper reflector in a BD-LFR design [117]. This design presents a con-
centration of 14 with a system height of 1.75 m. An alternative choice
with a hyperbolic-shaped upper reflector and a CPC cavity was found to
increase the concentration up to 84 [118]. The height of the system is

Fig. 11. The design of a double-pyramid over the absorber to reduce the “dark
image” (a) Design of the system (b) Paths of the light passing through a double
pyramid [105].

Fig. 12. Double-primary reflector design in a beam-down configuration [107].

higher concentration ratio reduces the maximum optical efficiency for
the typical concentration values of 3000; the optical efficiency of around
73% was reported. Also, the authors of this idea stated that it can be
extended also in other collector types, and it is not restricted to the dish
primary concentrator.

The next alternative design is based on the use of two solar reactors

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010859

E. Bellos

Fig. 13. The fixed-focus beam-down design (a) Detailed configuration, (b) 2-D depiction of the suggested design [108].

Fig. 14. Rotary secondary reflector design in a beam-down dish configuration (a) Normal position, (b) Rotated position [109].

depended on the primary mirror design, and it is usually in the range of
30–40 m, while the maximum optical efficiency is close to 70%. A recent
comparative  study  [119]  between  the  flat  and  the  hyperbolic  upper
reflector  shapes  proved  that  the  flat  design  is  a  better  choice.  More
specifically, under the same simulation conditions, the flat design was
found to be more efficient achieving an optical efficiency of 60% with a
concentration ratio of 31 suns. The authors of this work also highlighted
that the use of a hyperbolic secondary reflector is associated with a se-
ries of drawbacks named i) the magnification of the sun image on the
receiver, ii) the increase of the mirror width due to the eccentricity, iii)
the  use  of  the  geometry  of  high  complexity  and  iv)  the  creation  of

shadow optical losses.

Expect  the  classical  LFR  design,  the  beam-down  idea  has  been
combined  with  the  LFR  and  tower  reflector  designs  together.  This
complex concept with hyperboloid upper reflector is depicted in Fig. 21
and it has been extensively studied by the research team of Shanghai
Jiao  Tong  University  [120].  This  design  is  an  innovative  choice  that
leads to relatively low wind loads and it also includes a well-designed
conical receiver inside a cavity. According to the results, it was found
◦
that the system efficiency is around 60% for operation at 90
C while it
reduces to 39% for operation at 200
C. In another investigation of the
present system [121], the hyperboloid upper reflector was found to be a

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108510

E. Bellos

Fig. 15. Different versions of the double-reactor design in the beam-down dish concept [110].

Fig. 16. Beam-down dish collector with a receiver under the dish (a) Total configuration, (b) Cavity receiver design [111].

Fig. 17. Design of a beam-down system with robotic arm (a) Total configuration, (b) The robotic design with the freedom degrees [113].

superior choice optically compared to the elliptic design, although the
intercept  factor  of  the  elliptic  design  is  higher.  Another  study  [122]
proved that the spherical heliostats are more efficient than the linear
Fresnel heliostats, while the less efficient choice is the flat heliostats.

2.5. Discussion of the different beam-down solar technologies

A great number of designs and studies regarding beam-down solar
concentrating systems can be found in the open literature. Practically all
the  existing  designs  of  concentrating  systems  have  been  properly
examined in combination with the beam-down idea. However, there are

more  studies  concerning  focal  point  technologies  compared  to  linear
concentrating designs. Thus, a critical research gap regards the studies
of linear concentrating collectors and more specifically of the BD-PTC
systems.  This  collector  type  has  not  been  practically  examined  ther-
mally and only preliminary optical studies can be found. In the BD-LFR
and BD-LFR + Tower designs, there are more completed studies with
both optical and thermal parts, but they are also restricted. Table 1 in-
cludes  the  most  important  reported  designs  with  critical  efficiency
values included.

The geometrical designs for all kinds of BD configurations indicate
the hyperbolic secondary reflector as the most usual choice, especially

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108511

E. Bellos

◦
C [95] and the BD-LFR +
lower thermal efficiency around 24% at 600
Tower around 39% at 200
C [120]. However, there are promising re-
sults with a receiver design with an efficiency of 66.4% for the BD-ST
[96] and an overall electrical efficiency of 20% in a BD-ST unit [93].

◦

3. Concentrating photovoltaics based on beam-down technology

The beam-down idea has been combined with concentrating photo-
voltaics (CPV) with different design techniques aiming to optimize the
overall configuration. The use of a secondary reflector with (or without)
a homogenizer makes possible the increase of the uniformity of the solar
flux over the PV cell area. Moreover, the adoption of a secondary design
makes possible the splitting of the solar irradiation to direct the sun rays
of the proper wave lengths to the PV cells.

3.1. Concentrating photovoltaics

The CPV concept can be significantly improved by the incorporation
of a secondary reflector that can adjust properly the heat flux distribu-
tion  over  the  PV  area. The  development of  a  relatively uniform  solar
irradiation profile on the cell makes possible the avoidance of the hot
spots over it, the avoidance of the local superheating and consequently
the increase of the performance and the higher lifetime. This idea has
been  extensively  examined  in  the  literature,  mainly  with  solar  dish
concentrators.

The optical studies in the field of BD-CPV were the first attempts to
examine the applicability of this idea. Chen and Ho [123] suggested that
the use of a non-imaging secondary concentrator like CPC, as the sec-
ondary reflector, makes possible i) the avoidance of the dark image, ii)
the increase of the heat flux uniformity and ii) the reduction of the solar
disc effect. On the other hand, there are designs with hyperboloid and
parabolic-shaped secondary concentrators [124]. More specifically, the
comparison of these two designs indicates that the use of a hyperboloid
secondary concentrator reduces  significantly the height  of the  system
and  also  makes  the  collector  more  efficient  when  the  tracking  errors
increase [124].

A  usually  examined  configuration  of  BD-CPV  with  a  dish  primary
reflector is depicted in Fig. 22 [125]. This design includes a multi-leg
homogenizer which makes possible the suitable heat flux distribution
of  the  solar  rays  over  the  PV  cells.  This  idea  was  found  to  lead  to
maximum electrical efficiency of 15%, while the yearly electrical effi-
ciency was calculated at 10.6% for the climate conditions of Singapore.
In another work [126], the aforementioned idea was compared with a
Fresnel lenses design with a homogenizer (see Fig. 23) and it is found
that the Fresnel design is a more efficient choice with a yearly efficiency
of 14.1%. However, both designs were found significantly more efficient
compared to conventional PV panels under the same operating condi-
tions. Moreover, it is remarkable to state that the design of Fig. 22 can be
further enhanced by using a conjugate refractive-reflective homogenizer
which can increase the produced electricity by up to 4.5% [127].

Moreover,  a  beam-down  concentrating  thermal  photovoltaic  (BD-
CPVT) with a parabolic trough primary reflector has been examined by
Venegas-Reyes et al. [128]. The concentration ratio of this system was
around 13, with the electrical efficiency at 7.3% and the thermal effi-
ciency at 22.9%. Moreover, this analysis indicated the need for creating
a relatively uniform heat flux distribution over the PV cell to achieve
high performance.

3.2. Hybrid photovoltaics systems with beam splitter technology

Concentrating PV presents high temperatures due to the high energy
concentration  on  them,  something  that  reduces  significantly  the  cell
efficiency. It is useful to state that the increase in the cell temperature of
1 K leads to a 0.5% reduction in electrical efficiency [129]. Therefore,
there  is  a  lot  of  interest  in  applying  techniques  for  facing  this  issue,
aiming to increase electrical efficiency. The most classical technique is

Fig.  18. Typical  beam-down  PTC  design  with  a  tubular  receiver  with  two
primary parabolic reflectors [114].

for  the  BD-ST  case  [80].  For  the  BD-Dish  case,  both  hyperbolic  and
elliptic  designs  are  found  to  have  similar  performance  [98].  For  the
BD-LFR, the flat design was found to be a better configuration than the
hyperbolic  design  [119].  While  for  the  BD-PTC  the  parabolic-shaped
secondary reflector was found to be the best design [116]. Moreover,
it is useful to state that the hyperbolic design of the secondary reflector
was found to be the best candidate for the BD-LFR + Tower compared to
the elliptic design [121]. Another interesting conclusion of the present
analysis regards the reduced height of the system with the BD design
compared  to  the  conventional  systems.  This  result  is  important  espe-
cially for the BD-ST and the BD-LFR compared to the ST and the LFR
designs  respectively.  Moreover,  another  interesting  conclusion  is  the
development  of  a  relatively  uniform  heat  flux  distribution  over  the
absorber due to the use of a cavity (e.g., CPC) which acts as a homog-
enizer and increases the intercept factor of the system.

The optical efficiency of the reviewed solar technologies is variable,
and it is fully dependent on the specific design of every case. In the BD-
ST, the optical efficiency reached up to 57% [88,93] which is not a very
high value, thus it is obvious that a lot of research in this field has to be
addressed  in  the  future.  On  the  other  hand,  the  BD-Dish  technology
presents higher optical efficiencies close to 78–79% [107,108], while it
can reach up to 87% [111]. Moreover, the BD-Dish presents an inter-
mediate performance of around 60% [110] to 70% [118].

According to the findings, the point focal systems (BD-ST and BD-
Dish) present significantly higher concentration rations, usually in the
range of 2000–5000, compared to the linear systems (BD-PTC and BD-
LFR)  which  present  concentration  ratios  lower  than  100.  This  fact
makes possible the operation of the point-focal technologies in higher
◦
operating temperatures, usually in the range of 400
C. So, these
designs can be easily coupled with power thermodynamic cycles with
high efficiency (e.g. Brayton cycles) and they are promising choices for
designing sustainable systems that can substitute the conventional sys-
tems driven by fossil fuels.

◦
C–900

Regarding the thermal efficiency of the collectors, the BD-Dish with a
double primary reflector presents a very promising efficiency of 68.6%
◦
at 883
C [107]; a very promising value that indicates also high exergy
performance. Moreover, thermal efficiencies of around 60% at 650
C
[111] have also been reported for the BD-Dish with the receiver down
from the primary concentrator. On the other hand, the BD-ST presents

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108512

E. Bellos

Fig. 19. The beam-down PTC design with the receiver between the two reflectors. The secondary reflector has the following possible shapes: (a) Flat, (b) hyperbolic,
(c) elliptic, and (d) parabolic [115].

Fig. 20. The beam-down LFR design concept with flat primary and secondary mirrors [117].

to cool properly the PV cell by using natural or forced circulation of a
fluid in the back side of the cell [130]. The use of nanofluids as cooling
mediums is a choice that has been examined extensively in the literature

with  efficiency  and  environmental  benefits  [131].  Also,  there  are  de-
signs with fins in the back of the PV aiming to increase the cooling rate
with the ambient source [132].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108513

E. Bellos

Fig. 21. The BD-LFR + Tower design concept (a) Concentrating idea, (b) Vertical cross-section, (c) Horizontal cross-section, and (d) Real experimental setup [120].

Another important option is the suitable filtering of the solar irra-
diation  to  let  only  the  wavelengths  that  are  exploited  by  the  PV  cell
reach the PV and so the redundant solar irradiation does not warm up
the  cell.  Fig.  24  depicts  the  wavelengths  that  the  PV  and  the  photo-
thermal  systems  (PT)  exploit.  It  is  obvious  that  the  PV  can  utilize  a
specific range of solar irradiation and so this part of the solar irradiation
spectrum has to reach the PV cell for electricity production. On the other
hand, the other areas of the spectrum can be exploited properly by a
solar thermal (PT) system.

The  filtering  can  be  achieved  in  different  ways  like  nano-filtering
[134], selective absorber filtering [135], using splitter reflectors [133]
and using thin-film wave interference filters [135]. Fig. 25 shows the
three  main  categories  of  filtering;  Fig.  25a  depicts  the  idea  of
nano-filtering  by  passing  the  solar  irradiation  from  a  nanofluid  that
absorbs  specific  solar  irradiation  wavelengths  and  lets  to  pass  the
wavelengths  that  the  PV  can  exploit.  Fig.  25b  shows  the  nano-film
spectral  beam  splitter  technology  which  separates  the  sunlight  into
two quantities making possible the redirection of these quantities into
different directions. The last technique is the use of a semitransparent PV
cell spectral beam splitter which is depicted in Fig. 25c.

The  utilization  of  spectral  splitting  reflectors  in  down-beam  CPV
configurations  is  a  very  promising  choice  which  makes  possible  the
operation of the PV cell with high efficiency and also gives the possi-
bility to develop a hybrid system (or thermal PV – PVT) that can produce
significant amounts of thermal energy. More specifically, the use of a
proper splitter reflector can make an amount of the solar irradiation be

properly  reflected  on  the  down  part  of  the  system  and  thus  this  idea
belongs to the “beam-down configurations”. Moreover, the decoupling
of the solar and the electrical parts gives the possibility to produce useful
heat  at  high  temperatures,  something  that  is  not  possible  in  the  PVT
where the working medium cools the cell.

The beam-down systems utilize proper thin-film interference filters
or dichroic mirror coatings to slide the solar irradiation spectrum into
two  parts.  The  most  usual  choice  is  the  thin-film  interference  filters
because  they  present  a  series  of  advantages  with  the  most  important
being the flexibility to adjust the desired spectral separation [133]. The
multilayer thin-film filters include different materials for filtering solar
rays of lower and higher wavelengths. Usually, SiO2 is used for the lower
refractive  region  [135]  because  these  nanoparticles  present  approxi-
mately zero absorbance coefficients in the visible-light region [137]. For
the  higher  wavelength  region,  other  materials  are  selected  like  TiOx
[137],  Nb2O3  [138],  Ta2O5  [139]  and  SiN  [140].  Among  the  afore-
mentioned materials, the SiO2–TiO2 combination seems to be a suitable
choice [133]. Also, it is interesting to refer that there is the possibility to
use many materials together to create a gradient refractive index [141].
The spectral splitter technology is usually examined in the system
with photovoltaics for various applications. Zhang et al. [142] studied
the idea of modifying a PTC by putting splitter reflectors and conven-
tional reflectors together, while PV cell lines were used at the sides of the
absorber tube. This design makes it possible for the PV cell to operate
with an efficiency of 22.64%. Moreover, the thermal PVT with splitters
can be used for space heating applications [143] and for trigeneration

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108514

E. Bellos

Table 1
Summary of the studies regarding the beam-down systems.

Study

Collector type

Efficiency values

Cannavaro et al. [88]

BD-ST

Li et al. [89]

BD-ST

Saldivia et al. [93]

BD-ST

Mokhtar et al. [95]

BD-ST

Calvet et al. [96]

BD-ST

Yang et al. [107]

BD-Dish (Double primary
reflector)

Xu et al. [108]

Yang et al. [109]

Dahler et al. [110]
Xiao et al. [111]

BD-Dish (Fixed focal
point)
BD-Dish (Rotating
receiver)
BD-Dish (Double receiver)
BD-Dish (Receiver down
the dish)

Uzair and Rehman

BD-PTC

[114]

Gonzalez and

Hernandez [118]
Taramona et al. [119]

Li et al. [120]

BD-LFR (Hyperbolic
upper reflector)
BD-LFR (Flat upper
reflector)
BD-LFR + Tower

Yearly optical efficiency:
57%
Yearly optical efficiency:
37–46%
Peak optical efficiency: 51%
Peak optical efficiency: 57%
Electrical efficiency: 20%
Daily thermal efficiency:
◦
28% at 300
Daily thermal efficiency:
◦
24% at 600
Peak receiver efficiency:
66.4% at 450
Peak optical efficiency:
77.8%
Peak thermal efficiency:
68.6% at 883
Peak optical efficiency: 79%

C

C

C

C

◦

◦

Peak optical efficiency: 73%

Peak optical efficiency: 60%
Peak optical efficiency: 87%
Peak thermal efficiency:
63.7% at 628
Peak thermal efficiency:
58.9% at 673
Peak intercept factor: 90%

C

C

◦

◦

Peak optical efficiency: 70%

Peak optical efficiency: 60%

Peak thermal efficiency:
◦
60% at 90
C
Peak thermal efficiency:
◦
39% at 200

C

[144].

3.2.1. Beam-down solar towers with photovoltaics

The idea of spitting solar irradiation in a solar tower system has been
examined  two  decades  before  with  some  theoretical  investigations.
Fig. 26 shows a beam-down splitting solar tower [145] which concen-
trates the thermal spectrum close to the ground, while the PV spectrum
is focused on the focal region. This system is a beam-down technology in
the part of the photothermal conversion and the tower reflector acts as a

spectrum splitter. This design has been extensively examined in optical
terms by taking into consideration the receiver displacement [145] and
the different solar angles [146]. The design aspects of this configuration
were  described  in  the  aforementioned  studies  without  any  results
regarding the thermal and electrical performance of the unit.

Another  design  with  a  hyperboloid  tower  reflector  and  cavity
receiver in the ground has been examined by Segal et al. [147] in 2004.
The idea of this system is given in Fig. 27 and it is useful to state that the
PV cells are located at the “aim point”. Assuming the useful heat pro-
duction in the ground can be exploited by a combined cycle, the total
system efficiency is calculated at 32%. The PV electricity to the total
solar energy is calculated at 12%, while the remaining 20% of the effi-
ciency part is produced by the combined cycle.

3.2.2. Beam-down solar dishes with photovoltaics

The combination  of the  BD-Dish  with splitter  reflector  and  photo-
voltaics has been examined in the literature by some investigators in the
last few years. Houcine et al. [148] combined a typical BD-Dish cavity
system with PV cells in the bottom part of the dish, as Fig. 28 displays.
This  design  uses  a  conical  cavity  receiver  for  steam  production  and
presents an overall optical efficiency of 67%. Another design, with the
PV  cell  in  the  upper  part,  has  been  suggested  by  Hu  et  al.  [149],  as
Fig. 29 shows. They examined this configuration coupled with an ab-
sorption  chiller  for  cooling  production.  They  optimized  the  overall
configuration and finally, they calculated the energy and exergy system
efficiency at 75.9% and 18.0% respectively. The combination of a PV
cell  and  a  thermo-electric  generator  (TEG)  in  a  BD-Dish  is  given  in
Fig. 30 [150]. This design includes the PV cell in the dish bottom, while
the TEG is located in the upper part inside a cavity. It was found that the
total electrical efficiency is around 21.8%, the concentration ratio is 455
and the electricity production is 45.4 kW. It is useful to state that the
TEG can produce only 1.2 kW which is 2.6% of the produced quantity; a
result  that  indicates  that  the  TEG  technology  has  a  restricted  perfor-
mance compared to the PV.

3.2.3. Beam-down parabolic trough collectors with photovoltaics

The idea of coupling the parabolic linear troughs with splitting BD-
CPV  has  been  examined  extensively  and  it  is  a  promising  choice.
Wang et al. [151] examined a PTC with a splitting reflector that pro-
duces  useful  heat  in  two  temperature  levels.  More  specifically,  this
design produces high-temperature heat from the receiver over the sec-
ondary  mirror,  while  the  low-temperature  heat  is  produced  from  the
cooling  process  of  the  PV  cell,  as  Fig.  31  depicts.  This  system  was
examined for the case study of a dairy farm, and it was found that it can

Fig. 22. Typical BD-CPV with dish primary reflector and homogenizer (a) Total configuration, (b) Cross-section depiction [125].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108515

E. Bellos

Fig. 23. (a) Beam-down CPV with a homogenizer, (b) Fresnel lenses CPV with homogenizer [126].

cover 52% of the demand for steam, 40% of the hot water demand and
12% of the electricity demand of the unit. The payback period of this
design was found at 13.6 years, and they stated that the decrease of the
splitter  reflector  cost  can  lead  to  more  viable  investment  indexes.  In
another  work  [152],  a  similar  configuration  was  examined  but  with
plasmonic PV cells where the electrical efficiency was calculated at 22%;
a relatively high value which is a promising one.

An alternative design is based on the use of nanofluid as the splitting
system to capture the solar wavelengths that are not exploited by the PV.
Fig. 32 shows this design in detail [153] and it is clear that the nanofluid
absorbs solar irradiation before the secondary reflector. The electrical
efficiency of this system was calculated at 14.3% and it was found to be

about 10% more efficient than conventional designs.

The next part of the literature combines the idea of CPV with the
production  of  solar  fuels  inside  the  PTC  main  absorber  by  thermo-
chemical processes. Zhu et al. [154] studied a BD-CPV with a parabolic
trough for electricity and syngas production which is depicted in Fig. 33.
Methanol (CH3OH) feeds the absorber of the PTC, and the result is the
production of a mixture with H2 and CO. Assuming 39.4% efficiency for
the syngas conversion into electricity with an internal combustion en-
gine,  the  maximum  measure  electrical  efficiency  of  the  system  was
calculated  at  31.2%  with  56  concentration  ratio  and  operation  tem-
perature at 265
C. This idea has been examined also in other studies
with  similar  but  different  designs.  For  a  system  with  a  concentration

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108516

E. Bellos

produces  H2  and  CO2  leads  to  an  overall  electric  efficiency  of  25.3%
[157].

3.2.4. Beam-down linear Fresnel reflectors with photovoltaics

◦

The combination of the linear Fresnel reflectors with splitter and CPV
has been examined only by a few researchers in the literature. Fig. 34
[158] illustrates an interesting design that uses Fresnel reflectors, sec-
ondary  flat  splitter  reflectors,  tubular  fluid  absorbers  with  accompa-
nying  booster  reflectors  and  PV  cells  over  the  splitters.  The  overall
system electrical efficiency was calculated at 26.5% when the system
operates at 25
C, while the efficiency was reduced to 25.6% for oper-
◦
ation  at  50
C.  In  both  cases,  the  efficiency  was  higher  than  the
respective value of a conventional respective unit with 19% and 26%
enhancement  respectively.  It  is  important  to  state  that  the  exergetic
output of the produced thermal energy was used to estimate the overall
system’s electrical efficiency. Moreover, the concentration ratio of this
system was found to be up to 30. In another work [138], a similar design
was  found  to  have  12%  electrical  efficiency  only  from  PV,  while  the
thermal output was about 30%. Also, it was stated that an optimized
Nb2O3/SiO2 coating was able to remove 71% of the non-useful thermal
energy from the PV cell.

3.3. Discussion of the beam-down photovoltaic systems

There is a rich collection of various beam-down CPV technologies in
the literature and Table 2 summarizes the most representative studies.
These studies are separated into two categories; one with a splitter and

Fig.  24. Depiction  of  the  wavelengths  that  the  PV  exploits  and  the  photo-
thermal (PT) exploits for air mass air to 1.5 [133].

ratio  of  9.2  with  a  specific  spectrum  allocation  method,  the  overall
electrical efficiency was found at 23.3% which was 4% higher than the
design  without  the  spectrum  allocation  [155].  Also,  a  design  with  a
concentration  ratio  of  7.5  was  found  to  have  relatively  lower  perfor-
mance compared to the aforementioned designs, at 21.9% [156]. Also, it
is important to state that this idea but for methanol reforming which

Fig. 25. Basic spectral beam splitting technologies [136].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108517

E. Bellos

Fig. 26. Beam-down splitter in solar tower technology with the separated thermal receiver and PV receiver [145].

respectively. This is a reasonable conclusion, and the present discussion
makes clear that there is a need to design systems with high concen-
tration rations for achieving high-performance values.

Regarding the financial viability of the BD-CPV with splitter, there
are only a few data that indicate a payback period of around 13.6 years
[151]. The reduction of the splitter cost can be a critical parameter for
the financial viability of this technology.

4. Power cycles based on the beam-down concentrating
technology

Beam-down solar concentrating technologies give the possibility for
producing  heat of  high-temperature  levels  which  present high  exergy
content. Therefore, the utilization of the high-temperature heat rates in
work  production  machines  is  possible  and  thus  the  work  production
applications from the beam-down designs are a promising choice. The
beam-down system can be used in various power cycles like Rankine,
Brayton, Stirling, etc. aiming the green electricity production in efficient
and sustainable ways.

Fig. 27. Beam-down splitter design in a solar tower with a hyperboloid upper
reflector [147].

4.1. Gas turbines/combined cycles

one without. The use of a splitter makes possible the operation of the PV
cell with high efficiency because there is no concentration of “useless for
the PV” irradiation on the cell. Moreover, the splitter gives the oppor-
tunity  for  cogeneration  by  the  production  of  useful  heat;  without
coupling with the cell as in conventional thermal PV.

The  PV  electrical  efficiency  of  the  systems  without  splitter  takes
values  in  the  range  or  7.3%  [128]  up  to  14.1%  [126]  which  are
reasonable values for PV technologies. On the other hand, the use of a
splitter can lead to significantly higher values. For example, Ref. [152]
indicates a PV efficiency of 22% which is a high value only for the PV.
However, the designs with splitter give the possibility for the production
of electricity both from PV and from another thermal engine which is fed
by the produced heat or the produced solar fuel. It is remarkable to state
that Ref. [147] with tower design can lead to total electrical efficiency of
32%, Ref. [154] to 31.2%, while there are studies with total electrical
efficiencies around 25% [157,158].

A critical result is an increase in performance with an increase in the
concentration  ratio.  Taking  into  account  the  results  of  studies
[154–156], the total electrical efficiencies are 31.2%, 23.3% and 21.9%
respectively  while  the  concentration  ratios  are  56,  9.2  and  7.5

The  Brayton  cycle  is  a  usual  power  cycle  for  achieving  high-
performance  rates.  It  is  implemented  through  the  gas  turbine  ma-
chines with the most usual working fluid being air, while supercritical
CO2 gains more and more attention in the last years [159]. The idea of
beam-down solar systems coupled to gas turbines is not new and it has
been examined for some decades before. The BD-ST design is the most
appropriate one due to the ability to develop high-temperature levels
which are needed in gas turbines.

In 2006, Miron et al. [160] tested experimentally the receiver of a
BD-ST configuration for coupling it with a gas turbine (see Fig. 35). The
expected power input in the receiver was estimated at 500 kW initially,
but the experiments proved maximum input power at 350–400 kW; the
fact indicates the need for performing accurate design in these config-
urations. Later in 2016, Ndiaye et al. [161] examined the coupling of a
beam-down unit with a gas turbine. They concluded that the use of a
CPC concentrator over the receiver is needed to achieve the described
◦
temperature levels of around 1000

C.
The use of beam-down technologies with combined cycles is the next
step to achieve higher electrical efficiency. In 1998, Kribus et al. [162]
examined two kinds of combined cycles driven by BD-solar systems. The
examined cycle has a typical gas turbine driven by solar energy and fuel
which  feeds  with  heat  a  Rankine  cycle  (bottoming  cycle)  which  also

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108518

E. Bellos

Fig. 28. Beam-down Dish coupled with splitter and PV cells in the down part and a conical receiver [148].

Fig. 29. Beam-down Dish coupled with splitter and PV cells in the upper part: Design and wavelength distribution [149].

exploits solar irradiation (see Fig. 36). The design with a capacity of 34
MWel presents annual efficiency of 21.3% and a solar fraction of 24.2%,
while the design with a capacity of 0.6 MWel present annual efficiency of
16.1% and a solar fraction of 22.0%. Practically, the examined idea was
to  exploit  solar  irradiation  to  cover  partially  the  energy  needs  of  the
examined  system  and  to  lead  to  important  fuel  savings.  This  system
shows economic viability and so they are promising choices [163]. A

theoretical study by Segal and Epstein [164] proved that the maximum
efficiency of a beam-down solar-driven combined cycle is around 35% at
1600 K; which is separated into 70% efficiency of the solar field and 50%
thermodynamic efficiency of the cycle approximately.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108519

E. Bellos

Fig. 30. Beam-down Dish coupled with PV in the down part and TEG in the upper part [150].

Fig. 31. Beam-down CPV with a parabolic trough for electricity and heat production in two temperature levels [151].

4.2. Stirling engines

Stirling  engines  are  highly  efficient  units  for  producing  electricity
and they usually are coupled with solar dishes. The ideal Stirling power
cycle  is  performed  with  two  isothermal  and  two  isochoric  processes

[165] and it was initially suggested by Robert Stirling in 1816 [166].
Since  then,  numerous  researchers  have  examined  and  improved  this
idea in order to make it applicable and with high efficiency [165]. For
the typical Dish-Stirling systems, efficiency values of 32% are reported
with temperature levels around 850 K [167]. The beam-down dish solar

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108520

E. Bellos

Fig. 32. Beam-down CPV with a parabolic primary trough and nanofluid as the filtering medium [153].

Fig. 33. Beam-down CPV with a parabolic primary trough for electricity and syngas production [154].

systems can be easily coupled with the Stirling engines with designs that
put the engine under the dish and close to the ground. This idea makes
possible  the  development  of  lightweight  designs  because  there  is  no
need to move the engine, as in the conventional systems where the en-
gine is placed close to the focal region of the dish.

Fig. 37 depicts the idea of the BD-Dish Stirling engine which includes
the primary dish reflector, the secondary reflector and the Stirling En-
gine at the ground [168]. The optical analysis of this design was pre-
sented in Ref. [168] where the concentration ratio was found at 595 and
the optical efficiency close to 84.3%. Another design with a concentra-
tion  of  1880  suns  was  found  to  have  an  optical  efficiency  of  77.5%
[169]. The thermal analysis of such a system with a concentration ratio
of 1611 [170] proved that the overall electrical efficiency of the system
is around 21% with the ability to produce about 10 kWel.

The  next  part  of  the  literature  includes  an  advanced  design  that
combines  Stirling  engines  with  other  technologies  for  maximizing
electricity  production.  Shou  et  al.  [171]  suggested  the  use  of  a
PV-Stirling  system  with  a  beam-down  splitter  for  maximizing  the

electricity output, as  Fig. 38  displays. This  design  has PV cells  at the
bottom of the dish reflector and the Stirling engine at the focal region of
the dish. The splitter device is put in an intermediate location between
the engine and the dish for separating properly the solar irradiation. It
was found that the overall system electrical efficiency is around 28%
with  a  concentration  of  600  suns;  a  value  which  is  higher  than  the
operation with Stirling-only design and PV-only design.

Recently, another interesting design was suggested by Mohammad-
nia and Ziapour [172] and it is illustrated in Fig. 39. This system can lead
to an electrical efficiency of 24.6% with 38 kWel production, while the
optimum concentration ratio is 431 suns. It is remarkable to state that
the TEG is responsible for 1% of the electricity production, while its cost
is around 0.3% of the total system’s cost. The Stirling Engine produces
37% and the PV produces 62% of the total electricity. The cost analysis
indicates that the Stirling engine has the higher cost per power with 7.4
$/W, with the PV to follow at 2.3 $/W and the TEG at 1.4 $/W.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108521

E. Bellos

Fig. 34. Beam-down CPV with a Linear Fresnel reflector design for electricity and heat production (a) General design, (b) Cross-section of the system [158].

Table 2
Summary of the studies regarding the beam-down CPV systems.

Study

Collector type

Efficiency values

Burhan et al. [125]

BD-Dish-CPV-Homogenizer

Burhan et al. [126]

BD-Dish-CPV-Homogenizer

Venegas-Reyes et al.

BD-PTC-CPV

[128]

Segal et al. [147]

BD-ST-CPV-Splitter

Mohammadnia et al.

BD-Dish-CPV-Splitter-TEG

[150]

Wang et al. [151]
Zhang et al. [152]

Lin et al. [153]

Zhu et al. [154]

Zhu et al. [155]

Zhu et al. [156]

Wang et al. [157]

Liu et al. [158]

BD-PTC-CPV-Splitter
BD-PTC-CPV (plasmonic)-
Splitter
BD-PTC-CPV-Splitter
(nanofluid)
BD-PTC-CPV-Splitter-
Thermochemical
BD-PTC-CPV-Splitter-
Thermochemical
BD-PTC-CPV-Splitter-
Thermochemical
BD-PTC-CPV-Splitter-
Thermochemical
BD-LFR-CPV-Splitter
(Double flat)

Hu et al. [138]

BD-LFR-CPV-Splitter
(Double flat)

Yearly electrical efficiency:
10.6%
Maximum electrical
efficiency: 15%
Yearly electrical efficiency:
14.1%
Electrical efficiency: 7.3%
Thermal efficiency: 22.9%
Total electrical efficiency:
32%
PV electrical efficiency:
12%
Total electrical efficiency:
21.8%
Payback period: 13.6 years
PV electrical efficiency:
22%
Total electrical efficiency:
14.3%
Total electrical efficiency:
31.2%
Total electrical efficiency:
23.3%
Total electrical efficiency:
21.9%
Total electrical efficiency:
25.3%
Total electrical efficiency:
◦
26.5% at 25
Total electrical efficiency:
◦
25.6% at 50
Electrical efficiency: 12%
Thermal efficiency: 30%

C

C

4.3. Discussion of the power cycles coupled to beam-down solar
technologies

Beam-down solar concentrating systems can be coupled with power
cycles  and  devices  in  various  ways.  The  BD-ST  units  can  easily  be
coupled with Brayton cycles and combined cycles for power production.
Moreover,  the  BD-Dish  can  be  coupled  with  Stirling  engines  with
different configurations. Table 3 summarizes the studies of the BD de-
signs  that  include  power  cycles.  Brayton  cycle,  combined  cycle  and
Stirling  engine  cycle  are  the  cases  that  are  reported  in  the  existing
literature. It was found that the efficiency of a combined cycle with a

beam-down solar tower can be ranged from 16.1% to 35% on an annual
base.  On  the  other  hand,  the  beam-down  Stirling  engine  leads  to  an
electrical efficiency from 21% (simple Stirling) to 28% (Stirling and PV).
Therefore,  the  combination  of  PV  with  Stirling  is  a  promising  idea
because PV can produce significant amounts of electricity. On the other
hand, the use of TEG leads to a very small yield production but the TEG
is an economically viable solution, so it has a great interest. More spe-
cifically,  the  specific  cost  per  power  for  the  TEG  was  reported  at  1.4
$/W, while for the PV was reported at 2.3 $/W and for the Stirling en-
gine at 7.4 $/W. Therefore, it is clear that these systems lead to relatively
satisfying performance, something that indicates that the BD technolo-
gies coupled with power cycles are suitable and viable solutions.

5. Beam-down concentrating receiver/reactor configurations

Beam-down solar concentrating technologies are promising systems
for the production of solar fuels. Different ideas have been examined in
the literature aiming mainly the syngas production, as well as the pro-
duction  of  different  chemical  products.  Moreover,  there  is  a  great
research interest in the coupling of B-D systems with fluidized beds for
hot air production.

5.1. Fluidized beds/receivers

Numerous  researchers  have  examined  fluidized  bed  (FB)  designs
coupled  with  beam-down  solar  systems.  Fig.  40  depicts  the  idea  of
coupling a fluidized bed with a beam-down solar system for feeding a
power  cycle.  Matsubara  et  al.  [173]  examined  this  system  with  a  ca-
◦
C which is an
pacity of 100 kWth with a maximum temperature of 1400
ideal temperature for a highly efficient operation of a gas turbine.

◦

The literature studies in this field emphasize the design of the FB and
not so much the design of the solar-optical part. Different comparative
studies can be found to examine which designs of FB beds are the most
suitable. Firstly, it is remarkable to state that the use of a fluidized can
reach up to 1600
C. This result is
C, while a fixed bed is up to 600
explained by the proper lateral and axial dispersion of the particles in
the  fluidized  BED  case  [174].  Other  studies  have  shown  that  the
◦
maximum temperature levels in the laboratory can be up to 1200
C, but
there  is  the  possibility  of  achieving  higher  temperatures  [175,176].
Moreover, it has been found that SiC is a suitable material for FB in solar
applications [177].

◦

The comparison of the spouted and the bubbling beds proved that
both technologies have similar efficiency [178]. However, the spouted
bed leads to higher temperatures, but it needs a longer time to reach

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108522

E. Bellos

Fig. 35. Beam-down Tower design coupled to a gas turbine with air as the working fluid and maximum operating temperatures in the range of 1000–1300oC [160].

Fig.  37. Beam-down  Dish  design  with  Stirling  engine  located  at  the
ground [168].

Fig. 38. Beam-down splitting design with Stirling engine and PV cells [171].

Fig. 36. A basic representation of a combined cycle driven by BD solar tech-
nologies [162].

them. Another comparison showed that the even and the uneven fluid-
ized bed have similar performance, but the uneven design leads to lower
pumping costs with a reduction of about 25% [179]. The comparison of
conical spouted and spout-fluid beds shows that the spouted bed leads to
lower  particle  temperatures  and  therefore  to  higher  homogenization
[180].  Moreover,  the  spouted  bed  leads  to  a  52%  reduction  in  the
pumping cost which is an extra advantage of this technology.

The next part of the literature regards studies with a higher associ-
ation  with  the  solar  system.  A  two-tower  FB  has  been  examined  as  a
choice for the BD systems and this FB is depicted in Fig. 41. It has been
found  that  this  design  can  lead  to  a  mean  operating  temperature  of
around  1500
C  [181]. Fig.  42
illustrates  a  design  for  a  fluidized  bed  that  can  be  used  for  thermo-
chemical processes like gasification. According to experimental studies,

C  with peak  temperatures over  1700

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108523

E. Bellos

Fig. 39. Beam-down dish splitting design with Stirling engine, PV and TEG [172].

Table 3
Summary  of  the  studies  regarding  the  beam-down  systems  coupled  to  power
cycles/systems.

Study

Collector type

Efficiency values

Kribus et al. [162]

BD-ST-Combined
Cycle

Segal and Epstein [164]

Wardhana et al. [168]
Zhang et al. [169]
Wardhana et al. [170]

Shou et al. [171]

Mohammadnia and
Ziapour [172]

BD-ST-Combined
Cycle
BD-Dish-Stirling
BD-Dish-Stirling
BD-Dish-Stirling

BD-Dish-Splitter-
Stirling-PV
BD-Dish-Splitter-
Stirling-PV-TEG

Annual electrical efficiency:
21.3% at 34 MWel
Annual electrical efficiency:
16.1% at 0.6 MWel
Electrical efficiency: 35%

Optical efficiency: 84.3%
Optical efficiency: 77.5%
Total electrical efficiency:
21%
Total electrical efficiency:
28%
Total electrical efficiency:
24.6%

Fig.  40. The  concept  of  the  fluidized  bed  coupled  with  a  beam-down  tower
design for feeding a power cycle [173].

temperature levels are up to 1400
C after an operating time of 7 min
[182].  It  is  interesting  to  state  that  the  fluidized  beds  can  also  store
significant  amounts  of  thermal  energy
in  solar  concentrating
configurations.

◦

Fig. 43 shows an experimental setup for testing different materials in
different diameters for the investigation of the receiver thermal storage
efficiency [183]. It was found that SiC is a better choice than Al and sand
because it can store higher amounts of energy. Moreover, it was found
that the receiver efficiency is higher when the diameter of the particles
increases. Finally, the diameter of 370 μm of SiC can lead to a receiver
efficiency of around 21.4%.

Coupling fluidized beds with beam-down linear Fresnel configura-
tions  has  been  examined  in  the  literature.  More  specifically,  G ́omez-
Hern ́andez et al. [184] studied a beam-down LFR configuration that has
as working medium hot air and sand, as Fig. 44 indicates. This special
design was examined optically and thermally under different operating
◦
temperatures in the range of 200–800
C. It was found that the thermal
efficiency  of  the  system  can  be  at  40%,  while  the  efficiency  of  the
receiver separately is around 80%. Taramona et al. [185] examined the
use  of  vibration  under  the  receiver  in  a  BD-LFR-FB  design  and  they
concluded that this idea is a promising one for reducing the time that the
thermal process needs.

5.2. Thermochemical processes for hydrogen production

Hydrogen is a promising fuel for substituting fossil fuel combustion
and a lot of research has been focused on it [186]. However, hydrogen
cannot be found in nature and it has to be produced through thermo-
chemical processes which need energy [187]. Thus, the challenge is to
use  renewable  energy  sources  aiming  to  produce  hydrogen  which  is
known  as  “green  hydrogen”  [188].  Solar  irradiation  is  a  promising
choice for producing hydrogen through the proper thermochemical cy-
cles which need high-temperature levels. Thus, there is a need to utilize
solar concentrating units with high concentration ratios to achieve the
needed operating  temperatures. Beam-down designs are  ideal choices
for this case because they employ stable receivers without moving them
for tracking the sun’s path, as well as the BD system can operate with a
relatively high concentration ratio; the fact makes possible the operation
at high temperatures.

Solar thermochemical water splitting cycles are usually coupled with

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108524

E. Bellos

Fig. 41. Two-tower fluidized bed design coupled to a beam-down solar system [181].

Fig. 42. Design of a fluidized bed driven by a BD solar system ideal for thermochemical processes [182].

BD solar configurations for hydrogen production or syngas production
(mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide). These cycles use a metal
oxide (MO) to conduct a REDOX (reduction/oxidation) reaction for the
production of hydrogen (H2) and/or carbon monoxide (CO). The general
description of this reaction is given below in two steps [187]:

MOred + H2O→MOox + H2

or/and

MOred + CO2→MOox + CO

(12)

(13)

1st  step:  Endothermic  reduction  of
1300–1400

C):

◦

MOox→MOred +

1
O2
2

the  metal  oxide  (at

(11)

2nd  step:  Exothermic  oxidation  of  the  reduced  metal  oxide  (at
600–1000

C):

◦

1
Δδ

CeO2(cid:0) δox →

1
Δδ

CeO2(cid:0) δred +

Oxidation with CO2:

Regarding the selection of the metal oxide, there are various choices
like ZnO [189], CeO2 [190], FeAl2O4 [191], perovskites [192], etc. The
majority of the studies regarding the BD-solar system use ZnO or CeO2 as
the metal oxides.

The REDOX reaction with the CeO2 can be described below [193]:
Reduction of the CeO2:

1
O2, ΔН = 475 kJ per 1
2

/

2 mol O2

(14)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108525

E. Bellos

Fig. 43. Experimental setup for testing different materials for energy storage in a solar concentrating configuration with a fluidized bed [183].

CeO2(cid:0) δred + CO2→

1
Δδ

CeO2(cid:0) δox + CO, ΔН = (cid:0) 192 kJ per 1 mol CO2

Qfuel = mfuel HHV

(21)

1
Δδ

1
Δδ

Oxidation with H2O:

CeO2(cid:0) δred + H2O→

1
Δδ

CeO2(cid:0) δox + H2, ΔН = (cid:0) 234 kJ per 1 mol H2O

(15)

(16)

Where Δδ is the oxygen exchange capacity of ceria Δδ = δred(cid:0) δox. This
parameter is dependent on the temperature or the pressure difference
between  the  reduction  and  the  oxidation  processes.  It  is  useful  to
C leads to Δδ at 0.003 per
comment that the isothermal cycle at 1200
C and 0.1
cycle, while for optimal conditions with reduction at 1500
mbar and oxidation at 900

C and 1 bar, Δδ is 0.04 per cycle [193].
The REDOX reaction with the ZnO can be described below [194]:
Reduction of the ZnO (T > 2000 K):

◦

◦

◦

ZnO(s) →Zn(g) +

1
O2, ΔН = 456 kJ
2

/

mol

Oxidation with CO2 (T < 1300 K):
/

Zn + CO2→ZnO(s) + CO, ΔН = (cid:0) 67 kJ

mol

Oxidation with H2O (T < 1300 K):
/

Zn + H2O→ZnO(s) + H2, ΔН = (cid:0) 104 kJ

mol

(17)

(18)

(19)

At this stage, it is useful to define the solar-to-fuel efficiency (ηsol-fuel)

as below:

ηsol(cid:0) fuel =

Qfuel
Qsol

5.2.1. REDOX cycle with CeO2

Sch ̈appi  et  al. [193]  investigated experimentally the  REDOX cycle
with CeO2 for producing syngas from solar irradiation. Fig. 45 illustrates
the  pilot  experimental setup  of 5  kW thermal  power.  They found  the
solar  to syngas  efficiency to  be up to  3.8% according  to their experi-
ments. This efficiency is relatively low, but there are higher efficiencies
reported in the literature up to 5.6% [195,196].

In a theoretical study with a BD-tower reflector configuration, the
solar-to-fuel efficiency was found at 27% which is a relatively high value
[197]. The examined solar system is depicted in Fig. 46 and it includes
four CPC homogenizers to concentrate properly the solar irradiation on
the absorbing surface.

Water-splitting  cycle  with  CeO2  metal  oxide  has  been  examined
extensively  by  the  research  team  of  Kodama  et  al.  [198,199].  They
tested beam-down solar systems coupled with a fluidized bed (Miyazaki
unit) where the proper reactions are performed for hydrogen produc-
tion.  They  found  that  hydrogen  production  presents  a  peak  for  tem-
◦
perature  levels  around  800–900
C,  while  they  indicate  that  the
◦
C would be beneficial for achieving
achieved of temperatures at 1400
higher hydrogen production rates.

5.2.2. Methane reforming

Another interesting way for producing hydrogen is by using meth-
anol reforming through two independent equilibrium-limited reactions
as below:

Endothermic steam reforming reaction:

Where the fuel energy (Qfuel) can be defined as the product of the fuel
mass flow rate (mfuel) and its higher heating value (HHV) as below:

Exothermic water gas shift reaction:

CO + H2O→CO2 + H2, ΔH = (cid:0) 41 kJ/mol

(20)

CH4 + H2O→CO + 3H2, ΔH = 206 kJ/mol

(22)

(23)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108526

E. Bellos

Fig. 44. BD-LFR design coupled with a fluidized bed located at the ground with its opening at the same height as the primary reflectors [184].

Segal and Epstain [200] examined the use of a BD solar design for
methane reforming. They calculated the methane conversion efficiency
at 92.3%, while the solar cavity receiver efficiency at 87%. The oper-
ating temperature of the cavity was found to be up to 950

C.

◦

Biomass gasification.
The gasification of biomass is a promising choice for producing green
gas  fuels  from  solar  irradiation.  Boujjat  et  al.  [201]  studied  a  solar
gasification process of lignocellulosic biomass (C6H9O4) which can be
described below:

C6H9O4 + 2H2O→ + CO + 6.5H2, ΔН = 800 kJ/mol

(24)

◦

This reaction is an endothermic one that needs significant amounts of
energy in temperature levels over 1000
C for producing hydrogen and
carbon  monoxide.  In  the  study  of  Boujjat  et  al.  [201],  the  operating
temperature was variable but in the range of 1000–1500
C depending
on the following control strategy. Practically, it was found that syngas
production from biomass gasification from solar beam-down technology
is possible to be done.

◦

Ma et al. [202] examined also biomass gasification with beam-down
solar technology with a tower reflector. The final product was syngas
with the following substances: 47.99% H2, 36.29% CO, 6.66% CO2 and
2.04% CH4. Also, it was found that the lower heating value of the final
gas was 11510 kJ/m3, the carbon conversion at 78.2% and the gasifi-
cation energy efficiency at 93.0%. Moreover, it is important to state that
the overall system’s energetic efficiency was found at 30.8%.

5.3. Other thermochemical processes

The beam-down solar units can be coupled with a reactor for pro-
ducing various useful products. The reason for the wide investigation of
this idea is based on the possibility of achieving high-temperature levels
and exploiting a 100% renewable energy source. Moreover, the beam-
down  designs  make  possible  the  safe  operation  of  the  rector  because
they are stable and close to the ground, something that is not possible in
other solar concentrating technologies.

One classical application regards the production of Zinc (Zn) from
Zinc oxide (ZnO). The most usual way for producing (Zn) is based on the
carbothermal reduction reaction as below [203]:

ZnO + C→Zn + CO, ΔН = 240 kJ/kg

(25)

Wieckert  et  al.  [203]  examined  a  configuration  for  producing  Zn
from ZnO by exploiting solar irradiation as Fig. 47 depicts. More spe-
cifically, this configuration is a 5 kWth unit that can produce Zn at 0.05
mol/min. The operating temperature was about 1200
C, and the solar
conversion  efficiency  was  calculated  at  15%.  In  another  work  with  a
thermal input of 10 kWth, the conversion efficiency was found at 14%
C  and  75%  purity  in  Zn  at  the  products
with  operation  up  to  1173
[204].  In  another  study  [205],  a  5  kWth  system  that  operates  up  to
◦
1327
C was found to achieve a 20% conversion efficiency. The increase
of the system capacity can lead to higher operating temperatures and
thus to higher performance. A 300 kWth unit was found to operate up to

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108527

E. Bellos

Fig. 45. REDOX cycle with CeO2  for syngas production from solar irradiation with a beam-down dish configuration [193].

Briongos et al. [209] designed a beam-down LFR with a twin-screw
reactor  for  biomass  hydrothermal  carbonization,  as  it  is  depicted  in
Fig. 49. This configuration leads to a hydrochar conversion factor in the
range of 64%–78%. It is remarkable to state that this process was per-
formed with medium temperature levels up to 226

C.

◦

5.4. Discussion of the receiver/reactor configurations

Coupling  beam-down  solar  systems  with  reactors  or  receivers  for
thermochemical  processes  and  high-temperature  processes  is  an  idea
that has been examined by various researchers in the last two decades.
Different kinds of solar configurations have been tested with most of the
designs  using  reactors  at  the  ground  which  are  fed  by  heliostats  and
tower  reflectors.  This  design  makes  possible  the  operation  in  high
temperatures (e.g., >1000
C) and adjusts properly the heat input ca-
pacity.  However,  there  are  designs  based  on  the  beam-down  dish
reflector, as well as there is the possibility to use LFR design for pro-
cesses that require lower temperature levels (e.g., 200–300

C).

◦

◦

Fig. 46. Beam-down solar tower system with CPC homogenizers for fuel pro-
duction [197].

C and in this case, the Zn production was 50 kg/h while the total

◦
1500
process conversion efficiency was at 30% [206].

The comparison of the aforementioned process with the hydromet-
allurgy system with photovoltaics indicates that the use of PV is a more
efficient choice [207]. However, in the case of using biomass, the pro-
cess with the solar thermal system is more beneficial leading to an 82%
lower carbon footprint. Thus, the comparison of the different processes
for  producing  Zn  needs  a  multilateral  comparative  analysis  from  the
energy, environmental and economic points of view.

Roy et al. [208] examined the use of a beam-down dish configuration
for  cleaning the  methylene blue  contaminated water  aiming to  accel-
erate the photocatalytic reaction rate (see Fig. 48). They found that the
use of BiVO4 nanoflakes leads to 89% degradation of the blue methylene
in an hour which is a high value compared to the nominal value of 32%.

The fluidized  bed  technology  has  been  extensively  examined with
◦
beam-down configurations. High-temperature levels up to 1600
C have
been achieved and this fact is a promising one for the further application
of this technology for producing hot air for driving power cycles (e.g.,
Brayton cycle). Moreover, it was found that SiC is the best material for
using  it  in  the  fluidized  bed.  However,  there  is  a  lack  of  studies  that
emphasizes both the solar part and the fluidized bed system, thus this
scientific gap has to be covered in the next period with more studies. It is
remarkable to say that it was found that the receiver efficiency can be
about 21.4% with SiC according to Ref. [183].

Another important part of the literature aims at the thermochemical
processes for hydrogen or syngas production. REDOX cycles are studied
with  CeO2  as  the  most  usual  choice.  The  solar-to-fuel  efficiency  was
found to be relatively low in small capacities and higher when the ca-
pacity increases due to the possibility of operation in higher tempera-
tures. The conversion efficiency was found in the range of 3.8% [193] to
27% [197] and it is clear that more research, especially experimental, is
needed in order to design properly highly efficient systems for syngas

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108528

E. Bellos

Fig. 47. Beam-down solar system for Zn production with a secondary tilted reflector [203].

efficiency  was  92%  [202].  It  is  remarkable  to  state  that  the  overall
solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency for gasification was reported at 31%.
Furthermore, other chemical processes like Zn production have been
examined in the literature. The high capacity of the unit makes possible
the higher conversion efficiency of the ZnO to Zn. More specifically, at 5
kWth the conversion efficiency is 15% [203], while at 300 kWth it is 30%
[206]. Also, it has been reported that the use of biomass in the process of
Zn production makes the total process an environmentally friendly one
[207]. Moreover, there are applications of beam-down solar systems for
photocatalytic reactions [208] and biomass hydrothermal carbonization
[209].

To  conclude,  solar  beam-down  technologies  can  be  coupled  with
various thermochemical reactions in various ways. There are theoretical
and  experimental  studies  in  the  literature  and  there  are  important
conclusions regarding the system efficiency and productivity rates. The
results are promising, especially in the configurations with high capacity
and  generally  in  the  case  with  the  possibility  for  operation  in  high-
temperature levels (>1000
C). However, there is a need for perform-
ing more studies, especially experimental works, to optimize the designs
and  to  make  possible  the  development  of  commercial  solar-to-fuel
systems.

◦

6. Other applications based on the beam-down concentrators

Beam-down solar concentrating technologies have been examined in
numerous applications. The present section summarizes studies that are
neither thermochemical processes nor power systems and thus they are
summarized in a separate section.

Fig. 48. Beam-down solar dish for accelerating a photocatalytic reaction [208].

production.  Methane  reforming  and  biomass  gasification  are  other
possibilities that can be found in beam-down thermochemical units. The
methane reforming was found to be 92.3% [200], while the gasification

Beam-down solar systems concentrate high amounts of solar energy
into the receiver and this fact makes possible thermal storage with high

6.1. Integrated thermal energy storage designs

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108529

E. Bellos

Fig. 49. Beam-down LFR with a twin-screw reactor for biomass hydrothermal carbonization [209].

density. Therefore, various designs which incorporate thermal storage
have  been  investigated  in  the  literature.  Moreover,  some  studies
combine the BD systems with other thermal storage units.

◦

The use of a concrete thermal storage system has been suggested as
an interesting choice for coupling it with the beam-down solar tower in
the Nest storage pilot at the Masdar Institute Solar Platform [210]. In
this system, the charging process was tested at 390
C, while the dis-
◦
C. Moreover, for the same platform in the Masdar
charging was at 290
Institute, the molten salt has been tested as the working fluid and the
storage  medium.  In  this  platform,  the  receiver  of  the  beam-down
configuration is located in the ground, and it is mixed with sand from
the environment. The phenomenon of mixing molten sand with sand has
been examined by AlQaydi et al. [211] and the results showed stability
reduction with the sand but the melting point is not affected. Another
examined  idea  concerns  the  investigation  of  the  sand  particles  for
thermal  storage  material.  This  idea  has  been  studied  by  Iniesta  et  al.
◦
[212] and it was found that the sand temperature has to be up to 900
C
for avoiding agglomeration phenomena.

Yang et al. [212] examined the use of a fluidized bed as a storage

system from a beam-down solar unit, as Fig. 50 depicts. The charging
◦
C, while the discharging was
temperature of this unit was found at 570
◦
at 500
C. Moreover, the same research team [213] found the charging
efficiency  to  have  99%  efficiency and  the  discharging  92%.  Also,  the
solar-to-exergy efficiency was estimated at 52.7%. In another approach,
Kiwan  and  Soud  [214,215]  examined  numerically  [214]  and  experi-
mentally [215] thermal energy storage in the ground from a beam-down
solar unit, as Fig. 51 depicts. They found that the storage system presents
an efficiency of up to 73%. Moreover, they found that the use of a higher
number of conductive rods in the ground leads to higher performance.

6.2. Concentrating lighting systems

Lighting is an important electrical need for the building sector which
is responsible for important consumption. It is estimated that the specific
lighting load is ranged from 5 to 15 W/m2  depending on the lighting
technology and the kind of building [217]. In this direction, the idea of
using  beam-down  solar  concentrating  systems  for  lighting  purposes
seems to be a promising idea for reducing the electricity consumption of

Fig. 50. Fluidized bed as the storage unit in a beam-down solar system [216].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108530

E. Bellos

the building sector.

The most usual solar concentrating type is the dish that can be used
for  providing  lighting.  Fig.  52  depicts  the  idea  of  a  beam-down  dish
lighting system for a car park case study [218] which includes photo-
voltaics, a beam splitter reflector and a fiber optical bundle. This hybrid
system produces direct lighting through the fiber optical bundle and also
by  utilizing  the  electricity  from  the  PV  for  lighting  purposes.  It  was
found  that  four  dishes  with  a  diameter  of  3.28  m2  are  able  to  light
successfully a car park of 1700 m2 area. The solar utilization factor, for
both PV and lighting, is found to be around 40% which is a satisfying
value.

The combination of a Stirling engine with a lighting dish system has
been suggested by Kandili and Külahlı [219,220] and it is illustrated in
Fig.  53.  The  lighting  efficiency  of  the  suggested  configuration  was
calculated at 14%. Roy et al. [221] examined a beam-down dish lighting
system which is depicted in Fig. 54. This configuration can concentrate
up to 96 suns and the produced lighting is equivalent to 149 LEDs with
15 W per LED.

Moreover, it is important to state the possibility of using a PTC for
lighting purposes with a beam-down design as it is depicted in Fig. 55.
This configuration has been suggested by Li and Yuan [222] and it was
found that an 8 m2 PTC area can illuminate a floor area of around 500
m2. The total solar exploitation factor was calculated at 39% and the
lighting efficiency at 16%.

6.3. Industrial and other thermal processes

Beam-down solar concentrating technologies can be used in a great
variety of energy applications and especially in cases where there is a
thermal  input  demand  in  medium  and  high  temperatures.  Industrial
processes  can  exploit  this  technology  for  producing  the  proper  heat
input for their thermal processes. Segal and Epstein [223] suggested that
a BD-Tower reflector design can be used for cracking liquid petroleum
gas. They performed preliminary work regarding this process, and it was
calculated that the receiver presents 79% efficiency and the operating
temperatures were close to 900

C.

◦

Fig. 51. A beam-down solar system with thermal storage in the ground (a) First
reflection,  (b)  Secondary  reflections,  and  (c)  Thermal  energy  storage  in  the
ground [214].

Another application is the use of the BD-solar system for providing
high  heat  input  for  metal  processing  in  furnaces.  Patidar  et  al.  [224]
examined  this  idea  in  industrial  aluminum  soaking  furnaces  by  per-
forming  preliminary  work.  It  was  commented  that  the  possibility  for
operation at 800
C or more is the goal for making this technology of
high value.

◦

Another interesting choice is the development of proper receivers for
BD-solar systems for hot air of high temperatures which can be used in a
great variety of industrial processes. Nakamura et al. [225,226] studied
a  SiC  honeycomb  receiver  (see  Fig.  56)  that  can  produce  hot  air  at

Fig. 52. Beam-down dish system for lighting purposes of a car park (a) The dish system, (b) The car park [218].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108531

E. Bellos

Fig. 53. Beam-down solar dish configuration with Stirling engine and lighting system [219].

Fig. 54. A beam-down solar dish for lighting purposes (a) The examined collector, (b) Application of the system in a building [221].

◦

C. The performance of the receiver was found to be ranged from

560
40% to 80% depending on the operating conditions.

Recently, the use of a beam-down tower system for desalination has
been studied by Lorfing et al. [227] and the examined configuration is
displayed in Fig. 57. A solar field of 3845 m2 can produce 10,000 m3 of
fresh water on a yearly basis. Moreover, this design was found to be an
environmentally friendly solution compared to conventional systems.

6.4. Discussion of other applications with beam-down concentrators

Solar  concentrating  systems  with  beam-down  configurations  have
been studied for various applications like lighting, thermal storage and
industrial  processes.  The  different  possibilities  in  the  design  of  these
systems  make  it  possible  to  couple  them  with  different  applications.
Moreover, the BD systems can operate with various concentrating ratios
and so high temperatures can be achieved, something that makes flex-
ibility in the incorporation of these systems in different applications.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108532

E. Bellos

use  of  the  fluidized  bed  as  a  storage  device  has  been  used  and
solar-to-exergy efficiency of 53% has been reported [213]. An alterna-
tive  choice  is  the  storage  of  heat  inside  the  ground  with  the  aid  of
conductive rods [215].

Lighting  production  from  beam-down  solar  systems  has  been
examined by various researchers, usually with dish reflectors. Usually,
there  is  an  extra  device  like  PV  [218],  Stirling  engine  [219,220],  or
thermal receiver [222]. The lighting efficiency was found around 15%
[219,220,222], while the exploitation of the electricity for extra lighting
increases the total efficiency up to 40% [218].

The most usual solar concentrating type is the dish that can be used
for  providing  lighting.  Fig.  52  depicts  the  idea  of  a  beam-down  dish
lighting system for a car park case study [218] which includes photo-
voltaics, a beam splitter reflector and a fiber optical bundle. This hybrid
system produces direct lighting through the fiber optical bundle and also
by  utilizing  the  electricity  from  the  PV  for  lighting  purposes.  It  was
found  that  four  dishes  with  a  diameter  of  3.28  m2  are  able  to  light
successfully a car park of 1700 m2 area. The solar utilization factor, for
both PV and lighting, is found to be around 40% which is a satisfying
value.

Fig.  55. Beam-down  PTC  design  for  lighting  and  useful  heat  production  (1:
Reflector, 2: cold mirror for splitting the solar irradiation, 3: Fresnel lens con-
nected to the optical fiber-lighting unit, 4: thermal receiver) [222].

Fig. 56. A receiver of beam-down system for hot water production (a)Vertical
cross-section, (b) the honeycomb receiver [226].

The storage system for the beam-down unit is an interesting issue and
different ideas have been examined such as the use of concrete [210],
molten salt [211] and sand [212] as the storage mediums. Moreover, the

Other applications like cracking liquid petroleum gas [223], indus-
trial  metal  processes  [224],  hot  air  production  with  proper  receiver
[225,226]  and desalination  [227] can be  found in  the  literature.  The
results  of  these  studies  indicate  that the  beam-down  technologies  are
promising,  while  the  challenge  is  the  possibility  of  operating  in
high-temperature levels, generally over 800

C.

◦

The  present  section  makes  clear  that  beam-down  technology  has
great potential for the exploitation of solar irradiation in a great variety
of applications, especially in the industrial sector. Therefore, this col-
lector classification makes possible the easier exploitation of solar en-
ergy  as  an  alternative  energy  source  which  can  help  in  the  efficient
decarbonization of our society.

7. Discussion and future steps

Beam-down  solar  concentrating  technologies  consist  a  promising
alternative choice for designing highly efficient energy systems which
present a series of advantages as below: i) reduction of the used material
for construction, ii) increase of the performance, iii) the reduction of the
wind loads, iv) reduction of the thermal stresses that can lead to failure,
v) increase of the safety levels, and vi) the development of novel and
efficient storage designs.

However,  the  real  installations  of  beam-down  systems  are  seldom
and thus fact indicates that this technology is not yet mature. The most
usual experimental setups can be found in Japan at the campus of the
University of Miyazaki with a design for thermochemical processes [71],
as  well  as  at  the  Masdar  Institute  of  Science  and  Technology  with  a
receiver operating with molten salt [69]. Moreover, it is promising that
there is a CSP in China that is under construction and it is called “Yumen
Xinneng/Xinchen 50 MW Beam-down CSP” [68].

7.1. Comparison of the different solar concentrating technologies

There are plenty of designs that apply the beam-down idea, and this
fact creates a great variety of possible solutions for the new generation
CSP.  Practically,  all  the  existing  solar  concentrating  systems  can  be
properly  modified  by  incorporating  extra  reflectors  and  they  can  be
converted into beam-down systems.

The optical design of the beam-down technologies has been studied
extensively in the literature for all the possible configurations and so this
area is completed to a great extent. On the other hand, there are gaps in
the thermal studies and especially in the investigation of the total system
coupled to the power cycle. Practically, the optical study is the first step
in the analysis of the beam-down systems and the majority of the studies
emphasize this part because the beam-down technology is not mature
yet. Also, the thermal studies are not so usual because there are no novel

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108533

E. Bellos

Fig. 57. Beam-down tower system for desalination purposes with a multiple-effect distillation post-treatment procedure [227].

receiver  designs  coupled  to  the  beam-down  systems,  something  that
does not create the need for conducting specific thermal studies for these
collectors.  In  other  words,  the  beam-down  systems  have  not  been
extensively  examined  in  the  existing  literature,  compared  to  other
concentrating technologies, and this fact leads to significant scientific
gaps that are focused on the thermal investigation part.

The  optical  studies  have  mainly  compared  the  kind  of  secondary
reflector with the most usual choices to be the hyperbolic design, the
elliptical design, the parabolic and the flat design. Comparing the hy-
perbolic and the elliptical design, the majority of the studies indicate the
hyperbolic design as the most appropriate choice, especially in tower
technologies,  because it  can reduce  effectively  the  total  height  of the
unit [80,121]. Flat reflectors have been found as alternative choices that
can  lead  to  high  performance  in  LFR  designs  [119].  Moreover,  the
parabolic shape secondary reflector seems to be a good choice for PTC
designs [116].

The optical efficiency of the systems is influenced by the design as-
pects in a great way. The solar tower designs do not present too high
optical efficiencies with values around 57% to be reported [88,93]. On
the other hand, dish-based systems present higher performance in the
range  of  78%–87%  [107,108,111].  Another  important  aspect  regards
the higher concentration ratio that can be achieved with the point focal
technologies compared to the linear technologies. More specifically, the
point  focal  systems  can  concentrate  in  the  range  of  2000–5000  suns,
while the linear systems up to 100 suns. This fact makes it possible the
operating  with  high  temperatures  with  point  focal  technologies  and
more specifically up to 1000
C or more. So, highly efficient power cy-
cles  (e.g.,  Brayton  cycle)  and  thermochemical  processes  can  be  con-
ducted with the use of point-focal beam-down solar systems.

◦

The thermal efficiency of the solar units is depended on the initial
design and the operating conditions. The BD-Dish with a double primary
◦
reflector presents a very promising efficiency of 68.6% at 883
C [107],
while  efficiencies  of  around  60%  at  650
C  [111]  have  also  been  re-
ported. On the other hand, the BD-ST presents lower thermal efficiency
C [95] and the BD-LFR + Tower around 39% at
around 24% at 600
200
C [120]. But it is remarkable to state that the use of a highly effi-
cient receiver in a BD-ST unit can lead to an electrical efficiency of 20%
which is a promising value [93].

◦

◦

◦

Expect the conventional CSP technologies; the beam-down idea has
been also studied in the CPV with two different types; one with a splitter

and one without. The idea of using a splitter is a very promising one
because it makes it possible to decouple the PV cell from the redundant
solar  wavelengths  which  are  utilized  by  another  thermal  device.  The
CPV gives the possibility for cogeneration which is an extra advantage of
this technology. However, in all cases, the cooling of the cell is a critical
issue that has to be considered.

It  was  found  that  the  electrical  efficiencies  without  splitter  take
values  in  the  range  of  7.3%  [128]  up  to  14.1%  [126]  which  are
reasonable values for PV systems. On the other hand, the use of a splitter
can  lead  to  significantly  higher  values,  for  example  at  22%  [152].
However, the splitter designs give the possibility for the production of
electricity both from PV and from another thermal engine which is fed
by the produced heat or the produced solar fuel. So, higher total elec-
trical efficiencies can be found in these cases and more specifically 32%
[147], 31.2% [154] and 25% [157,158]. Moreover, it has to be high-
lighted that the increase in the concentration ratio can lead to higher
performance,  something  that  is  reasonable  but  has  also  been  found
through  the  present  review  study.  For  example,  the  increase  of  the
concentrating  ratio  from  7.5  to  32,  can  increase  the  efficiency  from
21.9% to 31.2% [154,156].

7.2. Economic and environmental aspects of the beam-down technologies

Beam-down solar concentrating systems are promising technologies
due to the reduced cost compared to conventional systems. The reduced
cost is based on the use of lower material quantity, mainly due to the
lower system height. Moreover, the placement of the receiver close to
the ground without moving reduces the operational and maintenance
cost of the units.

Regarding the environmental aspects of these systems, it is clear that
the  efficient  exploitation  of  solar  irradiation  makes  possible  the  pro-
duction of clean energy and also makes possible the production of in-
dustrial products by reducing fuel consumption. Also, the production of
solar  fuels  enables  long-term  energy  storage,  something  that  makes
possible green development and the significant reduction of fossil fuels.
Another  critical  environmental  issue  regards  the  utilization  of  lower
material  quantities,  something  that  has  a  positive  impact  on  the  life
cycle assessment of the system. Moreover, the beam-down systems are
compact and durable designs that present relatively low maintenance
costs,  something  that  reduces  their  environmental  footprint  of  them

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108534

E. Bellos

during their operation. Thus, important environmental benefits can be
found  by  taking  into  account  the  life  cycle  analysis  of  the  overall
configuration.

However, the literature studies do not emphasize the economic and
environmental analysis of the beam-down technologies because they are
in a preliminary stage and thus the emphasis is given to the optical and
thermal design studies. It is useful to state that it has reported the eco-
nomic viability of coupling PV with TEG in beam-down configurations
due to the low investment cost of the TEG [172]. Another interesting
result regards the calculation of the payback period of a BD-CPV with a
splitter at 13.6 years [151] which is a relatively high value due to the
high cost of the splitter. Thus, an important issue is the reduction of the
splitter cost in order to make this promising and efficient technology to
be also financially viable. Moreover, the cost of the CPC reflector over
the receiver is an important cost that has to be taken into consideration
during the sizing and the economical investigation of the beam-down
configurations.

7.3. Issues regarding the beam-down technologies

Beam-down  technologies  present  some  limitations  and  issues
regarding their operation which have to be faced before they become a
mature technology. One of the most important advantages of the beam-
down solar tower systems regards the reduction of the system height.
However, this fact is associated with more intense cosine effects [228]
and thus the optical design of the system has to be performed with high
accuracy.  The  upper  reflector  is  a  critical  component  that  has  to  be
designed carefully after the conductance of a proper optical optimiza-
tion procedure. The shape, the dimensions and the location of the upper
reflector are important aspects that have been extensively examined by
various  researchers  because  they  have  a  critical  impact  on  the  final
system performance.

Another limitation of the beam-down systems is the relatively lower
optical  efficiency  compared  to  the  respective  conventional  systems.
Practically, the incorporation of two or three different reflecting surfaces
introduces a significant amount of optical losses and this fact has to be
faced  by  using  material  of  high  reflectance  and  also  by  designing
properly the system for maximizing the intercept factors. Also, this issue
can  be  faced  by  designing  small  heliostats  [229].  Moreover,  the
beam-down  systems  require  the  use  of  an  extra  reflector  over  the
receiver as a homogenizer (usually with CPC geometry) to have a proper
image of the sun in the receiver. This fact makes the heat flux distri-
bution have a normalized profile but it introduces an extra optical loss in
the system [230].

◦

The secondary reflector  of the  beam-down configuration faces  the
limitation  of  the  high-temperature  development  which  can  reduce  its
lifetime and reduce the reflectance. Thus, there is a need to try to cool
this device properly when temperature levels over 150
C are observed
[231]. Another optical issue regards the deposition of molten salt par-
ticles on the homogenizer over the absorber which leads to reduces ef-
ficiency in higher incident angles [232]. Thus, there is a need to clean
properly the reflectors for improving the system’s efficiency. Moreover,
the beam-down system can lead to the development of high tempera-
tures on the receiver and this fact creates the need for manufacturing
durable  designs  that  withstand  the  high  temperatures  without  facing
failure dangers. Lastly, there is a need for a detailed cost analysis of the
beam-down systems because of the avoidance of some cost for the piping
and the great height, but there are costs for the extra reflectors [233]. So,
detailed financial sizing is a critical issue for the further development of
this technology.

7.4. Future steps on the field – What’s next?

steps in the field are given:

-  The studies on the linear solar concentrating technologies in beam-
down  systems  are  restricted  compared  to  the  point-focal  systems.
Thus, more research in the field of linear systems (PTC or LFR) with
beam-down designs is required.

-  The  thermal  studies  of  the  beam-down  systems  are  restricted
compared to the optical investigations, thus there is a need for more
studies with thermal and optical analysis together. Especially, there
is a need for thermal studies of the beam-down PTC configuration
because in this area there is an important scientific gap. Moreover,
the investigation of the beam-down solar systems coupled to appli-
cations  has  to  be  extensively  examined  in  the  future  in  order  to
optimize the total configuration together.

-  There is a need to develop more pilot units to examine more beam-
down  designs  in  real  operating  conditions.  This  step  is  important
before the commercialization of this technology.

- The  beam-down  systems  can  be  examined  as  choices  for  extra  in-
dustrial applications and there is a need for more research in various
thermal  applications,  for  example  for  solar  cooling  systems  with
multi-stage absorption chillers.

- The possibility of solar fuel production with beam-down technolo-
gies is a critical aspect that has to be extensively examined because
this idea gives the possibility for long-term energy storage from solar
energy exploitation.

-  The  economic  investigation  of  the  beam-down  configurations  by
taking  into  account  the  extra  costs  for  the  installation  of  the  sec-
ondary receiver, as well as of the CPC reflector over the receiver.
-  It is important to conduct environmental studies with an emphasis on
the  life  cycle  analysis  by  taking  into  consideration  the  material
reduction by the reduction of the system height.

- Sustainability studies that take into consideration energy, environ-
mental  and  social  criteria  have  to  be  performed  for  taking  into
consideration also the social adoption of the beam-down technology
compared to the other renewable technologies.

8. Conclusions

Beam-down solar concentrating technologies consist of solar systems
of the next generation, which are associated with a series of advantages
compared to  conventional solar  concentrating technologies. This  idea
can lead to designs with high operating temperature levels and thus it is
ideal for electricity production and for thermochemical processes that
aim  for  solar  fuel  production.  The  majority  of  the  literature  studies
investigate  focal  point  technologies  and  more  specifically  tower
reflector systems and dish reflectors. The comparison of these technol-
ogies  indicates  that  the  dish  technologies  present  higher  optical  effi-
ciencies compared to the tower systems and this fact indicates the need
for  improving  the  optical  efficiency  of  beam-down  tower  reflectors
configurations. More specifically, the dish systems present optical effi-
ciencies in the range of 78%–87% compared to the tower systems with
lower efficiencies usually close to 57%.

◦

The point focal systems operate with high concentrating ratios in the
range of 2000–5000 enabling operation at high-temperatures close to
1000
C.  On  the  other  hand,  linear  concentrating  systems  operate  at
lower temperatures because their concentrating ratio is restricted to 100
suns. This, the interest in linear beam-down technologies is restricted
compared to the point focal systems. Additionally, it is critical to high-
light that the use of a CPC over the receiver is an important design aspect
for enhancing the performance of the beam-down system. The geometry
of the CPC, as well as the exact location of this extra reflector, need to be
optimized properly. It is remarkable to add that the cost of the CPC is
relatively high, thus it has to be considered in the design procedure.

The future steps of the beam-down technology are critical because
this  technology  is  under  development  and  there  is  a  need  for  more
research but mainly for developing real installations. Below, the future

Another interesting option is concentrating photovoltaics in beam-
down systems, especially with the use of a splitter reflector. The idea
of  the  splitter  reflector  enables  decoupling  of  the  PV  from  redundant

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108535

E. Bellos

solar wavelengths thus increasing the PV efficiency. Moreover, the other
solar part is redirected to any other device for thermal production or
electricity production with another device (e.g., Stirling or TEG). It has
been reported that the splitter beam-down PV system can reach up to
22% efficiency, which is a satisfying value.

The conclusions of the present review can be used as guidelines for
future steps in the field of beam-down solar concentrating systems. The
extension of these solar systems in various industrial applications is a
critical  challenge,  as  well  as  the  development  of  pilot  experimental
setups, is an extra step that has to be conducted. The commercialization
of the beam-down technology is a critical step for making concentrating
solar  power  an  important  contributor  to  the  energy  mix  of  future
societies.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Nomenclature

Solar field aperture, m2

Afield
Areceiver  Receiver area, m2
CR
Gb
K
Pel
Qabs
Qsol
Qu
T
Tam
Tr,opt
UL

Concentration ratio
Direct beam irradiation, W/m2
Incident angle modifier
Produced electricity, W
Absorbed solar irradiation, W
Solar beam irradiation in the solar field, W
Useful heat production, W
Temperature, oC
Ambient temperature, oC
Optimum operating temperature of the receiver, oC
Collector thermal loss coefficient, W/m2K

Greek symbols
α
γ
Δδ
ΔН
ηglob
ηel
ηopt
ηst
ρ1
ρ2
τ

Absorbance of the receiver
Intercept factor
Oxygen exchange capacity
Enthalpy difference, kJ/kg
Global system efficiency
Electrical efficiency of a PV
Collector optical efficiency
Storage efficiency
Reflectance of the first reflector
Reflectance of the second reflector
Transmittance of the cover

Abbreviations
BD
CPC
CPV
CSP
FB
LCOE
LFR
MO
PTC
PT
PV
PVT

Beam-down
Compound parabolic concentrators
Concentrating photovoltaics
Concentrating solar power
Fluidized bed
Levelized cost of electricity
Linear Fresnel reflector
Metal oxide
Parabolic trough collector
Photothermal systems
Photovoltaic
Thermal photovoltaic

SD
ST
TEG

Solar dishes
Solar towers
Thermo-electric generator

References

[1] Global electricity demand is growing faster than renewables, driving strong

increase in generation from fossil fuels - News. IEA n.d. https://www.iea.org
/news/global-electricity-demand-is-growing-faster-than-renewables-driving-s
trong-increase-in-generation-from-fossil-fuels (accessed September 17, 2022).

[2] Olabi AG, Abdelkareem MA. Renewable energy and climate change. Renew

Sustain Energy Rev 2022;158:112111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2022.112111.

[3] Olabi AG, Obaideen K, Elsaid K, Wilberforce T, Sayed ET, Maghrabie HM, et al.
Assessment of the pre-combustion carbon capture contribution into sustainable
development goals SDGs using novel indicators. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;
153:111710. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111710.

[4] Said Z, Hachicha AA, Aberoumand S, Yousef BAA, Sayed ET, Bellos E. Recent

advances on nanofluids for low to medium temperature solar collectors: energy,
exergy, economic analysis and environmental impact. Prog Energy Combust Sci
2021;84:100898. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100898.

[5] Opolot M, Zhao C, Liu M, Mancin S, Bruno F, Hooman K. A review of high
temperature (≥ 500
C) latent heat thermal energy storage. Renew Sustain
Energy Rev 2022;160:112293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112293.
[6] Gamil A, Li P, Ali B, Hamid MA. Concentrating solar thermal power generation in

◦

Sudan: potential and challenges. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;161:112366.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112366.

[7] Lu Y, Zhu L, Agrafiotis C, Vieten J, Roeb M, Sattler C. Solar fuels production: two-
step thermochemical cycles with cerium-based oxides. Prog Energy Combust Sci
2019;75:100785. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.100785.

[8] Denholm P, Mehos M. Enabling greater penetration of solar power via the use of

CSP with thermal energy storage. Renew Energy 2011;28.

[9] Denholm P, Hand M. Grid flexibility and storage required to achieve very high
penetration of variable renewable electricity. Energy Pol 2011;39:1817–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.01.019.

[10] Singh T, Hussien MAA, Al-Ansari T, Saoud K, McKay G. Critical review of solar
thermal resources in GCC and application of nanofluids for development of
efficient and cost effective CSP technologies. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;91:
708–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.03.050.

[11] Renewable power generation costs in 2021./Publications/2022/Jul/Renewable-
Power-Generation-Costs-in-2021. n.d, https://irena.org/publications/2022/
Jul/Renewable-Power-Generation-Costs-in-2021. [Accessed 17 September 2022].
[12] Gosens J, Hedenus F, Sand ́en BA. Faster market growth of wind and PV in late
adopters due to global experience build-up. Energy 2017;131:267–78. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.05.046.

[13] Bellos E, Tzivanidis C. Alternative designs of parabolic trough solar collectors.
Prog Energy Combust Sci 2019;71:81–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2018.11.001.

[14] Bejan A, Kearney DW, Kreith F. Second law analysis and synthesis of solar

collector systems. J Sol Energy Eng 1981;103:23–8. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.3266200.

[15] Bellos E, Tzivanidis C. A realistic approach of the maximum work extraction from

solar thermal collectors. Applied System Innovation 2018;1:6. https://doi.org/
10.3390/asi1010006.

[16] Bellos E, Tzivanidis C. Solar concentrating systems and applications in Greece – a
critical review. J Clean Prod 2020;272:122855. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2020.122855.

[17] Morin G, Dersch J, Platzer W, Eck M, H ̈aberle A. Comparison of linear Fresnel and
parabolic trough collector power plants. Sol Energy 2012;86:1–12. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.solener.2011.06.020.

[18] Kalogirou SA. Solar thermal collectors and applications. Prog Energy Combust Sci

2004;30:231–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2004.02.001.

[19] Meißner TM, Oskay C, Bonk A, Gr ́egoire B, Donchev A, Solimani A, et al.
Improving the corrosion resistance of ferritic-martensitic steels at 600
C in
molten solar salt via diffusion coatings. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2021;227:
111105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2021.111105.

◦

[20] Chen J, Xiao G, Xu H, Zhou X, Yang J, Ni M, et al. Experiment and dynamic

simulation of a solar tower collector system for power generation. Renew Energy
2022;196:946–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2022.07.045.
[21] Fuqiang W, Ziming C, Jianyu T, Yuan Y, Yong S, Linhua L. Progress in

concentrated solar power technology with parabolic trough collector system: a
comprehensive review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2017;79:1314–28. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.05.174.

[22] Balasubramanian KR, Jinshah BS, Ravikumar K, Divakar S. Thermal and

hydraulic characteristics of a parabolic trough collector based on an open natural
circulation loop: the effect of fluctuations in solar irradiance. Sustain Energy
Technol Assessments 2022;52:102290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
seta.2022.102290.

[23] Praveen RP, Chandra Mouli KVV. Performance enhancement of parabolic trough
collector solar thermal power plants with thermal energy storage capability. Ain
Shams Eng J 2022;13:101716. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2022.101716.

[24] Arabkoohsar A, Sadi M. A solar PTC powered absorption chiller design for Co-

supply of district heating and cooling systems in Denmark. Energy 2020;193:
116789. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116789.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108536

E. Bellos

[25] Ziyaei M, Jalili M, Chitsaz A, Alhuyi Nazari M. Dynamic simulation and life cycle
cost analysis of a MSF desalination system driven by solar parabolic trough
collectors using TRNSYS software: a comparative study in different world regions.
Energy Convers Manag 2021;243:114412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2021.114412.

[26] Immonen J, Mohammadi K, Powell KM. Simulating a solar parabolic trough
collector plant used for industrial process heat using an optimized operating
scheme that utilizes flexible heat integration. Sol Energy 2022;236:756–71.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2022.03.044.

[27] Ouagued M, Khellaf A, Loukarfi L. Performance analyses of Cu–Cl hydrogen
production integrated solar parabolic trough collector system under Algerian
climate. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2018;43:3451–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2017.11.040.

[28] Therminol VP-1 heat transfer fluid | Therminol | eastman. n.d. https://www.th

[51] Pavlovic S, Loni R, Bellos E, Vasiljevi ́c D, Najafi G, Kasaeian A. Comparative study
of spiral and conical cavity receivers for a solar dish collector. Energy Convers
Manag 2018;178:111–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2018.10.030.

[52] Malik MZ, Shaikh PH, Zhang S, Lashari AA, Leghari ZH, Baloch MH, et al.

A review on design parameters and specifications of parabolic solar dish Stirling
systems and their applications. Energy Rep 2022;8:4128–54. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.egyr.2022.03.031.

[53] Aslfattahi N, Loni R, Bellos E, Najafi G, Kadirgama K, Harun WSW, et al.

Efficiency enhancement of a solar dish collector operating with a novel soybean
oil-based-MXene nanofluid and different cavity receivers. J Clean Prod 2021;317:
128430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128430.

[54] Kasaeian A, Kouravand A, Vaziri Rad MA, Maniee S, Pourfayaz F. Cavity receivers

in solar dish collectors: a geometric overview. Renew Energy 2021;169:53–79.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.12.106.

erminol.com/product/71093459. [Accessed 18 September 2022].

[55] Loni R, Asli-Ardeh EA, Ghobadian B, Kasaeian AB, Bellos E. Energy and exergy

[29] Said Z, Ghodbane M, Boumeddane B, Tiwari AK, Sundar LS, Li C, et al. Energy,

exergy, economic and environmental (4E) analysis of a parabolic trough solar
collector using MXene based silicone oil nanofluids. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell
2022;239:111633. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2022.111633.

[30] Herrmann U, Kelly B, Price H. Two-tank molten salt storage for parabolic trough

solar power plants. Energy 2004;29:883–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-
5442(03)00193-2.

[31] Benyakhlef S, Al Mers A, Merroun O, Bouatem A, Boutammachte N, El Alj S, et al.
Impact of heliostat curvature on optical performance of Linear Fresnel solar
concentrators. Renew Energy 2016;89:463–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2015.12.018.

investigation of alumina/oil and silica/oil nanofluids in hemispherical cavity
receiver: experimental Study. Energy 2018;164:275–87. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2018.08.174.

[56] Karimi R, Gheinani TT, Madadi Avargani V. A detailed mathematical model for
thermal performance analysis of a cylindrical cavity receiver in a solar parabolic
dish collector system. Renew Energy 2018;125:768–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.renene.2018.03.015.

[57] Hassan A, Quanfang C, Abbas S, Lu W, Youming L. An experimental investigation

on thermal and optical analysis of cylindrical and conical cavity copper tube
receivers design for solar dish concentrator. Renew Energy 2021;179:1849–64.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.07.145.

[32] Qiu Y, Li M-J, Wang K, Liu Z-B, Xue X-D. Aiming strategy optimization for

[58] Loni R, Kasaeian AB, Askari Asli-Ardeh E, Ghobadian B, Le Roux WG.

uniform flux distribution in the receiver of a linear Fresnel solar reflector using a
multi-objective genetic algorithm. Appl Energy 2017;205:1394–407. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.09.092.

Performance study of a solar-assisted organic Rankine cycle using a dish-mounted
rectangular-cavity tubular solar receiver. Appl Therm Eng 2016;108:1298–309.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.08.014.

[33] Hongn M, Larsen SF, Gea M, Altamirano M. Least square based method for the

[59] Pye J, Hughes G, Abbasi E, Asselineau C-A, Burgess G, Coventry J, et al.

estimation of the optical end loss of linear Fresnel concentrators. Sol Energy
2015;111:264–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.10.042.

[34] Nixon JD, Dey PK, Davies PA. Design of a novel solar thermal collector using a
multi-criteria decision-making methodology. J Clean Prod 2013;59:150–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.06.027.

[35] Bellos E. Progress in the design and the applications of linear Fresnel reflectors – a
critical review. Therm Sci Eng Prog 2019;10:112–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tsep.2019.01.014.

[36] Bellos E, Tzivanidis C, Moghimi MA. Reducing the optical end losses of a linear
Fresnel reflector using novel techniques. Sol Energy 2019;186:247–56. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.05.020.

[37] Barb ́on A, Bay ́on L, Bay ́on-Cueli C, Barb ́on N. A study of the effect of the
longitudinal movement on the performance of small scale linear Fresnel
reflectors. Renew Energy 2019;138:128–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2019.01.040.

[38] Barb ́on A, Fern ́andez-Rubiera JA, Martínez-Valledor L, P ́erez-Fern ́andez A,

Bay ́on L. Design and construction of a solar tracking system for small-scale linear
Fresnel reflector with three movements. Appl Energy 2021;285:116477. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116477.

[39] Bellos E, Tzivanidis C. Assessment of linear solar concentrating technologies for
Greek climate. Energy Convers Manag 2018;171:1502–13. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2018.06.076.

[40] Baharoon DA, Rahman HA, Omar WZW, Fadhl SO. Historical development of

concentrating solar power technologies to generate clean electricity efficiently – a
review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;41:996–1027. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rser.2014.09.008.

[41] Zhu G, Wendelin T, Wagner MJ, Kutscher C. History, current state, and future of
linear Fresnel concentrating solar collectors. Sol Energy 2014;103:639–52.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2013.05.021.

[42] Li QEE, Qiu Y. Triple-objective optimization of He Brayton cycles for ultra-high-
temperature solar power tower. Energy Convers Manag 2022;270:116210.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2022.116210.

[43] Xiao G, Nie J, Xu H, Zhang C, Zhu P. Performance analysis of a solar power tower
plant integrated with trough collectors. Appl Therm Eng 2022;214:118853.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2022.118853.

[44] Merch ́an RP, Santos MJ, Medina A, Calvo Hern ́andez A. High temperature central
tower plants for concentrated solar power: 2021 overview. Renew Sustain Energy
Rev 2022;155:111828. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111828.

[45] Coventry J, Campbell J, Xue Y, Hall C, jin-soo Kim, Pye J, et al. Heliostat cost

down scoping study - final report. 2016.

[46] Optics of solar central receiver systems: a review. n.d. https://opg.optica.org/oe
/fulltext.cfm?uri=oe-24-14-A985&id=340823. [Accessed 18 September 2022].
accessed

[47] Ho CK, Iverson BD. Review of high-temperature central receiver designs for

concentrating solar power. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;29:835–46. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.099.

[48] Aseri TK, Sharma C, Kandpal TC. A techno-economic appraisal of parabolic

trough collector and central tower receiver based solar thermal power plants in
India: effect of nominal capacity and hours of thermal energy storage. J Energy
Storage 2022;48:103976. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.103976.

[49] He Y-L, Qiu Y, Wang K, Yuan F, Wang W-Q, Li M-J, et al. Perspective of

concentrating solar power. Energy 2020;198:117373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2020.117373.

[50] Coventry J, Andraka C. Dish systems for CSP. Sol Energy 2017;152:140–70.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.02.056.

Development of a higher-efficiency tubular cavity receiver for direct steam
generation on a dish concentrator. AIP Conf Proc 2016;1734:030029. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.4949081.

[60] Bellos E, Bousi E, Tzivanidis C, Pavlovic S. Optical and thermal analysis of

different cavity receiver designs for solar dish concentrators. Energy Convers
Manag X 2019;2:100013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2019.100013.
[61] Piadehrouhi F, Ghorbani B, Miansari M, Mehrpooya M. Development of a new

integrated structure for simultaneous generation of power and liquid carbon
dioxide using solar dish collectors. Energy 2019;179:938–59. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2019.05.025.

[62] Figaj R, Szubel M, Przenzak E, Filipowicz M. Feasibility of a small-scale hybrid
dish/flat-plate solar collector system as a heat source for an absorption cooling
unit. Appl Therm Eng 2019;163:114399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2019.114399.

[63] Subramani J, Nagarajan PK, Subramaniyan C, Anbuselvan N. Performance studies

on solar parabolic dish collector using conical cavity receiver for community
heating applications. Mater Today Proc 2021;45:1862–6. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.matpr.2020.09.062.

[64] Aboelmaaref MM, Zayed ME, Zhao J, Li W, Askalany AA, Salem Ahmed M, et al.
Hybrid solar desalination systems driven by parabolic trough and parabolic dish
CSP technologies: technology categorization, thermodynamic performance and
economical assessment. Energy Convers Manag 2020;220:113103. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113103.

[65] Assareh E, Assareh M, Alirahmi SM, Shayegh M, Wang F, Behrang M, et al.

Thermodynamic assessment of a cogeneration system with CSP Driven-Brayton
and Rankine cycles for electric power and hydrogen production in the framework
of the energy and water nexus. Energy Nexus 2022;5:100031. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.nexus.2021.100031.

[66] Reflecting telescope optics I. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2004. https://doi.org/

10.1007/978-3-540-76581-3.

[67] Thalange VC, Pal E, Minocha N, Nayak AK, Mahajani SM, Panse SV, et al. Thermal
hydraulics of natural circulation loop in beam-down solar power tower. Energy
2018;159:1088–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.06.156.
[68] Yumen Xinneng/Xinchen - 50MW beam-down | concentrating solar power

projects | NREL. n.d, https://solarpaces.nrel.gov/project/yumen-xinneng-xin
chen-50mw-beam-down. [Accessed 18 September 2022].

[69] Calvet N, Martins M, Grange B, Perez VG, Belasri D, Ali MT, et al. The Masdar
Institute solar platform: a new research facility in the UAE for development of
CSP components and thermal energy storage systems. AIP Conf Proc 2016;1734:
100003. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4949191.

[70] Grange B, Kumar V, Gil A, Armstrong PR, Codd DS, Slocum A, et al. Preliminary
optical, thermal and structural design of a 100 kWth CSPonD beam-down on-sun
demonstration plant. Energy Proc 2015;75:2163–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egypro.2015.07.359.

[71] Kodama T, Gokon N, Matsubara K, Yoshida K, Koikari S, Nagase Y, et al. Flux
measurement of a new beam-down solar concentrating system in Miyazaki for
demonstration of thermochemical water splitting reactors. Energy Proc 2014;49:
1990. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.211. –8.

[72] Three solar modules of world’s first commercial beam-down tower Concentrated
Solar Power project to be connected to grid – HELIOSCSP n.d. https://helioscsp.
com/three-solar-modules-of-worlds-first-commercial-beam-down-tower-concentr
ated-solar-power-project-to-be-connected-to-grid/(accessed September 18,
2022).

[73] Ali MF, Ghani MRA, Gan CK, Othman S, Jano Z, Sutikno T. A review on solar
secondary concentrator. TELKOMNIKA (Telecommunication Computing

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108537

E. Bellos

Electronics and Control) 2018;16:2365–73. https://doi.org/10.12928/
telkomnika.v16i5.8821.

[74] Bushra N, Hartmann T. A review of state-of-the-art reflective two-stage solar
concentrators: technology categorization and research trends. Renew Sustain
Energy Rev 2019;114:109307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109307.

[75] Bellos E, Tzivanidis C. Development of analytical expressions for the incident

angle modifiers of a linear Fresnel reflector. Sol Energy 2018;173:769–79.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.08.019.

[76] Rabl A. Tower reflector for solar power plant. Sol Energy 1976;18:269–71.

https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(76)90027-X.

[77] Wei X, Lu Z, Yu W, Xu W. Ray tracing and simulation for the beam-down solar
concentrator. Renew Energy 2013;50:161–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2012.06.029.

[78] Segal A, Epstein M. Comparative performances of ‘TOWER-TOP’ and ‘TOWER-
REFLECTOR’ central solar receivers. Sol Energy 1999;65:207–26. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0038-092X(98)00138-8.

[79] Kribus A, Zaibel R, Segal A. Extension of the hermite expansion method for

CASSEGRAINIAN solar central receiver systems. Sol Energy 1998;63:337–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(98)00113-3.

[80] Segal A, Epstein M. The optics of the solar tower reflector. Sol Energy 2001;69:

229–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(00)00137-7.

[81] Segal A, Epstein M. Practical considerations in designing large scale “beam down”
optical systems. J Sol Energy Eng 2007;130. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2804629.
[82] Segal A, Epstein M. Truncation of the secondary concentrator (CPC) as means to

cost effective beam-down system. J Sol Energy Eng 2010;132. https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.4001469.

[83] Lahlou R, Armstrong PR, Calvet N, Slocum AH, Shamim T. Testing of a secondary
concentrator integrated with a beam-down tower system under non-liquid
cooling strategies. AIP Conf Proc 2018;2033:170007. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.5067171.

[84] Diago M, Calvet N, Armstrong PR. Net power maximization from a faceted beam-
down solar concentrator. Sol Energy 2020;204:476–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.solener.2020.04.061.

[85] Diago M, Armstrong PR, Slocum AH, Calvet N. Where should beam down

heliostat central rays intersect the final optical element axis? AIP Conf Proc 2018;
2033:040012. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5067048.

[86] Leonardi E. Detailed analysis of the solar power collected in a beam-down central
receiver system. Sol Energy 2012;86:734–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2011.11.017.

[87] Khlief AK, Gilani SI, Al-Kayiem H, Ali BH. Optical analysis of various reflectors
applied in solar beam down tower. 2016. https://www.semanticscholar.org/pape
r/OPTICAL-ANALYSIS-OF-VARIOUS-REFLECTORS-APPLIED-IN-Khlief-Gilani/e
6ab0bf9da8405491acc8aa27078f2872a4b0e11. [Accessed 27 September 2022].

[88] Canavarro D, Delgado G, Patil V, Blanco M, Horta P. Etendue-matched solar

tower beam-down system for high-temperature industrial processes. AIP Conf
Proc 2022;2445:120005. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0085900.

[89] Li L, Yang S, Yang S, Wang B, Pye J, Lipi ́nski W. Optical analysis of a solar

thermochemical system with a rotating tower reflector and a receiver–reactor
array. Opt Express, OE 2020;28. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.389924. 19429–45.

[90] Hasuike H, Yoshizawa Y, Suzuki A, Tamaura Y. Study on design of molten salt
solar receivers for beam-down solar concentrator. Sol Energy 2006;80:1255–62.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2006.03.002.

[91] Gil A, Grange B, Perez VG, Tetreault-Friend M, Codd DS, Calvet N, et al. CSPonD
demonstrative project: start-up process of a 25 kW prototype. AIP Conf Proc
2017;1850:110003. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4984477.

[92] Calvet N, Hamer T, Zhou L, Trumper DJr A. An origami-inspired design of a

thermal mixing element within a concentrated solar power system. 2017.
[93] Saldivia D, Bilbao J, Taylor RA. Optical analysis and optimization of a beam-

down receiver for advanced cycle concentrating solar thermal plants. Appl Therm
Eng 2021;197:117405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.117405.

[94] Cooper T, D ̈ahler F, Ambrosetti G, Pedretti A, Steinfeld A. Performance of

compound parabolic concentrators with polygonal apertures. Sol Energy 2013;
95:308–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2013.06.023.

[95] Mokhtar M, Meyers SA, Armstrong PR, Chiesa M. Performance of a 100 kWth

concentrated solar beam-down optical experiment. J Sol Energy Eng 2014;136.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4027576.

[96] Calvet N, Slocum AH, Gil A, Grange B, Lahlou R, Hamer TT, et al. Dispatchable
solar power using molten salt directly irradiated from above. Sol Energy 2021;
220:217–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.02.058.

[97] Mauk CE, Prengle HW, Sun EC-H. Optical and thermal analysis of a cassegrainian
solar concentrator. Sol Energy 1979;23:157–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-
092X(79)90117-8.

[98] Chen C-F, Lin C-H, Jan H-T. A solar concentrator with two reflection mirrors

designed by using a ray tracing method. Optik 2010;121:1042–51. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2008.12.010.

[99] Chen C-F, Lin C-H, Jan H-T, Yang Y-L. Design of a solar concentrator combining

paraboloidal and hyperbolic mirrors using ray tracing method. Opt Commun
2009;282:360–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optcom.2008.10.017.

[100] Zhang Y, Xiao G, Luo Z, Ni M, Yang T, Xu W. Comparison of different types of
secondary mirrors for solar application. Optik 2014;125:1106–12. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2013.07.113.

[101] Cheng Q, Chai J, Zhou Z, Song J, Su Y. Tailored non-imaging secondary reflectors

designed for solar concentration systems. Sol Energy 2014;110:160–7. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.09.013.

[102] Meng X, Xia X, Sun C, Dai G. Optimal design of symmetrical two-stage flat

reflected concentrator. Sol Energy 2013;93:334–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2013.04.020.

[103] Shanks K, Sarmah N, Ferrer-Rodriguez JP, Senthilarasu S, Reddy KS,

Fern ́andez EF, et al. Theoretical investigation considering manufacturing errors of
a high concentrating photovoltaic of cassegrain design and its experimental
validation. Sol Energy 2016;131:235–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2016.02.050.

[104] Chen Y-C, You C-C. Optimal design of a secondary optical element for a

noncoplanar two-reflector solar concentrator. Int J Photoenergy 2015;2015:
e861353. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/861353.

[105] Research on a square Cassegrain-type solar concentrating reflector with a double
pyramid. Optica Applicata - Tom 2016;46:3. - BazTech - Yadda n.d. http://yadda.
icm.edu.pl/baztech/element/bwmeta1.element.baztech-41231493-7c93-42df-9
439-d79730968033. [Accessed 1 October 2022].

[106] Wang J, Yang S, Jiang C, Yan Q, Lund PD. A novel 2-stage dish concentrator with
improved optical performance for concentrating solar power plants. Renew
Energy 2017;108:92–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.02.059.
[107] Yang S, Wang J, Lund PD, Jiang C, Huang B. Design and performance evaluation
of a high-temperature cavity receiver for a 2-stage dish concentrator. Sol Energy
2018;174:1126–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.10.021.

[108] Xu H, Xu C, Li S, Zhang Z, Liu Y, Xin T, et al. A beam-down solar concentrator

with a fixed focus — design and performance analysis. Sol Energy 2022;241:
428–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2022.06.017.

[109] Yang S, Wang J, Lund PD. Optical design of a novel two-stage dish applied to

thermochemical water/CO2 splitting with the concept of rotary secondary mirror.
Energies 2020;13:3553. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13143553.

[110] D ̈ahler F, Wild M, Sch ̈appi R, Haueter P, Cooper T, Good P, et al. Optical design
and experimental characterization of a solar concentrating dish system for fuel
production via thermochemical redox cycles. Sol Energy 2018;170:568–75.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.05.085.

[111] Xiao G, Guo K, Ni M, Luo Z, Cen K. Optical and thermal performance of a high-
temperature spiral solar particle receiver. Sol Energy 2014;109:200–13. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.08.037.

[112] Yang S, Wang J, Lund PD, Jiang C, Liu D. Assessing the impact of optical errors in

a novel 2-stage dish concentrator using Monte-Carlo ray-tracing simulation.
Renew Energy 2018;123:603–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.02.034.
[113] Wardhana AS, Ashari M, Suryoatmojo H. Designing and modeling a novel dual

parabolic concentrator with three degree of freedom (DOF) robotic arm. Sol
Energy 2019;194:436–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.10.057.
[114] Uzair M, Rehman N ur. Intercept factor for a beam-down parabolic trough
collector. J Sol Energy Eng 2021;143. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4050804.
[115] Wu S, Tang R, Wang C. Numerical calculation of the intercept factor for parabolic
trough solar collector with secondary mirror. Energy 2021;233:121175. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.121175.

[116] Wu S, Wang C, Tang R. Optical efficiency and performance optimization of a two-
stage secondary reflection hyperbolic solar concentrator using machine learning.
Renew Energy 2022;188:437–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2022.01.117.

[117] Taramona S, L ́opez-Quiroz RA, Gallo A, G ́omez-Hern ́andez J. Prototype design

and first tests of a linear beam-down solar field, vol. 9; 2021.

[118] S ́anchez-Gonz ́alez A, G ́omez-Hern ́andez J. Beam-down linear Fresnel reflector:
BDLFR. Renew Energy 2020;146:802–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
renene.2019.07.017.

[119] Taramona S, Gonz ́alez-G ́omez P

 ́
A, Briongos JV, G ́omez-Hern ́andez J. Designing a
flat beam-down linear Fresnel reflector. Renew Energy 2022;187:484–99. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2022.01.104.

[120] Li X, Dai YJ, Wang RZ. Performance investigation on solar thermal conversion of
a conical cavity receiver employing a beam-down solar tower concentrator. Sol
Energy 2015;114:134–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.01.033.

[121] Li X, Lin M, Dai Y, Wang C-H. Comparison-based optical assessment of

hyperboloid and ellipsoid reflectors in a beam-down solar tower system with
linear Fresnel heliostats. J Sol Energy Eng 2017;139. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.4037742.

[122] Dai Y, Li X, Zhou L, Ma X, Wang R. Comparison-based optical study on a point-
line-coupling-focus system with linear Fresnel heliostats. Opt Express, OE 2016;
24:A966–73. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.24.00A966.

[123] Chen YT, Ho TH. Design method of non-imaging secondary (NIS) for CPV usage.
Sol Energy 2013;93:32–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2013.03.013.
[124] Oh SJ, Kim H, Hong Y. Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulation of a cassegrain solar

concentrator module for CPV. Front Energy Res 2021;9.

[125] Burhan M, Chua KJE, Ng KC. Simulation and development of a multi-leg

homogeniser concentrating assembly for concentrated photovoltaic (CPV) system
with electrical rating analysis. Energy Convers Manag 2016;116:58–71. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.02.060.

[126] Burhan M, Shahzad MW, Ng KC. Long-term performance potential of

concentrated photovoltaic (CPV) systems. Energy Convers Manag 2017;148:90–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.05.072.

[127] Shanks K, Baig H, Singh NP, Senthilarasu S, Reddy KS, Mallick TK. Prototype
fabrication and experimental investigation of a conjugate refractive reflective
homogeniser in a cassegrain concentrator. Sol Energy 2017;142:97–108. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.11.038.

[128] Venegas-Reyes E, Ortega-Avila N, Pe ̃na-Cruz MI, García-Ortiz OJ, Rodríguez-
Mu ̃noz NA. A linear hybrid concentrated photovoltaic solar collector: a
methodology proposal of optical and thermal analysis. Energies 2021;14:8155.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14238155.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108538

E. Bellos

[129] Ansari E, Akhtar MN, Othman WAFW, Abu Bakar E, Alhady SSN. Numerical

investigation of thermal efficiency of a solar cell. Appl Sci 2022;12:10887.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app122110887.

[130] Siah Chehreh Ghadikolaei S. An enviroeconomic review of the solar PV cells

cooling technology effect on the CO2 emission reduction. Sol Energy 2021;216:
468–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.01.016.

[131] Said Z, Arora S, Bellos E. A review on performance and environmental effects of
conventional and nanofluid-based thermal photovoltaics. Renew Sustain Energy
Rev 2018;94:302–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.06.010.

[132] Atkin P, Farid MM. Improving the efficiency of photovoltaic cells using PCM

infused graphite and aluminium fins. Sol Energy 2015;114:217–28. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.01.037.

[133] Hong W, Li B, Li H, Niu X, Li Y, Lan J. Recent progress in thermal energy recovery
from the decoupled photovoltaic/thermal system equipped with spectral splitters.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;167:112824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2022.112824.

[134] Kumar S, Thakur R, Singhy A, Tripathi RK, Sethi M. A review of heat removal

mechanism in concentrated PVT systems using beam splitter. Mater Today Proc
2022;50:952–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.06.355.

[135] Mojiri A, Taylor R, Thomsen E, Rosengarten G. Spectral beam splitting for

efficient conversion of solar energy—a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;
28:654–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.026.

[136] Liang H, Wang F, Yang L, Cheng Z, Shuai Y, Tan H. Progress in full spectrum solar
energy utilization by spectral beam splitting hybrid PV/T system. Renew Sustain
Energy Rev 2021;141:110785. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.110785.

[137] Liang H, Han H, Wang F, Cheng Z, Lin B, Pan Y, et al. Experimental investigation

on nanofluid. Energy Convers Manag 2022;258:115531. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enconman.2022.115531.

[154] Zhu T, Li Q, Xuan Y, Liu D, Hong H. Performance investigation of a hybrid
photovoltaics and mid-temperature methanol thermochemistry system. Appl
Energy 2019;256:113908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113908.

[155] Zhu T, Li Q. A novel spectrum allocation method in the photovoltaic-

thermochemical hybrid solar system. J Power Sources 2021;513:230541. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230541.

[156] Zhu T, Li Q, Yu A. Analysis of the solar spectrum allocation in a spectral-splitting
photovoltaic-thermochemical hybrid system. Sol Energy 2022;232:63–72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.12.022.

[157] Wang Y, Li Q, Li D, Hong H. Thermodynamic analysis for a concentrating

photovoltaic-photothermochemical hybrid system. Energy 2018;148:528–36.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.01.182.

[158] Liu Y, Hu P, Zhang Q, Chen Z. Thermodynamic and optical analysis for a CPV/T
hybrid system with beam splitter and fully tracked linear Fresnel reflector
concentrator utilizing sloped panels. Sol Energy 2014;103:191–9. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.01.047.

[159] Delkasar Maher S, Sarvghad M, Olivares R, Ong T-C, Will G, Steinberg TA. Critical

components in supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle power blocks for solar power
systems: degradation mechanisms and failure consequences. Sol Energy Mater Sol
Cell 2022;242:111768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2022.111768.
[160] Miron G, Reich E, Kagan J, Segal A. Calorimetric measurements of the input

power into a 500 kW high concentration solar energy volumetric receiver.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection; 2008. p. 63–73.
https://doi.org/10.1115/ISEC2006-99119.

on spectral splitting of photovoltaic/thermal hybrid system with two-axis sun
tracking based on SiO2/TiO2 interference thin film. Energy Convers Manag 2019;
188:230–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2019.03.060.

[161] Ndiaye A, Thiam A, Mbow C, Stouffs P, Azilinon D. Preliminary study of a small

beam-down solar tower on sub-Saharan countries. AIP Conf Proc 2016;1734:
070021. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4949168.

[138] Hu P, Zhang Q, Liu Y, Sheng C, Cheng X, Chen Z. Optical analysis of a hybrid solar
concentrating Photovoltaic/Thermal (CPV/T) system with beam splitting
technique. Sci China Technol Sci 2013;56:1387–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11431-013-5209-2.

[162] Kribus A, Zaibel R, Carey D, Segal A, Karni J. A solar-driven combined cycle

power plant. Sol Energy 1998;62:121–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X
(97)00107-2.

[163] Yogev A, Kribus A, Epstein M, Kogan A. Solar “tower reflector” systems: a new

[139] Terui H, Kobayashi M. Refractive-index-adjustable SiO2-Ta2O5 films for

integrated optical circuits. Appl Phys Lett 1978;32:666–8. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.89848.

[140] Crisostomo F, Taylor RA, Surjadi D, Mojiri A, Rosengarten G, Hawkes ER. Spectral
splitting strategy and optical model for the development of a concentrating hybrid
PV/T collector. Appl Energy 2015;141:238–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2014.12.044.

[141] Wang G, Yao Y, Chen Z, Hu P. Thermodynamic and optical analyses of a hybrid
solar CPV/T system with high solar concentrating uniformity based on spectral
beam splitting technology. Energy 2019;166:256–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2018.10.089.

[142] Zhang JJ, Qu ZG, Zhang JF. MCRT-FDTD investigation of the solar-plasmonic-

electrical conversion for uniform irradiation in a spectral splitting CPVT system.
Appl Energy 2022;315:119054. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2022.119054.

[143] Zhang C, Shen C, Zhang Y, Pu J. Feasibility investigation of spectral splitting

photovoltaic/thermal systems for domestic space heating. Renew Energy 2022;
192:231–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2022.04.126.

[144] Hao X, Shan S, Gao N, Chen G, Wang Q, Gu T. Performance analysis of a novel

combined cooling, heating and power system with solar energy spectral beam
splitting. Energy Convers Manag 2023;276:116500. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2022.116500.

[145] Imenes AG, Buie D, McKenzie D. The design of broadband, wide-angle

interference filters for solar concentrating systems. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell
2006;90:1579–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2005.08.007.

[146] Imenes AG, Buie D, Mills DR, Schramek P, Bosi SG. A new strategy for improved
spectral performance in solar power plants. Sol Energy 2006;80:1263–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2005.04.021.

[147] Segal A, Epstein M, Yogev A. Hybrid concentrated photovoltaic and thermal
power conversion at different spectral bands. Sol Energy 2004;76:591–601.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2003.12.002.

[148] Houcine A, Maatallah T, Saeed F. Steam and electrical power generation by a

hybrid photovoltaic/parabolic dish concentrator using beam splitter technology.
Int J Energy Res 2022;46:12341–61. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.8000.
[149] Hu Y, Zhang L, Zhang H, Lv H, Xu C. Thermodynamic analysis of a spectral-

splitting hybrid PV-thermal system with LiBr/H2O absorption heat transformer.
Energy Convers Manag 2021;249:114868. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2021.114868.

[150] Mohammadnia A, Rezania A, Ziapour BM, Sedaghati F, Rosendahl L. Hybrid
energy harvesting system to maximize power generation from solar energy.
Energy Convers Manag 2020;205:112352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2019.112352.

[151] Wang K, Pantaleo AM, Herrando M, Faccia M, Pesmazoglou I, Franchetti BM,

et al. Spectral-splitting hybrid PV-thermal (PVT) systems for combined heat and
power provision to dairy farms. Renew Energy 2020;159:1047–65. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.05.120.

[152] Zhang JJ, Qu ZG, Wang Q, Zhang JF, He YL. Multiscale investigation of the

plasmonic solar cell in the spectral splitting concentrating photovoltaic-thermal
system. Energy Convers Manag 2021;250:114846. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enconman.2021.114846.

[153] Lin J, Liu S, Ju X, Xu C, Ju X, Liu H. Investigation of two-stage concentrating

splitting photovoltaic/thermal system with a flexible heat-electricity ratio based

approach for high-temperature solar plants. Int J Hydrogen Energy 1998;23:
239–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-3199(97)00059-1.

[164] Segal A, Epstein M. Optimized working temperatures of a solar central receiver.

Sol Energy 2003;75:503–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2003.08.036.
[165] Tavakolpour-Saleh AR, Hamzavi A, Omidvar A. A novel solar-powered self-

blowing air heating system with active control based on a quasi-Stirling cycle.
Energy 2021;227:120454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.120454.
[166] Stirling R. Stirling air engine and the heat regenerator. US Patent 1816;4081:16.
[167] Singh UR, Kumar A. Review on solar Stirling engine: development and

performance. Therm Sci Eng Prog 2018;8:244–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tsep.2018.08.016.

[168] Wardhana AS, Suryoatmojo H, Ashari M. Design of parabolic solar concentrator to
improve the optical efficiency for thermal engine generator using dual reflector
Gregorian method. 2016 International Seminar on Intelligent Technology and its
Applications. ISITIA); 2016. p. 457–64. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ISITIA.2016.7828704.

[169] Zhang Y, Luo Z, Xiao G, Ni M. Characteristics of a novel solar dish system. Spring
Congress on Engineering and Technology; 2012. p. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/
SCET.2012.6342111. 2012.

[170] Wardhana AS, Suryoatmojo H, Ashari M. Optimization of heat flux distribution on
dual parabolic dish for Stirling engine applications. In: International conference
on sustainable energy engineering and application. ICSEEA); 2016. p. 6–11.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSEEA.2016.7873559. 2016.

[171] A dielectric multilayer filter for combining photovoltaics with a stirling engine for
improvement of the efficiency of solar electricity generation. Chin Phys Lett 2011;
28:128402. https://doi.org/10.1088/0256-307X/28/12/128402.

[172] Mohammadnia A, Ziapour BM. Investigation effect of a spectral beam splitter on
performance of a hybrid CPV/Stirling/TEG solar power system. Appl Therm Eng
2020;180:115799. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.115799.

[173] Matsubara K, Sakai H, Kazuma Y, Sakurai A, Kodama T, Gokon N, et al. Numerical
modeling of a two-tower type fluidized receiver for high temperature solar
concentration by a beam-down reflector system. Energy Proc 2015;69:487–96.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.057.

[174] Tregambi C, Chirone R, Montagnaro F, Salatino P, Solimene R. Heat transfer in
directly irradiated fluidized beds. Sol Energy 2016;129:85–100. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.solener.2016.01.057.

[175] Kodama T, Gokon N, Cho HS, Matsubara K, Etori T, Takeuchi A, et al. Particles
fluidized bed receiver/reactor with a beam-down solar concentrating optics: 30-
kWth performance test using a big sun-simulator. AIP Conf Proc 2016;1734:
120004. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4949206.

[176] Kodama T, Gokon N, Cho HS, Matsubara K, Kaneko H, Senuma K, et al. Particles
fluidized bed receiver/reactor tests with quartz sand particles using a 100-kWth
beam-down solar concentrating system at Miyazaki. AIP Conf Proc 2017;1850:
100012. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4984469.

[177] Díaz-Heras M, Barreneche C, Belmonte JF, Calder ́on A, Fern ́andez AI, Almendros-

Ib ́a ̃nez JA. Experimental study of different materials in fluidized beds with a
beam-down solar reflector for CSP applications. Sol Energy 2020;211:683–99.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.07.011.

[178] Díaz-Heras M, Moya JD, Belmonte JF, C ́orcoles-Tendero JI, Molina AE,

Almendros-Ib ́a ̃nez JA. CSP on fluidized particles with a beam-down reflector:
comparative study of different fluidization technologies. Sol Energy 2020;200:
76–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.09.006.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108539

E. Bellos

[179] Díaz-Heras M, Belmonte JF, Almendros-Ib ́a ̃nez JA. Experimental observations on
directly irradiated fluidized beds: even and uneven fluidization. Exp Therm Fluid
Sci 2021;120:110242. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2020.110242.

[180] Díaz-Heras M, Belmonte JF, Almendros-Ib ́a ̃nez JA. Experimental observations on

directly irradiated conical spouted and spout-fluid beds. Exp Therm Fluid Sci
2022;130:110488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2021.110488.
[181] Bellan S, Matsubara K, Cho HS, Gokon N, Kodama T. A CFD-DEM study of

hydrodynamics with heat transfer in a gas-solid fluidized bed reactor for solar
thermal applications. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;116:377–92. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.09.015.

[182] Bellan S, Kodama T, Matsubara K, Gokon N, Cho HS, Inoue K. Thermal

performance of a 30 kW fluidized bed reactor for solar gasification: a CFD-DEM
study. Chem Eng J 2019;360:1287–300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2018.10.111.

[183] Seo SB, Ahn H, Go ES, Ling LJJ, Siambun NJ, Park Y-K, et al. Evaluation of the
solar thermal storage of fluidized bed materials for hybrid solar thermo-chemical
processes. Biomass Conv Bioref; 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13399-022-
02609-8.

[184] G ́omez-Hern ́andez J, Gonz ́alez-G ́omez PA, Briongos JV, Santana D. Technical

feasibility analysis of a linear particle solar receiver. Sol Energy 2020;195:
102–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.11.052.

[185] Taramona S, G ́omez-Hern ́andez J, Briongos JV, Santana D. Designing a lab-scale
vibrating solar receiver for a linear beam-down solar field. AIP Conf Proc 2022;
2445:100006. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0085755.

[186] Ravi SS, Aziz M. Clean hydrogen for mobility – Quo vadis? Int J Hydrogen Energy

2022;47:20632–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.04.158.
[187] Boretti A. Technology readiness level of solar thermochemical splitting cycles.

ACS Energy Lett 2021;6:1170–4. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsenergylett.1c00181.

[188] Liu W, Wan Y, Xiong Y, Gao P. Green hydrogen standard in China: standard and
evaluation of low-carbon hydrogen, clean hydrogen, and renewable hydrogen. Int
J Hydrogen Energy 2022;47:24584–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2021.10.193.

[189] Steinfeld A. Solar hydrogen production via a two-step water-splitting

thermochemical cycle based on Zn/ZnO redox reactions. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2002;27:611–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-3199(01)00177-X.

[190] Pullar RC, Novais RM, Caetano APF, Barreiros MA, Abanades S, Oliveira FAC.

A review of solar thermochemical CO2 splitting using ceria-based ceramics with
designed morphologies and microstructures. Front Chem 2019;7.

[191] Scheffe JR, Li J, Weimer AW. A spinel ferrite/hercynite water-splitting redox

cycle. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:3333–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2010.01.140.

[192] Jiang Q, Tong J, Zhou G, Jiang Z, Li Z, Li C. Thermochemical CO2 splitting

reaction with supported LaxA1(cid:0) xFeyB1(cid:0) yO3 (A=Sr, Ce, B=Co, Mn; 0⩽x, y⩽1)
perovskite oxides. Sol Energy 2014;103:425–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2014.02.033.

[193] Sch ̈appi R, Rutz D, D ̈ahler F, Muroyama A, Haueter P, Lilliestam J, et al. Drop-in

fuels from sunlight and air. Nature 2022;601:63–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-021-04174-y.

[194] Koepf E, Advani SG, Steinfeld A, Prasad AK. A novel beam-down, gravity-fed,
solar thermochemical receiver/reactor for direct solid particle decomposition:
design, modeling, and experimentation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:
16871–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.08.086.

[195] Marxer D, Furler P, Takacs M, Steinfeld A. Solar thermochemical splitting of CO2

into separate streams of CO and O2 with high selectivity, stability, conversion,
and efficiency. Energy Environ Sci 2017;10:1142–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C6EE03776C.

[196] Zoller S. A 50 kW solar thermochemical reactor for syngas production utilizing
porous ceria structures. In: Doctoral thesis. ETH Zurich; 2020. https://doi.org/
10.3929/ethz-b-000426499.

[197] Yang S, Li L, Wang B, Li S, Wang J, Lund P, et al. Thermodynamic analysis of a

conceptual fixed-bed solar thermochemical cavity receiver–reactor array for
water splitting via ceria redox cycling. Front Energy Res 2021;9.

[198] Kodama T, Gokon N, Cho HS, Bellan S, Matsubara K, Inoue K. Particle fluidized
bed receiver/reactor with a beam-down solar concentrating optics: performance
test of two-step water splitting with ceria particles using 30-kWth sun-simulator.
AIP Conf Proc 2018;2033:130009. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5067143.

[199] Kodama T, Cho HS, Inoue K, Saito T, Watanabe S, Gokon N, et al. Particles

fluidized bed receiver/reactor with a beam-down solar concentrating optics: first
performance test on two-step water splitting with ceria using a Miyazaki solar
concentrating system. AIP Conf Proc 2019;2126:180011. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.5117691.

[200] Segal A, Epstein M. Solar ground reformer. Sol Energy 2003;75:479–90. https://

doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2003.09.005.

[201] Boujjat H, Yuki Junior GM, Rodat S, Abanades S. Dynamic simulation and control
of solar biomass gasification for hydrogen-rich syngas production during
allothermal and hybrid solar/autothermal operation. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2020;45:25827–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.01.072.

[202] Ma C, Zhou Y, Wang J, Li X. Numerical study on solar spouted bed reactor for
conversion of biomass into hydrogen-rich gas by steam gasification. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2020;45:33136–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2020.09.120.

[203] Wieckert C, Tzouganatos N, Steinfeld A. Development of a 5 kWth windowless
packed-bed reactor for high-temperature solar thermochemical processing. AIP
Conf Proc 2018;2033:130016. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5067150.

[204] Koepf EE, Advani SG, Prasad AK, Steinfeld A. Experimental investigation of the
carbothermal reduction of ZnO using a beam-down, gravity-fed solar reactor. Ind
Eng Chem Res 2015;54:8319–32. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.5b01249.

[205] Osinga T, Frommherz U, Steinfeld A, Wieckert C. Experimental investigation of
the solar carbothermic reduction of ZnO using a two-cavity solar reactor. J Sol
Energy Eng 2004;126:633–7. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1639001.
[206] Wieckert C, Frommherz U, Kr ̈aupl S, Guillot E, Olalde G, Epstein M, et al.

A 300kW solar chemical pilot plant for the carbothermic production of zinc. J Sol
Energy Eng 2006;129:190–6. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2711471.
[207] Yadav D, Banerjee R. A comparative life cycle energy and carbon emission

analysis of the solar carbothermal and hydrometallurgy routes for zinc
production. Appl Energy 2018;229:577–602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2018.08.001.

[208] Roy JS, Morency S, Messaddeq Y. Ultrafast cleaning of methylene blue

contaminated water accelarating photocatalytic reaction rate of the BiVO4
nanoflakes under highly intense sunlight irradiation. J Photochem Photobiol, A
2021;7:100037. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpap.2021.100037.

[209] Briongos JV, Taramona S, G ́omez-Hern ́andez J, Mulone V, Santana D. Solar and
biomass hybridization through hydrothermal carbonization. Renew Energy 2021;
177:268–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.05.146.

[210] Martins M, Villalobos U, Delclos T, Armstrong P, Bergan PG, Calvet N. New

concentrating solar power facility for testing high temperature concrete thermal
energy storage. Energy Proc 2015;75:2144–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egypro.2015.07.350.

[211] AlQaydi M, Delclos T, AlMheiri S, Calvet N. Effect of sand and method of mixing

on molten salt properties for an open direct absorption solar receiver/storage
system. AIP Conf Proc 2017;1850:080002. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4984423.

[212] Iniesta AC, Diago M, Delclos T, Falcoz Q, Shamim T, Calvet N. Gravity-fed

combined solar receiver/storage system using sand particles as heat collector,
heat transfer and thermal energy storage media. Energy Proc 2015;69:802–11.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.089.

[213] Yang S, Wang J, Lund PD, Jiang C, Li X. Modelling and performance evaluation of
an integrated receiver-storage for concentrating solar power beam-down system
under heterogeneous radiative conditions. Sol Energy 2019;188:1264–73.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.07.031.

[214] Kiwan S, Soud QR. Numerical investigation of sand-basalt heat storage system for
beam-down solar concentrators. Case Stud Therm Eng 2019;13:100372. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2018.100372.

[215] Kiwan S, Soud QR. Experimental investigation of the thermal performance of a
sand-basalt heat storage system for beam-down solar concentrators. Case Stud
Therm Eng 2020;19:100609. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2020.100609.

[216] Yang S, Wang J, Lund PD, Jiang C, Li X. High performance integrated receiver-

storage system for concentrating solar power beam-down system. Sol Energy
2019;187:85–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.05.041.

[217] Gentile N, Lee ES, Osterhaus W, Altomonte S, Naves David Amorim C, Ciampi G,

et al. Evaluation of integrated daylighting and electric lighting design projects:
lessons learned from international case studies. Energy Build 2022;268:112191.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2022.112191.

[218] Song D, Lv H, Liao J, Huang W, Huang S, Cheng C, et al. Evaluation of a large

dish-type concentrator solar lighting system for underground car park. Int J
Energy Res 2018;42:2234–45. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.4017.

[219] Kandilli C, Külahlı G. Performance analysis of a concentrated solar energy for
lighting-power generation combined system based on spectral beam splitting.
Renew Energy 2017;101:713–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2016.09.032.

[220] Kandilli C. Exergoeconomic analysis of a novel concentrated solar energy for
lighting-power generation combined system based on spectral beam splitting.
IJEX 2016;21:239. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJEX.2016.078927.

[221] Roy JS, Morency S, Dugas G, Messaddeq Y. Development of an extremely

concentrated solar energy delivery system using silica optical fiber bundle for
deployment of solar energy: daylighting to photocatalytic wastewater treatment.
Sol Energy 2021;214:93–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.11.061.

[222] Li T, Yuan C. An optimal design analysis of a novel parabolic trough lighting and
thermal system. Int J Energy Res 2016;40:1193–206. https://doi.org/10.1002/
er.3505.

[223] Segal A, Epstein M. Modeling of solar receiver for cracking of liquid petroleum

gas. J Sol Energy Eng 1997;119:48–51. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2871832.

[224] Patidar D, Tiwari S, Sharma P, Pardeshi R, Chandra L, Shekhar R. Solar convective
furnace for metals processing. JOM 2015;67:2696–704. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11837-015-1633-z.

[225] Nakakura M, Ohtake M, Matsubara K, Yoshida K, Cho HS, Kodama T, et al.

Development of a receiver evaluation system using 30 kWth point concentration
solar simulator. Energy Proc 2015;69:497–505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egypro.2015.03.058.

[226] Nakakura M, Matsubara K, Cho H-S, Kodama T, Gokon N, Bellan S, et al.

Buoyancy-opposed volumetric solar receiver with beam-down optics irradiation.
Energy 2017;141:2337–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.11.147.
[227] Lorfing D, Ahmadi A, Laborie S, Olives R, Falcoz Q, Py X, et al. Energy and

environmental performance of a new solar boiler with heat recovery for seawater
desalination. Sustain Prod Consum 2022;32:330–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
spc.2022.05.001.

[228] Shao S, Zhu X, Fan Y. A study on cosine efficiency in a tower reflector solar power
system. 2019 Chinese automation congress. CAC); 2019. p. 4224–7. https://doi.
org/10.1109/CAC48633.2019.8996808.

[229] Miller S. To beam or not to beam down. In: Proceedings of SWC2017/SHC2017.

Abu Dhabi: International Solar Energy Society; 2017. p. 1–12. https://doi.org/
10.18086/swc.2017.04.11.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108540

E. Bellos

[230] Mutuberria A, S ́anchez M, Testani C, Fernandez J, Rinaldi A, Moya EZ. Challenges

and handicaps on the design of an efficient beam-down system at an existing
heliostat field layout. In: IEEE international conference on environment and
electrical engineering and 2020 IEEE industrial and commercial power systems
Europe. EEEIC/I&CPS Europe); 2020. p. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/EEEIC/
ICPSEurope49358.2020.9160816. 2020.

[231] Ben-Zvi R, Segal A, Epstein M. Beam-down mirror: thermal and stress analyses.

J Sol Energy Eng 2009;131. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3197536.

[232] Lahlou R, Armstrong PR, Calvet N, Shamim T. Reflectance degradation of a

secondary concentrator by nitrate salt vapor deposition in an open volumetric
receiver configuration. AIP Conf Proc 2017;1850:130006. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.4984500.

[233] Vant-Hull L. Issues with beam-down concepts. Energy Proc 2014;49:257–64.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.028.

Dr. Evangelos Bellos is a postdoctoral researcher in the School
of Mechanical Engineering at the National Technical Univer-
sity  of  Athens,  Greece  and  he  is  also  a  research  associate  in
CERTH, Greece. He has a total 11-year of research experience
and he has participated in national and internal research pro-
jects.  His  research  interest  includes  solar  energy,  solar
concentrating  collectors  and  relative  applications  with  an
emphasis  on  heating,  cooling  and  electricity  production  sys-
tems. Dr. Bellos has published about 190 Journal papers and
several papers in conference proceedings. His h-index accord-
ing to Scopus is equal to 53 (8000 citations) and according to
Google  Scholar  to  61  (10000  citations).  He  has  gained
numerous  national  and  international  awards  throughout  his
career.  Moreover,  he  has  been  included  in  the  top  2%  of  the  scientists  with  the  most
influential work for 2019, 2020 and 2021 according to the published lists from Elsevier
and the University of Stanford.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108541
