Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Tire pyrolysis char: Processes, properties, upgrading and applications 

Ningbo Gao a, *,1, Fengchao Wang a, 1, Cui Quan a, Laura Santamaria b, Gartzen Lopez b,c, 
Paul T. Williams d, * 
a Xi’an International Joint Research Center on Solid Waste Recycling and Utilization, Xi’an Key Laboratory of Solid Waste Recycling and Resource Recovery, School of 
Energy and Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China 
b Department of Chemical Engineering, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, P.O. Box 644 E48080, Bilbao, Spain 
c IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain 
d School of Chemical & Process Engineering, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Waste tire 
Pyrolysis 
Tire char 
Modification method 
Tire char application 

Waste tires are solid wastes with large annual output and with the potential for great harm to the environment. 
The pyrolysis of waste tires can recycle energy and produce reusable products. Although there are many reviews 
in the literature in regard to the pyrolysis characteristics of waste tires, no one paper focuses on reviewing and 
summarizing the tire char. This paper critically appraises the achievements of earlier reports and literature and 
assesses the current state-of-the-art for the production and application of tire char from waste tires. Initially, the 
thermal decomposition behavior of different tire rubbers is discussed and compared where it is shown that the 
different components of waste tire  rubber have different thermal degradation characteristics. The influencing 
factors on the yield and quality of tire char are discussed and assessed in terms of different pyrolysis reactors and 
technologies,  tire  type  and  composition,  and  a  range  of  pyrolysis  process  conditions.  The  composition  of  the 
waste tire and pyrolysis conditions are the main factors affecting the distribution of pyrolysis products. Pyrolysis 
technology and reactor equipment also have an effect on the distribution of pyrolysis products. The physical and 
chemical structural characteristics of tire char are critically reviewed in detail, including a comparison of the 
fundamental differences with commercial carbon black and modified tire char (physical activation and chemical 
activation).  Finally,  high-value  application  fields  and  developmental  prospects  of  tire  char  are  summarized. 
Through extensive literature review, a novel development was that tire char could be used as a source of gra-
phene. The economic analysis of the various tire char applications should be one of the main research directions 
in the future. The keynote of this review is to promote intensification of waste tire recycling and treatment so that 
more tire char can be obtained from waste tire pyrolysis and thereby be reused in different applications to obtain 
more value.   

1. Introduction 

The  rapid  development  of  the  automobile  and  transportation  in-
dustries has led to a sharp increase in the annual output of waste tires 
[1–4]. It is estimated that more than 3 billion tires are produced each 
year with an expectation of continuing market demand growth of over 
4% [5]. Inevitably, there will also be billions of end-of-life waste tires 
produced,  requiring  waste  management,  treatment,  and  disposal  [6]. 
Stockpiling and improper disposal of waste tires causes problems to the 
environment through providing sites for vermin or breeding grounds for 
insects and the potential of fire hazard of large tire dumps (Fig. 1). 

Material recovery options for waste tires include recycling as rubber 
[7,8] and rubber particles [9,10] for use as rubber flooring for sports 
fields  and  playgrounds  and  their  use  as  civil  engineering  application 
materials  [11]. The treatment and  disposal methods  applied to waste 
tires in some countries also includes disposal in waste landfill [12,13]. 
However, waste tires do not readily degrade in landfills because of the 
presence of strong cross-linking of sulfur bonds and rubber in the tire 
rubber formulation [14,15]. Therefore, there is a recent impetus to find 
more  sustainable  and  higher  value  resource-recovery  options  for  the 
treatment of waste tires. 

Pyrolysis is a promising method of recycling, and energy and fuels 

* Corresponding authors. 

E-mail addresses: nbogao@xjtu.edu.cn (N. Gao), P.T.Williams@leeds.ac.uk (P.T. Williams).   

1  These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101022 
Received 3 September 2021; Received in revised form 8 June 2022; Accepted 8 June 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101022Availableonline2September20220360-1285/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

development  of  catalytic  pyrolysis  has  been  explored  to  increase  the 
selection of high-value chemicals such as benzene, toluene, and xylenes 
(BTX).  However,  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  different  supported  noble 
metals such as Ni, Co, Pd and Pt showed different catalytic performances 
[39,40]. Thus, improving the quality of pyrolysis products is the main 
challenge  for  the  full-scale  development  of  the  waste  tire  pyrolysis 
process. It has been reported that several industrial-scale tire pyrolysis 
projects  have  not  reached  full  commercial  success  due  to  the  limited 
value of the obtained products [41]. 

A bibliometric analysis reveals the increasing attention to waste tire 
valorization by pyrolysis in recent literature with more than 1700 papers 
published since the year 2000. The search term “tire pyrolysis”  in the 
search fields of, “title, abstract, and keywords” were performed using the 
Scopus database. Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the number of published 
papers dealing with tire pyrolysis and the number of citations received 
by these papers in the Scopus database. As observed, since 2000, the 
number of papers published per year has increased by 8 times. Along the 
same line, the increase of the impact of this topic in scientific literature is 
even  more  remarkable,  currently  reaching  more  than  6000  citations 
(cid:0) 1. The total number of citations is more than 38,000 with a high 
year
index of 90, which evidences the great interest of this tire valorization 
route in the scientific community. 

China  has  the  highest  contribution  to  the  tire  pyrolysis  literature 
followed by Spain, the United States, India, and United Kingdom. Fig. 4a 
shows  the  distribution  of  the  most  active  countries  in  tire  pyrolysis 
research. Tire pyrolysis studies were mainly published in Chemical En-
gineering and Energy and Fuels journals. The leading journal in this field 
is the Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis with more than 110 
papers (6.5% of the total number of published papers), followed by Fuel 
(5.1%), Waste Management (3.3%), Energy and Fuels (2.5%) and Fuel 
Processing  Technology  (2.1%).  A  detailed  distribution  of  the  leading 
journals publishing tire pyrolysis research articles is shown in Fig. 4b. 
The most active research group in this field is that headed by Prof. 
Martin Olazar from the University of the Basque Country. Other groups 
with significant contributions to tire pyrolysis research are those led by 
Prof. Christian Roy (Universit´e Laval), Prof. Paul Williams (Leeds Uni-
versity), and Prof. Ram´on Murillo (Instituto de Carboquímica Zaragoza). 
Early literature has reported a great deal of information about the 
various  applications  of  waste  tires  and  there  are  several  reviews  on 
waste tire pyrolysis. For example, a detailed review on recycling waste 
tire  rubber  and  associated  environmental  considerations  have  been 
presented [42]. The overviews of the properties and utilization of waste 
tire rubber in concrete were also reported [43,44]. It was also reported 
that  the  recycling  methods  of  waste  tires,  the  influence  of  pyrolysis 
conditions  on  tire  pyrolysis  products,  and  the  application  of  the 

Fig. 1. The harm of waste tires on the environment.  

recovery in the field of waste tire treatment, which could meet the three 
principles of solid waste treatment: reduction, resource recovery, and 
mitigation of pollutants. Compared with other treatment methods (i.e. 
combustion [16,17], retread, and landfill [18,19]), using pyrolysis as a 
recovery method has been widely researched since it results in reduced 
secondary pollution of the environment and the potential for the higher 
economic value of products. The pyrolysis process degrades the organic 
components  of  waste  tires  to  obtain  gases,  condensable  oil  [20],  and 
solid  char  [21,22].  Accordingly,  the  transformation  of  waste  tires  to 
alternative  fuels  allows  for  reduced  use  of  conventional  fossil  fuels, 
therefore, waste tire pyrolysis has been demonstrated to be a feasible 
way to indirectly reduce greenhouse gas emissions [23]. In addition, the 
steel reinforcement of the tire can be recovered from the residual char 
for recycling back into the iron and steel industry [22,25]. 

Pyrolysis technology has developed and matured enough over time 
to  be  regarded  as  a  rapid  and  efficient  treatment  option  to  solve  the 
environmental problems caused by waste tires. The steel, rubber, carbon 
black, additives, and other materials contained in the waste tire may be 
recovered and almost no waste by-products are produced from the py-
rolysis process [24]. Fig. 2 illustrates the products and by-products from 
waste  tire  pyrolysis.  With  proper  processing  and  modification,  for 
example through pyrolysis oil and gas treatment, reforming of product 
volatiles [25], chemical impregnation modification of char [26], char 
activation by steam [27] or CO2  [28], the pyrolysis products could be 
used as fuel gas or fuel oil [29,30], a rubber reinforcement agent [31, 
32], pollutant adsorbent [33], high-value chemicals [34,35], and other 
resource materials [36]. 

The main product obtained from tire pyrolysis under mild conditions 
is pyrolysis oil, however, its direct utilization as a fuel oil is conditioned 
by  high  sulfur  content  and  composition  [37,38].  In  this  respect,  the 

Fig. 2. The pyrolysis products of waste tires.  

Fig.  3. Evolution  of  the  paper  number  of  tire  pyrolysis  published  and  their 
impact in the 2000 to 2021 period. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010222N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Fig. 4. Top countries in tire pyrolysis research (more than 40 contributions), 4a, and leading indexed scientific journals (more than 15 publications) (4b).  

pyrolysis products (oil, gas, and char) [45]. The influence of different 
reactor types on the efficiency and proportions of waste tire pyrolysis 
products  has  been  discussed  [46].  Though  the  waste  tire  pyrolysis 
technology and product applications were summarized [21], the appli-
cations  of  tire  char  were not  comprehensively covered.  Arabiourrutia 
et al. [47] analyzed the latest advances in waste tire valorization using 
catalytic  pyrolysis  with  a  special  focus  on  catalysts,  reaction  mecha-
nisms, and product properties. Although various authors have reviewed 
waste tire treatment in terms of waste tire recycling methods, pyrolysis 
technology,  and  pyrolysis  products  application,  none  of  their  work 
included an in-depth review of tire pyrolysis char and did not include 
suggestions for further research areas on the topic. 

Tire char is one of the main pyrolysis products obtained from waste 
tires, whose economic value is a vital factor to determine the continued 
development  of  the  commercialization  of  waste  tire  pyrolysis  [48]. 
Many studies have reported on improving the quality and application of 
tire  char.  Based  on  these  previous  studies,  this  paper  provides  a 
comprehensive and critical review of waste tire derived char and aims to 
promote the development of this technology from the following aspects: 
(1) the waste tire pyrolysis principle; (2) the main factors affecting the 
properties of tire char; (3) the physical and chemical characteristics of 
tire char; (4) the modification and high-value applications of tire char; 
(5) the developments and future trends in the research and development 
of tire char. In particular, this paper discusses the thermo-gravimetric 
analysis  of  different  waste  tire  rubbers;  a  comprehensive  comparison 
of influencing factors (pyrolysis reactor, pyrolysis technology, pyrolysis 
conditions, tire type, and composition) on the yield and quality of tire 
char; the physical/chemical characteristics of tire char and commercial 
carbon black are discussed and compared; a discussion on the advan-
tages and disadvantages of different modification methods of tire char; 
reviewing the use of tire char as adsorbents, catalysts and supporting 
materials, reinforcing agent and storage materials. 

2. Properties of waste tire 

2.1. Tire type and composition 

According to the various requirements and working environment of 
tires  (long-distance,  load,  and  pressure)  and  environmental  re-
quirements (road quality, temperature, humidity), the compositions of 
tires can be very different. Waste tires can be simply classified as light 
vehicle tires (LVT), medium vehicle tires (MVT), and heavy vehicle tires 
(HVT). A large proportion of natural rubber (NR) exists in LVT (bicycle 
tires), the highest proportion of styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) is found 
in MVT (car tires) and  a high proportion  of butadiene rubber (BR) is 
present in HVT (truck tires) [49]. The exact composition of tires depends 
on brand [50] and type [51]. In MVT (car tires) and HVT (truck tires), 
the amount of carbon black present could reach 28 wt. %, which is much 
higher  than  that  of  only  11  wt.  %  in  LVT  (bicycle  tires)  [52].  Many 

various 

(TG-DSC) 

Pyrolysis-Gas 

Chromatography-Mass 

(Thermal 
analytical  methods 
using 
attempts 
Infrared  Spectrometry  (TG-FTIR) 
Gravimetric-Fourier  Transform 
[53–55], 
Spectrometry 
(Py-GC/MS)  [56,57],  Thermogravimetric-Differential  Scanning  Calo-
rimetry 
[58],  Thermogravimetric-Mass  Spectrometry 
(TG-MS), etc.) have been implemented in the field of the determination 
of the composition of waste tire rubber. Danon et al. [59] have deter-
mined  and  identified  the  rubber  composition  of  waste  tires  using 
de-volatilization kinetics. Tire rubber mainly includes mixtures of NR, 
BR, synthetic rubber (SR), and SBR. Other tire composition results have 
also been reported by other researchers [55,57,60,61]. 

In addition to the different types of rubber, a typical tire also contains 
carbon  black,  metals,  textiles,  and  additives  (silica,  vulcanization 
agents). The main influence of carbon black is to improve the abrasion 
resistance  of  the  tire,  moreover,  it  is  a  cheap  anti-ozonant  and  also 
contributes to extracting heat from the tread and belt to avoid thermal 
damage to the tire. The role of steel is to provide support and strength to 
tires. Sulfur as a vulcanizing agent increases the elasticity of tires and 
improves  their  strength  and  hardness  [62],  and  zinc  oxide  acts  as  an 
activator  to  accelerate  the  vulcanization  of  rubber  with  sulfur  [63]. 
However, the quantities of these components in the tire formulation are 
different depending on the requirements of tire manufacture and prop-
erties. Table 1 shows the basic components of eight different types of 
tires. 

Usually, the major part of the tire is rubber (about 45-47 wt. %) [4] 
due to its good elasticity and shock absorbance properties. Because of 
the low production and high price of natural rubber, the rubber used in 
tires is a  mixture of NR (polyisoprene) and SR (e.g. SBR)  in different 
ratios depending upon the specific use. These rubbers are mainly used in 
the sidewalls (22 wt. %) and the treads (32.5 wt. %) [4]. If carbon black 
and silica (comprising about 21-22.5 wt. %) are not added to the tire 
composition, the mechanical and wear resistance of the tire will be very 
poor [4]. 

The carbon black structure aids the constant elongation stress and 
modulus of the rubber and tire rubbers require a suitable composition of 
carbon  blacks  of  different  particle  sizes  to  attain  the  desired  perfor-
mance. The smaller the particle size of the carbon black, the better the 
reinforcing performance and wear resistance. Reinforced carbon black 
with fine particle size is mainly used in the tire tread, endowing tires 
with excellent wear resistance. The higher the carbon black structure, 
the higher the constant elongation stress and modulus and the better the 
distribution within the rubber. The rubber compound needs a suitable 
composition of carbon blacks of different particle sizes. In the other parts 
of  the  tire,  the  rubber  material  is  required  to  be  resistant  to  flexural 
cracking,  ozone  oxidation,  with  good  elasticity  and  low  thermal  per-
formance.  To  achieve  these  objectives,  a  coarse  particle  size  of  semi- 
(cid:0) 1)  is 
reinforced  carbon  black (specific  surface  area  less  than 40  m2⋅g
generally  chosen.  The  third  vital  components  in  tires  are  metal  rein-
forcement, which is included at more than 12 wt. %. The ratio of metal 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010223N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Table 1 
The composition of tire depending on the required use.  

Material 

Car 
tire 

Truck 
tire 

Rubber/Elastomers 

47 

45 

(wt.%) 

22.5 

21 

14 
5.5 
2.5 

23.5 
1 
3 

8.5 

6.5 

Carbon black and 
silica (wt.%) 
Metals (wt.%) 
Textiles (wt.%) 
Vulcanization 

agents (wt.%) 
Additives (wt.%) 
Sulfur (wt.%)    

Zinc oxide (wt.%)    

Off- 
road 
tire 

47 

22 

12 
10 
3 

6 

Passenger 
tire 

Truck 
tire 

47 

45 

21.5 

16.5 
5.5 
- 

7.5 
1 

1 

22 

21.5 
- 
- 

5 
1 

2 

LVT 

MVT 

HVT 

Comments 

48% 
NR 
10% 
SR 
11 

14% 
NR 
27% 
SR 
28 

27% 
NR 
14% 
SR 
28 

Different synthetic and natural rubber are used, e.g. natural rubber 
(polyisoprene), chloroprene rubber, butadiene rubber, 
polybutadiene rubber, synthetic rubber, etc. 

To strengthen the rubber and aid abrasion resistance 

14-18 
- 
- 

14-25 
- 
- 

14-25 
- 
- 

Steel belts and cord for strength 
Used for reinforcement 
Used to facilitate production process 

12-16 
1.4 

16-17 
1.88 

16-17 
2.09 

- 

- 

- 

additives used to partial replacement carbon black (such clay) 
Used to cross link the polymer chains within the rubber, harden 
and prevent excessive deformation at elevated temperatures 
As an activator to accelerate the vulcanization of rubber with 
sulfur 

Refs. 

[4] 

[4] 

[4] 

[22] 

[22] 

[52] 

[52] 

[52]   

in truck tires reaches 23.5 wt. %, whereas, the metal ratio in off-road 
tires  and  car  tires  is  between  12  and  14  wt.  %  [4].  The  content  of 
vulcanization agents in tires is minimal, at between 2.5 and 3.0 wt. % 
[4].  Vulcanization  agents  play  an  important  role  in  the  durability  of 
tires. Additives are compounds that improve processing properties such 
as pressure sensitivity and hot melt of the rubber [64] and are added at 
between 6 and 8.5 wt. % [4]. The yield of additives in car tires could 
reach 8.5 wt. %, but in off-road tires are typically 6 wt. %. Vulcanization 
accelerator  is  one  particular  additive,  which  is  good  at  promoting 
shortening  the  vulcanization  time  and  decreasing  the  vulcanization 
temperature  of  rubber.  Vulcanization  accelerators  used  in  tires  also 
could reduce the use of vulcanization agents (sulfur) and increase the 
mechanical properties of the rubber. The most common accelerator is 
ZnO  which  also  acts  as  a  vulcanization  activator.  According  to  the 
different compositions of tires, the nature and source of tire char will 
also be different. The carbon in tire char is derived both from the py-
rolysis of rubber and also from the carbon black and additives [65]. 

2.2. Thermal properties 

Pyrolysis  is  a  technology  for  energy  and  resource  recovery  from 
many  different types  of  wastes  at  the  appropriate  temperature  and  is 
carried out under inert conditions. The thermal decomposition charac-
teristics  of  wastes investigated  with  thermo-gravimetric (TG)  analysis 
determine the mass change of samples concerning temperature or time 
[66]. Moreover, the relevance of this technique lies in the capacity to 

also obtain a preliminary rubber composition and to determine pyrolysis 
kinetics [67]. To analyze the TG curves, the higher the DTG value, the 
faster the degradation reaction and consequently the easier the sample is 
(cid:0) 1  have been 
decomposed. Heating rates of between 1 and 100 
used for the evaluation of tire pyrolysis kinetics in the reported literature 
[68], however, intermediate values are the most suitable. On the one 
hand, the use of too high heating values provokes severe heat transfer 
limitation to the sample and a displacement of the DTG curve to higher 
temperatures. On the other hand, low heating rates greatly lengthen the 
duration of the experiment. 

C⋅min

◦

The TG curves of waste tires are generally similar, but some differ-
ences exist due to the diversity of the rubber formulation and compo-
sition of additives used in tire manufacture [49,69]. Danon et al. [70] 
studied the thermal decomposition behavior of waste bicycle tires. Ac-
cording to the TG and DTG curves, waste tire thermal decomposition 
consisted  of  two  stages  involving  tire  rubber  decomposition  and 
decomposition of pyrolysis products derived from secondary pyrolysis 
[71] (as shown in Fig. 5a). The first stage involves the decomposition of 
the  different  components  of  the  tire  which  decompose  at  different 
temperatures;  (i)  The  plasticizers  and  other  additives  in  tires  start  to 
◦
decompose at 150-200 
C and there is a little yield of oil/gas produced 
[62,72]. At temperatures higher than 250 
C, pyrolysis oil and gas are 
produced; (ii) Between 250 and 500 
C, NR [73] and SBR/BR [74] are 
◦
degraded [75]. Between 450 and 500 
C, the maximum release of liquid 
products takes place then a further increase provokes a decrease [76]. At 
◦
C, volatiles is degraded completely, and 
temperatures higher than 550 

◦

◦

Fig. 5. TG/DTG curves for waste bicycle tire at 50 

◦

C⋅min

(cid:0) 1  heating rate (a) [71] and waste car tire at 30 

◦

C⋅min

(cid:0) 1  heating rate (b) [79].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010224N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

tire  rubber  is  almost  completely  decomposed  [77].  The  second  stage 
involves  secondary  cracking  of  the  produced  pyrolysis  products  that 
C, which has 
mainly takes place in the temperature range of 660-850 
also been reported in the works of Han et al. [78] and Li et al. [76]. 

◦

Some  researchers  have  suggested  that  tire  decomposition  can  be 
divided into three zones [66]. In the first zone, nearly 5 wt. % mass loss 
occurs  due  to  the  decomposition  of  the  light  volatiles  existing  in  the 
waste tire (Fig. 5b) [79]. The second zone is the main decomposition 
zone which takes place between temperatures of 300 and 500 
C with 
about  60  wt.  %  mass  loss,  which  occurs  since  the  main  components 
(rubbers) of the waste tire start to decompose within this temperature 
range  [59].  The  third  decomposition  zone  refers  to  the  secondary 
cracking  of  pyrolysis  products,  which  takes  place  in  the  temperature 
range  of  600-900 
C.  These  results  show  good  agreement  with  other 
literature [5,80]. The TG thermogram in Fig. 5 shows that the residual 
product of tire pyrolysis is more than 33.0 wt. % of the initial weight, 
and consists of fixed carbon and ash [81,82]. 

◦

◦

The typical TG and DTG thermograms of tire decomposition shown 
in  Fig.  5a  and  5b  show  that  the  components  of  waste  tires  exhibit 
different and complicated thermal degradation behavior. The division of 
the  waste  tire  rubber  pyrolysis  stages  completely  depends  on  the 
different  interpretations  of  the  individual  researchers.  Although  re-
searchers have divided the thermal degradation behavior of waste tires 
into two or three stage segments according to mass loss and weight loss 
rate, the last stage is always attributed to the generation of the secondary 
reactions of the pyrolysis product. Three-stage degradation behavior is a 
more  detailed  description  and  analysis  of  the  two-stage  degradation 
behavior. More detailed division of the stages of thermal degradation of 
waste  tires  can  be:  0-100 
C, 
decomposition of the volatiles in the waste tire, which is shown both in 
Fig.  5a  and  5b;  320-530 
C,  SBR/BR 
C, the 
degradation (these two stages are shown in Fig. 5b); 500-600 
volatiles  in  rubber are  completely  pyrolyzed;  > 600 
C,  the  pyrolysis 
products are cracked into small molecular products. Although this di-
vision is more detailed, it also has some defects since it is not clear how 
the composition of the tire rubber, e.g. NR and SBR/BR exist in the waste 
tire rubber. Reports on TGA of tires commonly show two peaks of tire 
rubber degradation, which suggest that NR and SBR are present in most 
tire rubber studied in the literature, but detailed rubber composition is 
rarely presented [83,84]. It is also not clear what the pyrolysis products 
are in the secondary cracking zone reported in the literature. 

C,  moisture  volatilization;  100-320 

C,  NR  degradation;  450-550 

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

At present, most research based on thermo-gravimetric analysis has 
been  used  to  establish  an  accurate  dynamic  model  and  calculate  the 
mass loss of waste tires with time and temperature change. There are a 
range of kinetic models developed for the decomposition of waste tires. 
The  use  of  TGA  for  the  pyrolysis  of  the  tire  and  the  different  kinetic 
approaches proposed was reported in the literature [68]. A single-step 
decomposition  model  for  waste  tire  rubber  was  once  proposed  [85]. 
However, it was a simplified model and did not provide a reasonable 
explanation for the different mass loss peaks observed in the pyrolysis 
thermogram  curve  because  the  reaction  rate  of  the  different  reaction 
steps was not suitably predicted. Therefore, the use of the single-step 
decomposition  model  has  not  been  popular.  Ayl´on  et  al.  [86]  built  a 
model based on the DTG thermogram of the waste tire. They calculated 
the pyrolysis activation energy of the main components of the tire and 
reported that the activation energy of the additives in the waste tire was 
(cid:0) 1,  the  activation  energy  of  SBR  was  reported  as  212 
70  KJ  mol
(cid:0) 1. 
KJ⋅mol
Iso-conversion or model free methods have been widely applied in TGA 
studies  for  the  assessment  of  kinetic  parameters  (activation  energy) 
without  considering  an  explicit  model.  In  this  approach,  TGA  results 
under varying heating rates for the same conversion value are consid-
ered  for  the  determination  of  activation  energy  for  each  conversion 
point 
and 
Kissinger, 
Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose  methods  are  the  most  commonly  applied 
methods in this category [88]. Thus, the pyrolysis of truck and passenger 

(cid:0) 1,  and  the  activation  energy  of  NR  was  265  KJ⋅mol

Flynn-Wall-Ozawa, 

Friedman, 

[87]. 

tires using Friedman and Kissinger methods was analyzed [89], more-
over, the performance of both methods was compared and the reaction 
the 
mechanism  was  discussed.  Alsurakji  et  al.  [90]  applied 
iso-conversional method proposed by Ozawa-Flynn-Wall for the evalu-
ation  of  thermal  and  catalytic  pyrolysis  of  waste  tires  using  NiO  and 
MgO catalysts. Thus, the obtained kinetic parameters were of specific 
interest for the evaluation of the kinetic role played by each catalyst. A 
wide study comparing several kinetic approaches has been carried out 
[91], including iso-conversional methods and other conventional kinetic 
approaches. A significant increase in the activation energy in relation to 
truck and car tire pyrolysis was determined using the Friedman method 
by  Chen  et  al.  [92].  Thus,  the  low  activation  energies  for  conversion 
values below 0.2 correspond to the dehydration and decomposition of 
processing oils, whereas the higher activation energies for higher con-
versions  are  associated  with  the  decomposition  of  NR  and/or  SBR. 
Recently, a quasi-isothermal TGA approach for the evaluation of the tire 
pyrolysis reaction mechanism was proposed [57]. This procedure evi-
denced  eight  decomposition  zones  associated  with  different  reactions 
taking place during waste tire pyrolysis. 

In the pyrolysis of waste tires, the kinetic data is different due to the 
different  pyrolysis  conditions.  Under  the  same  pyrolysis  conditions, 
different  brands  and  models  of  tires  have  different  components  and 
contents (such as the different ratios of SBR, BR, black carbon, and other 
additives), resulting in the different internal structures of tire rubber. 
With the different tire rubber structures, the rate of heat transfer, and 
heat  absorption  varies  greatly,  resulting  in  different  changes  in  the 
process of rubber molecular cracking and thermal weight loss. There-
fore,  there  is  no  general  trend  that  can  explain  the  changes  in  the 
composition of waste tires. 

Because  the  source  and  the  composition  of  the  waste  tire  were 
different  in  different  literature  reports,  the  TG/DTG  thermograms 
consequently  varied.  Although  none  of  the  research  papers  reports  a 
comprehensive TG/DTG analysis for the waste tire, each provides data 
for the waste tire pyrolysis industry. 

3. Influencing factors on the yield and quality of tire char 

The quality and yield of tire char strongly depend on the original tire 
composition and pyrolysis process conditions and also play a significant 
role  in  terms  of  the  economic  feasibility  of  the  waste  tire  pyrolysis 
process [21,93,94]. To improve the quality of tire char, it is necessary to 
understand the influencing factors and how they relate to the quality of 
tire char. Several factors affect the quality of tire char in different ways, 
and the influencing mechanisms are also different. The quality and yield 
of tire char are determined by the following factors: (i) type of pyrolysis 
reactor (fixed bed, fluidized bed, conical spouted bed, and rotary kiln 
reactor) [46]; (ii) type of pyrolysis process (vacuum pyrolysis, micro-
wave  pyrolysis,  hydrogenation  pyrolysis,  co-pyrolysis,  and  catalytic 
pyrolysis) [95]; (iii) operating conditions [45] (temperature, pressure, 
residence time, carrier gas (N2, CO2), particle size, catalyst); (iv) other 
factors such as original tire composition. In general, fast pyrolysis con-
ditions  ensure  quick  tire  particle  heating  and  rubber  degradation. 
Therefore, the violent release of pyrolysis volatiles inside tire particles 
promotes  their  fast  diffusion  towards  the  outside.  These  conditions 
minimize  secondary  condensation  reactions  of  pyrolysis  volatiles  and 
reduce  solid  product  formation.  Thus,  the  char  yield  obtained  in  fast 
pyrolysis  is  usually  slightly  higher  than  the  carbon  black  content  of 
original tire rubber, i.e. in the 25 to 35% range. However, the opposite 
effect  can  be  observed  under  slow  pyrolysis  conditions  with  a  higher 
extent  of  secondary  reactions,  higher  char  yields,  and  carbon  black 
adulteration. In this latter case, the char yield usually ranges between 35 
and 45%. Moreover, the original tire composition also plays a significant 
role in char yield and characteristics. Thus, depending on tire brand and 
application (light or heavy vehicle, motorcycles etc.) variable contents 
and compositions of rubber and carbon black are used. In this respect, 
different authors have studied the pyrolysis of different tire materials 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010225N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

under  the  same  experimental  conditions  and  reported  significant  dif-
ferences  in  char  yields  and  their  main  features,  for  example  the  char 
surface area [50,96]. 

3.1. Pyrolysis reactor 

The pyrolysis process is performed in an inert gas atmosphere (e.g. 
N2  [97], Ar [98], He [99], pyrolysis gas [100]). The use of carrier gas 
ensures the operation is maintained under inert conditions and avoids 
the  presence  of  air  in  the  reaction  environment  and  the  subsequent 
oxidation of the organic material in the pyrolysis process. The flow ve-
locity of the inert gas could influence the reaction environment, resi-
dence time, and pyrolysis product yield and composition. The inert gas 
flow  velocity  and  the  size  and  specific  gravity  of  waste  tire  particles 
determine the particle behavior in the pyrolysis reactor. The different 
structures of pyrolysis reactors affect the yield and quality of pyrolysis 
products of the waste tire. According to the classification of two-phase 
(gas-solid) flow models given in the literature, pyrolysis reactors have 
(cid:0) 1)  and  gas  flow  velocity  (υ, 
different  dispersion  coefficients  (D,  m2⋅s
(cid:0) 1) [101]. According to the dispersion coefficient and gas flow ve-
m⋅s
(cid:0) 1, 
locity, the following models are defined: fixed bed (D = 0.0-0.02 m2⋅s
(cid:0) 1, υ 
υ = 0.02-0.6 m⋅s
(cid:0) 4-0.06 
= 0.015-0.7 m⋅s
(cid:0) 1) [107,108], rotary kiln reactor (D = 0.0-0.35 
m2⋅s
(cid:0) 1) [109–111]. It is worthy of note that dispersion 
m2⋅s
coefficients evaluate the degree of back-mixing and quantify the devi-
ation from ideal plug flow behavior. Therefore, this coefficient is of great 
interest  to the design and operation of chemical reactors, since  it de-
termines the residence time distribution in the reactor. This parameter is 

(cid:0) 1) [102,103], fluidized bed (D = 0.001-0.6 m2⋅s
(cid:0) 1) [104–106], conical spouted bed (D = 5 × 10

(cid:0) 1, υ = 0.1-0.5 m⋅s
(cid:0) 1, υ = 0-0.7 m⋅s

of  especial  relevance  in  tire  pyrolysis  due  to  its  role  in  the  extent  of 
secondary  reactions  and  the  distribution  of  pyrolysis  products.  More-
over, the heating rate is another parameter affecting pyrolysis perfor-
mance  that  was  considered  in  the  reactors  classification.  Thus,  fixed 
(cid:0) 1 
◦
beds are usually operated under slow heating rates in the 5-40 
ranges  [73,83,112–114],  the  effective  heating  rate  attained  in  rotary 
kilns depends on several factors such as the reactor size, rotation speed, 
or the use of heat carriers (as steel balls). Finally, both fluidized bed and 
spouted bed reactors guarantee fast heating of tire particles and reach 
(cid:0) 1  [115, 
effective  heat  values  with  high  heating  rates  of  103-104  ◦
116]. 

C⋅min

C⋅s

3.1.1. Fixed bed 

At present, the fixed bed reactor is one of the main types of waste tire 
pyrolysis equipment used in laboratory-scale studies due to its ease of 
operation [117,118] and low cost [119]. However, these reactors are 
mainly operated in the batch mode, i.e., the tire material located in the 
reactor  is  slowly  heated  while  the  formed  pyrolysis  volatiles  are 
continuously  purged  from  the  reactor  using  an  inert  gas  stream. 
Accordingly, the obtained results are regarded as preliminary and prior 
to a continuous demonstration or commercial scale operation. Fixed bed 
reactors can be divided into vertical fixed bed [112] (Fig. 6a), horizontal 
fixed bed [120] (Fig. 6b), one-step catalytic fixed bed [121] (Fig. 6c), 
and two-step catalytic fixed bed [24] (Fig. 6d). The main advantages of a 
fixed bed for the pyrolysis of waste tires are: (i) the back-mixing is small 
[122,123], liquid and catalyst can be removed effectively; (ii) the me-
chanical loss of catalysts is small [124]; (iii) the structure of the fixed 
bed is simple [125]; (iv) the fixed bed is suitable for dealing with any 
size and shape of feedstock solids without segregation problems (such as 

Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of fixed bed experimental equipment; vertical fixed bed (a), horizontal fixed bed (b), one-step catalytic bed [121,127] (c), and two-step 
catalytic bed [82] (d). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010226N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

liquid-solid segregation and catalysts-raw feedstock segregation) [126]. 
The  most  significant  advantage  of  the  fixed  bed  reactor  is  that  the 
catalyst bed can be added as required by the process due to its simple 
structure  [82,121,127]  (Fig.  6).  In  this  respect,  different  reactor  con-
figurations  have  been  used  in  tire  catalytic  pyrolysis.  The  simpler 
alternative is the use of the catalysts in-situ physically mixed with tire 
material  [128–131],  nevertheless,  this  strategy  has  some  drawbacks 
including,  higher  coke  deposition  and  the  difficult  separation  of  the 
catalyst and char at the end of the reaction [132]. However, the use of a 
second fixed reactor represents an interesting alternative (see Fig. 6c) 
[121,127,133–135]. It is worthy of note that this reactor system allows 
for independent temperature optimization in the pyrolysis and catalytic 
cracking  steps,  moreover  the  direct  contact  between  the  catalyst  and 
waste tire impurities is also avoided. In addition, the use of two catalytic 
beds downstream of the pyrolysis reactor (Fig. 6d) has been also pro-
posed [82]. Moreover, the pyrolysis target products could be obtained 
by placing different catalysts in the fixed bed [136]. 

◦

◦
C) and then increased (600-900 

Williams et al. [137] studied the effect of temperature and heating 
rate on the composition of pyrolysis products using a fixed bed reactor. 
The yield of tire char decreased with the increase of pyrolysis temper-
ature, up to 600 
C, although the yield was still more than 35 wt. %. 
However,  it  was  reported  that  the  yield  of  char  first  decreased 
◦
C) with a vertical fixed bed 
(500-600 
reactor [138], (Fig. 6a). With the temperature increase, the yield of char 
decreased using a horizontal fixed bed [69], (Fig. 6b). The high heating 
(cid:0) 1  without  catalysts  to  18 
value  of  tire  char  varied  from  11  MJ⋅kg
(cid:0) 1  with a double catalysts bed. The specific surface area of tire 
MJ⋅kg
(cid:0) 1 with one catalytic bed [121], (Fig. 6c). The yield 
char was 70.06 m2⋅g
of tire char reached nearly 45 wt. % with a single untreated char catalyst 
bed. Also, it appears that a decrease in sulfur content in the product oil 
was observed with single bed catalytic pyrolysis [127]. The influence of 
single and double fixed catalyst beds on the pyrolysis products of waste 
tires was studied [82], (Fig. 6d). Therefore, the number of catalyst beds 
has a significant effect on the yield of tire char. The yield of tire char 
varied from 36 wt. % (non-catalysts) to 43 wt. % (double catalysts bed). 
After the addition of the fixed catalyst bed, the yield of pyrolysis gas 
increased to 45 wt. % and was higher than that of thermal pyrolysis. The 
use of high carrier gas flow rates contributes to reducing residence time 
in the fixed bed and attenuating secondary reactions of pyrolysis vola-
tiles that increase the yield of gaseous products or aromatics. This results 
in an increase in the production of the pyrolysis liquid phase, with a low 
oxygen content of 3.2 wt. % in the pyrolysis oil with a fixed bed such as 
that shown in Fig. 6b, and also produced an increase in the yield of tire 
char at 3.5 wt. % [139]. According to Cunliffe et al. [112], the yield of 
tire  char  remains  fairly  constant  with  a  mean  of  37.8  wt.  %  over  a 
◦
temperature range from 450 to 600 

C. 

3.1.2. Fluidized bed 

The fluidized bed is a reactor that uses gas or liquid to pass through a 
granular  solid  bed  to  make  the  solid  particles  rise  in  suspension  and 
enables  gas-solid  reactions  or  liquid-solid  reactions  to  take  place. 
Compared with the fixed bed reactor, the advantages of the fluidized bed 
reactor include fast heating rate, operation under fast pyrolysis condi-
tions [140], high heat utilization efficiency [141], short gas residence 
time [100,142],  reduced extent of secondary reactions [143], and fa-
cilitates a continuous operational process with easy control [144–146]. 
The  fluidized  bed  reactor  is  popular  in  the  waste  tire  pyrolysis  pro-
cessing industry because it is a continuous operation, enables process 
scale-up, and produces a higher yield of oil [147,148]. However, there 
are  also  some  problems  with  the  fluidized  bed  such  as  high  energy 
consumption  [145],  high  investment  cost,  and  the  long  cooling  time 
needed for condensation of pyrolysis volatiles because of the high gas 
throughput. Due to the short residence time of the waste tire in fluidized 
beds, the tire char possesses a smaller specific surface area and less pore 
structure compared to char produced from fixed bed reactors. The flu-
idized bed is suitable for pyrolysis of waste tires with a small particle size 

(0.1-2.0  mm)  [145,149].  Tire  char  has  exhibited  an  agglomeration 
phenomenon [150] observed from low-temperature pyrolysis in fluid-
ized beds due to its incomplete pyrolysis [100] and short residence time. 
To  completely  pyrolyse  waste  tires,  it  is  necessary  to  prevent 
low-temperature sintering (particle caking) and maintain stable opera-
tion of the fluidized bed in the process of waste tire pyrolysis [150]. The 
overall trend of char yield is decreasing with temperature increase using 
a fluidized-bed [100] (see Fig. 7). Moreover, fluidized bed reactors have 
excellent  features  for  in-situ  catalytic  pyrolysis,  enabling  suitable 
gas-solid  contact  and  the  mixing  regime  ensuring  high  catalytic  effi-
ciency.  In  addition,  operational  strategies  of  catalyst  circulation  and 
continuous regeneration can be developed. Unlike the plastics catalytic 
pyrolysis process, fluidized beds have been scarcely used in catalytic tire 
pyrolysis. Williams and Brindle [151,152] studied the pyrolysis of waste 
tires using a fluidized bed reactor with in-line fixed bed catalysis. The 
use of a fluidized bed bench scale reactor with in-line catalytic cracking 
over  HZMS-5  zeolite  for  the  co-pyrolysis  of  waste  tires  and  bamboo 
sawdust has also been proposed [153]. 

◦

C and 17.5 g⋅min

According to Raj et al. [154], the yield of tire char reached 45.5 wt. 
C, 0.3 mm particle 
% at the conditions of, pyrolysis temperature, 475 
(cid:0) 1 feed rate in a fluidized bed reactor, increasing the 
size, and 17.5 g⋅min
particle size to 0.71 mm produced the lowest yield of tire char at 24.5 
(cid:0) 1 feed 
◦
wt. % at the same pyrolysis conditions of 475 
rate. They produced a char yield model which illustrated the relation-
ship between char yield and input parameters. The pyrolysis of waste 
tires using a fluidized bed reactor has been studied by Dai et al. [100] 
and showed that an increase in temperature, residence time, and particle 
size led to a decrease in the yield of tire char. This result is similar to a 
model result in the reported literature [154]. It is reported that the sulfur 
content of tire char obtained from the fluidized bed pyrolysis was re-
ported to be in the range of 2.1-2.3 wt. % and the ash content of tire char 
is about 10.6-11.3 wt. %. The specific surface area of tire char was re-
(cid:0) 1 as the pyrolysis temperature was 
ported to increase from 73 to 85 m2⋅g
◦
increased from 500 to 600 
C for the pyrolysis of tires in a fluidized bed 
reactor [155]. 

3.1.3. Conical spouted bed 

The  conical  spouted  bed  reactor  is  similar  to  the  conventional 
(bubbling) fluidized bed with the added advantage of inherent proper-
ties for handling sticky and irregular solids (such as waste tires) [156]. It 
has been observed by many researchers that the conical spouted bed has 
two advantages of short residence time and reduced secondary reactions 
of particulate matter. In addition, its design is simpler than that of the 
traditional  fluidized  bed  due  to  there  being  no  distribution  plate  and 
consequently, lower pressure drop in the pyrolysis chamber [157,158]. 
The  high  speed  of  movement  of  the  gas  in  the  conical  spouted  bed 
produces intense contact between the gas and solid phases, which helps 
to enhance the heat and mass transfer between the gas and solid phases 
and thereby improves the heating rate of the solids [159,160]. It is re-
ported that a high yield of pyrolysis oil was obtained at low tempera-
tures with the conical spouted bed reactor. However, the quality of the 
obtained tire char was improved at high pyrolysis temperatures [147]. A 
schematic diagram of a spouted bed reactor system is shown in Fig. 8 
[147]. 

Lopez et al. [156] discussed the performance of the conical spouted 
bed reactor for waste tire pyrolysis under vacuum conditions. There was 
no reported agglomeration phenomenon of tire char when the conical 
spouted bed reactor was used which was attributed to the long residence 
time of pyrolysis at high temperature, however, the pores of the tire char 
were blocked and resulted in a low specific surface area. The yield of tire 
char obtained with the conical spouted bed was reported as 35 wt. % 
[161]. The sulfur content of tire char was high with a content of 3.68 wt. 
%  [147],  since,  around  60  wt.  %  of  the  total  sulfur  contained  in  the 
waste tire was retained in the tire char at the pyrolysis temperature of 
◦
◦
575 
C. The specific surface area of tire char obtained at 575 
C was 80 
(cid:0) 1. A similar conclusion is also reported in another research article 
m2⋅g

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010227N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of fluidized-bed pyrolysis apparatus [100].  

Fig. 8. Schematic diagram of the conical spouted bed bench scale process for 
waste tire pyrolysis [46,147]. 

[96], where it was reported that 33.7 wt. % of tire char was obtained 
using  the  conical  spouted  bed  reactor.  Tire  char  obtained  with  the 
conical  spouted  bed  is  regarded  as  poor  quality  and  would  require 
activation for its further application as activated carbon [162]. 

3.1.4. Rotary kiln reactor 

The rotary kiln reactor has been widely applied for the pyrolysis of 
waste tires due to the adaptability of the reactor to cope with the vari-
able  shape  and  size  of  the  waste  tire  in  the  pyrolysis  operation.  The 
rotary kiln drums are generally constructed to produce a horizontal or 
inclined cylinder rotating around its axis [163]. The rotary kiln reactor 
has  been  successfully  applied  in  the  field  of  pyrolysis  of  solid  wastes 
because it allows good control of the process variables, especially waste 
solid  residence  time  in  the  reactor  [99,164,165].  However,  there  are 
some problems with the rotary kiln reactor, such as uneven temperature 
distribution  and  hysteresis,  resulting  in  abundant  heat  loss  and  high 
energy consumption [166]. It is reported that tire char obtained from the 
rotary kiln reactor contains higher volatile matter, higher ash, and sulfur 
content, since the uneven temperature distribution results in unstable 
pyrolysis of the waste tire. 

Ayano˘glu et al. [167] reported a conversion of waste tire into tire 
char of about 35 wt. % using a rotary kiln reactor (Fig. 9). The tire char 
produced  had  a  high  heating  value  (HHV)  and  ash  content  of  23.69 
(cid:0) 1 and 10.35 wt. %, respectively. The specific surface area of tire 
MJ⋅kg
(cid:0) 1. Increasing pyrolysis 
char was reported to be very low, at 22.4 m2⋅g
◦
temperature from 700 to 900 
C, tire char yield was shown to decrease 
from 59.4 to 46.8 wt. % when one tonne of waste tire feedstock was 

Fig. 9. Schematic diagram of the rotary kiln reactor pyrolysis system [167].  

◦

pyrolysed in a rotary kiln reactor with a capacity of 4.3 m3 [168]. The 
yield of tire char obtained was 41.2 wt. % [169] under a steam atmo-
sphere  with  a  rotary  kiln  reactor  operating  at  high  temperatures 
(850 
C). The sulfur content of tire char was reported as 3.0 wt. % and 
(cid:0) 1,  which  was 
the  specific  surface  area  of  the  tire  char  was  40  m2⋅g
(cid:0) 1 [167] due to the high 
higher than that of Ayanoglu, at the 22.4 m2⋅g
ash content (10.35 wt. %) in the tire char. It has also been shown that the 
specific surface area of tire char obtained from a rotary reactor increased 
significantly with increasing pyrolysis temperature [170]. 

3.1.5. Auger reactor 

The auger type reactor for pyrolysis of waste tires has become more 
and  more popular  in recent  years due to  its  higher  heat transfer  effi-
ciency, better tire conversion rate, low carrier gas demand, low energy 
requirements, and other advantages. An advantage of the auger reactor 
is the low specific size and ease of portability, therefore, enabling its use 
where  the  waste  is  generated  or  concentrated.  The  portability  of  the 
auger reactor is conducive to reducing the costs associated with trans-
portation, management, and logistics of the waste. The tire char yield is 
similar in both fixed bed and single-auger reactors, at approximately 38 
wt. % of the raw tire material. However, the residence time of material 
in an auger reactor is shorter than that in a fixed bed. Some studies have 
considered the single-auger reactor for conducting the pyrolysis of waste 
tires. According to one study, the tire char yield reached 40.6 wt. % at a 
◦
pyrolysis temperature of 600 
C and 3.7 min residence time. The volatile 
matter yield in the tire char is reported to be lower than 5.0 wt. % with a 
single-auger  reactor  [171].  This  reactor  could  improve  the  total  con-
version  with  a  short  solid  residence  time  (<1.5  min).  Another  study 
◦
reported that the tire char yield reached 40.5 ± 0.3 wt. % at 550 
C, with 
the  maximum  sulfur  content  in  tire  char  of  2.6  wt.  %  [172]  with  a 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010228N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

◦

C to 46.55 wt. % at 400 

single-auger reactor (Fig. 10a). The twin-auger reactor is effective for 
the intermediate pyrolysis of waste tires, obtaining more yield of tire oil, 
and reduced tire char yield. The tire char yield ranged from 39.24 wt. % 
◦
at a pyrolysis temperature of 475 
C with a 
twin-auger reactor [173] (Fig. 10b). The sulfur content in tire char ob-
tained from a twin-auger reactor was shown to be 3.6 wt. % with a char 
(cid:0) 1  [174]. It was also reported in the 
specific surface area of 57.0 m2⋅g
literature that the tire char yield obtained from a twin-auger reactor is 
higher  than  that  obtained  with  a  single  auger  reactor,  however,  the 
HHV, volatile matter, and SBET of the tire char was lower than that ob-
tained  with  single  auger  reactor.  From  the  perspective  of  tire  char,  a 
twin-auger reactor for tire pyrolysis is better than that of a single auger 
reactor.  The use of  a  single  auger reactor  may  lead  to  material  accu-
mulations  or  plugging  because  of  the  simple  conveyance  of  the  tire 
feedstock  via  screw  feeding  and  small  size  feedstock.  However,  the 
twin-auger reactor could promote a constant feeding of the feedstock, 
and in addition, leads to better mixing effectiveness among the particles 
of the feedstock and with other materials when granular solids are used 
as heat carriers [175]. 

Pyrolysis reactors have different advantages and disadvantages, and 
application scopes. The method of heat and mass transfer has a signifi-
cant effect on the distribution of pyrolysis products and their quality. 
Thus, fast pyrolysis conditions, i.e., high heating rates and short resi-
dence times of volatiles, lead to a high yield of oil products and lower 
yields of gases and tire char, which is the typical situation in fluidized 
and spouted bed reactors. However, the operation under slow pyrolysis 
conditions promotes secondary reaction with the subsequent increase of 
gaseous products and char, and a reduction of oil yield [21,22], with 
fixed beds being the most common slow pyrolysis technology. Table 2 
shows  that  the  quality  of  tire  char  produced  is  significantly  different 
with  various  pyrolysis  reactors.  This  phenomenon  occurs  because 
different pyrolysis reactors are suitable for different shapes and sizes of 
the waste tire and that the pyrolysis conditions of pyrolysis reactors are 
different.  Thus,  fast  heating  of  tire  particles  promotes  a  fast  rubber 
devolatilization and rapid release of pyrolysis volatiles. However, under 
slow pyrolysis conditions, volatiles formation takes place over a longer 
time  period  and  these  products  require  a  long  time  to  leave  the  tire 
particles.  This  increase  in  residence  time  promotes  degradation  in-
termediates  to  form  inside  tire  particles  and  favors  carbonization  of 
volatiles  by  secondary  reactions  with  the  subsequent  increase  in  tire 
char yields and the ratio of pyrolysis char to original carbon black in the 
product  tire char. Compared with the fixed bed reactor, the  fluidized 
bed, rotary kiln and spouted bed reactors could operate at an industrial 
scale with continuous operation and waste tire feeding. However, there 
are also some problems needed to be solved for the development of a 

continuous feed pyrolysis process which include: (i) improving the gas 
sealing performance of the feeding system; (ii) isolating the reactor and 
the feed system effectively; (iii) operating the reactor safely and stably; 
(iv) optimizing the process parameters. In the development of the waste 
tire pyrolysis process, selecting an appropriate pyrolysis reactor cannot 
only reduce the investment cost but also increase process throughput. 

3.2. Pyrolysis processes 

To change the product distribution, improve the quality of pyrolysis 
products, or gain operational advantages, different alternative processes 
to conventional thermal pyrolysis have been proposed in the literature. 
These  commonly  used  pyrolysis  processes  for  treatment  of  the  waste 
tires  are  mainly  vacuum  pyrolysis,  pressurized  pyrolysis,  microwave 
pyrolysis, plasma pyrolysis, hydrogenation pyrolysis, co-pyrolysis, and 
catalytic pyrolysis. The mechanism by which the products of pyrolysis 
are improved in relation to these pyrolysis technologies will be different. 

3.2.1. Vacuum pyrolysis 

The vacuum pyrolysis process has been developed and widely used in 
the  treatment  of,  for  example,  waste  straw,  plastic,  and  oil  sludge 
[181–183].  The  vacuum  pyrolysis  of  solid  wastes  is  a  pyrolysis  tech-
nology that uses a vacuum pump to generate negative pressure in the 
pyrolysis reactor, release volatiles off solid wastes and reduce the resi-
dence time of volatiles in the pyrolysis reactor. Vacuum pyrolysis not 
only reduces the possibility of secondary reactions of pyrolysis volatiles 
but also has a significant influence on the yield and distribution of py-
rolysis  products  [93,184]. Interestingly,  a  positive  effect of the  lower 
yield of organic compounds attached to the tire char has been reported 
[93,156]. Moreover, the operation under vacuum conditions reduces the 
inert gas flow rate requirements and accelerates the tire degradation rate 
[156]. In addition, low-temperature vacuum pyrolysis has lower toler-
ance requirements related to the ability to withstand temperature and 
the construction materials of the pyrolysis equipment [185]. According 
to Lopez et al. [156], a slight reduction in tire char yield was obtained 
from vacuum pyrolysis (253 mbar), where 33-34 wt. % yield of tire char 
(cid:0) 1  (pyrolysis tem-
was reported with a specific surface area of 96 m2⋅g
(cid:0) 1)  than  that  obtained 
perature  425 
under  ambient  pressure.  Compared  with  the  properties  of  pyrolysis 
products under atmospheric conditions, vacuum pyrolysis could prevent 
the pores of the tire char from being blocked and thereby improve the 
surface properties of tire char. This positive effect on the quality of tire 
char  is  due  to  the  short  residence  time  of  pyrolysis  volatiles  on  the 
surface of the tire feedstock during the reaction process. Results from 
vacuum pyrolysis of tire rubber showed the production of a good quality 

C),  which  was  higher  (46  m2⋅g

◦

Fig. 10. Experimental set-up of the single auger reactor (a) [172] and twin-auger reactor (b) [173].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010229N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Table 2 
Comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of waste tire pyrolysis reactor designs.  

Pyrolysis 
reactor 

Fixed bed 

Fluidized bed 

Conical spouted bed 

Rotary Kiln bed 

Auger reactor 

Reactor scale 

H: 11.45-30 cm D: 2.0-15.0 cm 

V: 210-1766 ml D: 5.0-30.0 
cm 

Tire size 
Conditions (M, 
T, H1, N, RT) 

Advantage 

◦

◦

C, 5-25 

0.25-3.00 mm 
30-50 g, 400-850 
C/ 
min, 25-100 mL/min, 10-120 
min 
Low back mixing, simple 
structure, small mechanical 
loss of catalysts. Realizing 
multiphase reaction process. 
Beneficial to target products. 

Disadvantage 

Long time to start and stop, 
high energy consumption, low 
work efficiency, uneven 
distribution of pyrolysis 
products. 
42-58 
Oil (wt.%) 
4-11 
Gas (wt.%) 
Char (wt.%) 
38-47 
Ultimate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
74.60-82.1 
C (wt.%) 
1.06-1.0 
H (wt.%) 
0.49-1.0 
N (wt.%) 
2.46-2.54 
S (wt.%) 
O (wt.%) 
2.5-3.5 
Proximate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
M (wt.%) 
V (wt.%) 
FC (wt.%) 
Ash (wt.%) 
HHV (MJ/kg) 
Char SBET (m2/ 

- 
- 
- 
8.24-20.4 
11-18 
40-230 

◦

H: 34.0 cm 
conical section H: 20.5 cm 
Angle: 28 
upper D: 12.3 cm 
bottom D: 2 cm 
1-2.0 mm 
0.3-3.0 kg/h, 400-600 
3.0-9.5 L/min, 20 ms 

◦

C, -, 

0.14-10 mm 
0.6-3.0 kg/h, 350-805 
25-100 mL/min, 1-3.0 s 

◦

C,-, 

High heating rate, short gas 
residence time, high thermal 
utilization rate, small 
secondary reaction, easy 
industrial scale-up. 

High energy consumption, 
high investment cost, long 
cooling time of volatiles. 

25.3-44.5 
16.18-46.0 
24.50-45.5 

88 
9.5-11 
0.29-0.41 
2.1-2.3 
- 

- 
- 
- 
10.6-11.3 
- 
73-85 

Handle highly sticky and 
irregular materials. Flexible 
operating conditions. 
Continuous carbon black 
removal. Simple process 
design. 
Small specific surface area of 
tire char. Uneven of solid 
residence time due to rapid 
circulation of solid and 
agitation 
53.9-58.0 
3.6-10.2 
35.9-37.9 

86.5-86.9 
0.7-0.8 
0.3-0.5 
2.1-3.6 
- 

- 
- 
- 
7.1-7.3 
- 
46.5-116.3 

H: 21.3-660 cm 
D: 15.0-220 cm 
V: 3.76 dm3-25 m3  

Laboratory mall-scale 
instruments 

0.3-4.0 cm 
0.04-5.0 kg/h, 400- 
◦
1100 
C, -, 3.0-9.5 L/min, -, 
speed rotation:0.5-3.0 rpm 
Wide adaptability to 
material shape and size. 

Uneven and lagging of 
temperature distribution, 
large heat loss, high sulfur 
content of pyrolysis oil, 
low flash point. 
28-37 
20-31 
35-41 

77.4-89.86 
0.4-3.14 
0.29-1.2 
1.72-2.28 
3.1-4.8 

0.50 
74.09 
15.06 
9.0-17.2 
23.69 
22-40 

◦

◦

C, 5- 

C/min, 0.15 -11.4 L/ 

2-5 mm 
1.0-6.0 kg/h, 400-600 
20 
min, 3.7-120 min 
Higher heat transfer 
efficiency, better conversion 
rate, short residence time, 
low specific size and ease of 
portability 

Material accumulations in 
reactor, only suitable for 
small size feedstock. 

41.8-46.5 
11.3-18.1 
39.0-42.6 

74.7-85.4 
0.8-1.7 
0.4-0.7 
2.0-2.6 
˂ 0.1 

0.45-4.3 
1.33-6.3 
78.1-81.6 
11.6-20.5 
25.5-30.6 
57.0 

[171–174] 

g) 
Refs. 

[121,139,170,176,177] 

[149,154,155,178] 

[156,159,179,180] 

[48,139,167] 

H: Height; D: Diameter; V: Volume; 
M: experimental mass; T: Temperature; H1: Heating rate; N: Nitrogen flow rate; RT: Residence time; - not described in the reference text. 

tire char with a small amount of carbon deposition formed on the surface 
of the char [186]. Pyrolysis of truck tire under vacuum conditions (total 
pressure  lower  than  100  mbar)  produced  a  tire  char  with  a  specific 
(cid:0) 1  with  0.7  wt.  %  ash  and  0.5  wt.  %  sulfur 
surface  area  of  95  m2⋅g
contents [187]. However, an issue that exists with vacuum pyrolysis is 
the  low  efficiency  of  heat  transfer  within  the  reactor.  Therefore, 
increased heat input is required to operate at full load [188]. The vac-
uum pyrolysis technology of waste tires has obvious advantages of high 
efficiency and safety, but its disadvantages are the low yield of tire char 
and high content of heavy oil compounds in the liquid products. 

3.2.2. Pressurized pyrolysis 

Opposite  to  vacuum  pyrolysis,  the  pressurized  pyrolysis  of  solid 
wastes has been investigated. The pressurized pyrolysis of solid wastes 
involves addition of a pressure balancer (back pressure valve) after the 
pyrolysis reactor to adjust the internal pressure of the pyrolysis reactor 
to be higher than ambient pressure. The solid wastes are pyrolyzed in 
this  high-pressure  environment.  Pressurized  pyrolysis  inhibits  the 
diffusion movement of volatiles, results in the volatiles not immediately 
leaving the solid wastes, and increases the residence time of the volatiles 
in  the  pyrolysis reactor and  the  probability of secondary cracking  re-
actions.  The  influence  of  pressurized  pyrolysis  has  been  reported  in 
relation to the pyrolysis products of, for example, biomass [189] and 
coal [190] where it was shown that increased pressure resulted in an 
increased yield of char. This advantage reported for biomass and coal 
pressurized pyrolysis has also been reflected in waste tire pyrolysis. The 
yield of tire char increased 10.40% when the pressure of the pyrolysis 

◦

system was varied from ambient to 2.0 MPa at a pyrolysis temperature of 
600 
C. Compared with the tire char obtained from ambient pressure, 
the pressurized pyrolysis tire char has a characteristic of melting and 
cross-linking,  therefore,  the  specific  surface  area  of  tire  char  derived 
from pressurized pyrolysis was smaller than that of tire char obtained 
from ambient pressure. Wang et al. [191] have carried out research on 
pressurized pyrolysis tire char, and reported on the carbon crystal form 
and  pore  size  of  the  pressurized  pyrolysis  tire  char.  It  was  confirmed 
with Raman spectrometry that the pressurized pyrolysis tire char has a 
tendency towards graphitization. The pressurized pyrolysis tire char has 
a high selectivity and catalytic effect towards the pyrolysis oil of waste 
tires [191]. Although Ma et al. [192] studied the pressure influence on 
waste tire pyrolysis, the tire char obtained from pressurized pyrolysis 
was not investigated. 

At  present,  there  are  relatively  few  studies  on  the  pressurized  py-
rolysis of waste tires, but the advantages of its treatment are significant. 
The pressurized pyrolysis of waste tires increases the yield of tire char 
and pyrolysis oil and reduces the yield of pyrolysis gas. The process is 
cleaner and has fewer pollutant emissions. However, the mechanism of 
pressurized  pyrolysis  of  waste  tires  has  rarely  been  reported,  which 
should  be  part  of  future  research  work.  The  pressurized  pyrolysis  of 
waste  tires  is  still  in  the  laboratory  stage  and  although  higher  value 
products are easier to be obtained, few industrial applications have been 
reported. If the target products of waste tire pyrolysis are high-yield tire 
char  and  high-quality  pyrolysis  oil,  the  pressurized  pyrolysis  can  be 
considered a priority treatment method. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102210N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

3.2.3. Microwave pyrolysis 

Microwaves refer to electromagnetic waves with a frequency of 300 
MHz - 300 GHz and a wavelength of 1-100 cm [193]. The microwave is a 
process whereby materials absorb the microwave energy and convert it 
into heat energy [194], this property enables the process to be devel-
oped for the pyrolysis of waste tires. The distinct characteristics of mi-
crowave pyrolysis include high selectivity in relation to the pyrolysis oil 
components  (limonene,  23.4%)  [195],  gas  components  (H2,  54.52%) 
[196]  and  high  efficiency  in  the  wastes  pyrolysis  treatment  process 
[197]. In addition, this heating method allows for homogeneous heat 
distribution in the reactor [195,196]. Microwave pyrolysis is suitable for 
materials with low thermal conductivity such as waste tires. The pres-
ence of the reinforcing carbon black material in the tire rubber, which is 
a low thermal conductivity material, could enhance the transfer of the 
microwave  energy  into  the  rubber  to  promote  rubber  pyrolysis  and 
generate more tire char [198,199]. The effect of microwave power on 
the  pyrolysis  products  of  waste  tire  powder  was  reported  in  various 
literature reports [199–201]. The degree of pyrolysis of the waste tire 
powder increased with the increase of microwave power. At 500 w of 
microwave power, the maximum conversion rate of the waste tire was 
realized, resulting in a product yield of 45.0 wt. % oil, 18.5 wt. % gas, 
and 36.5 wt. % char. The performance of waste tire pyrolysis products 
with microwave-assisted pyrolysis has been investigated [202,203]. The 
results showed that low amounts of organic substances were present and 
blocked the pores of the tire char but did not affect the direct utilization 
of the product tire char. The content of sulfur in the tire char was about 
50%  of  the  initial  sulfur  present  in  the  feedstock  tires,  which  is  in 
agreement with results reported elsewhere in the literature [155]. The 
(cid:0) 1) 
char obtained from the waste tire has a higher LHV (33± 3 MJ⋅kg
[204,205]. It has been reported that the apparent density of the tire char 
(cid:0) 1, which was higher than an exfo-
was in the range of 0.40-0.56 g⋅mL
(cid:0) 1) [206]. Compared 
liated graphite but lower than graphite (2.25 g⋅mL
to catalytic pyrolysis technology, microwave pyrolysis could reduce the 
occurrence  of  secondary  reactions.  Microwave  pyrolysis  technology 
does not require any pretreatment of the tire feedstock, even including 
crushing and grinding, that is, the waste tire can be used directly. At 
present, this technology for waste tires treatment is only at laboratory 
scale experiments. 

Microwave pyrolysis has a thermal effect on the pyrolysis of waste 
tires, as well as a non-thermal effect caused by the characteristics of the 
microwave itself and the action of the microwave field. Compared with 
the traditional pyrolysis method, microwave pyrolysis not only shortens 
the pyrolysis time and saves energy, but also reduces the cost of waste 
tires treatment. It has many advantages that traditional pyrolysis tech-
nology does not have. However, the problems of microwave pyrolysis 
include the high cost of large-scale continuous production of microwave 
energy  required  for  the  pyrolysis  equipment  and  the  incomplete  un-
derstanding  of  the  mechanism  of  microwave  pyrolysis.  Although  mi-
crowave pyrolysis of waste tires is not the mainstream technology in the 
market, the development of a large-scale microwave pyrolysis reactor is 
a necessary step to promote an industrial scale application. In addition, 
the microscopic mechanism of microwave pyrolysis, that is the mecha-
nism of the thermal effect and non-thermal effect on waste tires treat-
ment, should also be considered in future research work. 

3.2.4. Plasma pyrolysis 

Plasma is the fourth state of matter except for solid, liquid, and gas, 
which is a state of matter formed by positive and negative ions generated 
after the atoms are ionized. Plasma technology involves the creation of a 
sustained electrical arc by the passage of electrical current through a gas. 
The plasma pyrolysis process has received attention because of a sub-
stantial  number of advantages of the technology, such as small space 
volume,  high  treatment  rate,  quick  start  and  stop,  and  completely 
decomposing material into small molecules. According to experimental 
results, thermal plasma pyrolysis has been investigated as a promising 
method of treating waste tires for energy and resource recovery [207, 

208]. Huang et al. [209] have tested the characterization of the gas and 
char products derived from waste tires obtained from thermal plasma 
pyrolysis and found that the main components of the gas products are 
H2, CO, CH4, C2H2, and C2H4. The combustion heating value of the tire 
(cid:0) 3. The tire char yield varies from 39 
pyrolysis gas was about 5-9 MJ⋅Nm
to 69 wt. %, and contains more than 16 wt. % ash content, 80 wt. % 
carbon content, and 2.7 wt. % sulfur content. The specific surface area of 
(cid:0) 1.  The  tire  char  analysed  by  X-ray  photo-
tire  char  is  about  70  m2⋅g
electron  spectroscopy,  revealed  that  tire  char  has  a  mainly  graphitic 
carbon  structure.  TA  later  report  by  Huang  et  al.  [210]  showed  that 
increasing  the  radio-frequency  power (1600-2000  W)  increases waste 
tire pyrolysis conversion (34.4-78.4 wt. %) and decreases tire char yield 
(21.6-65.6  wt.  %).  The  products  of  waste  tires  obtained  from  plasma 
pyrolysis are mainly gas and tire char. This technology could completely 
deal  with  waste  tires  with  no  need  for  the  condensation  process  to 
recover  pyrolysis  oil.  However,  the  quality  of  tire  char  from  plasma 
pyrolysis technology was poor, the specific surface area was small and 
the ash content in tire char was high. Compared with conventional py-
rolysis technology, the plasma pyrolysis of waste tires has some disad-
vantages; in the plasma pyrolysis process, due to high voltage discharge, 
plasma  is  unstable  and  it  is  necessary  to  prevent  explosion  accidents 
caused by sparking; plasma pyrolysis will increase equipment cost and 
results  in  a  consequent  additional  increase  in  the  cost  of  waste  tires 
treatment. The plasma pyrolysis of waste tires has been studied mainly 
on the laboratory scale, and no industry reports have been found. Plasma 
pyrolysis is a promising treatment method for waste tires treatment, but 
it  is  not  the  main  treatment  method.  Although  the  plasma  pyrolysis 
technology of waste tires is currently only investigated at the laboratory 
scale,  there  is  still  much  research  work  to  be  explored,  such  as  the 
mechanism of plasma pyrolysis of waste tires, and the combined action 
mechanism of plasma autocatalysis and high temperature. 

3.2.5. Hydro-pyrolysis 

Hydro-pyrolysis is a mature technology and is widely being used in 
terms  of  petroleum  refining  [211,212].  Hydro-pyrolysis  could  not 
directly stabilize the pyrolysis oil derived from solid wastes, but it has 
the effect of altering pyrolysis volatile hydrocarbons to generate more 
saturated  hydrocarbons.  To  improve  the  quality  of  the  pyrolysis  oil 
produced from waste tires and meet the characteristics required for fuel 
oil applications, some researchers have explored the chemical structure 
characteristics and application feasibility of the recombination products 
obtained  from  waste  tire  hydrogenation  pyrolysis  [213].  The 
hydro-pyrolysis process is a simple and effective method for waste tire 
clean conversion into useful products. It can adjust the yield and quality 
of the pyrolysis oil, gas, and tire char products. The hydro-pyrolysis of 
waste tires mainly affects the quality of the liquid (processing heavy oil 
into light oil) and gas phase (increasing the yield of non-condensable 
gases such as H2, CH4, and C2H4) products [214]. However, this pro-
cess has little influence on the yield of tire char. Compared with direct 
pyrolysis  of 
tire 
hydro-pyrolysis  include  decreasing  the  energy  consumption,  reducing 
secondary condensation as well as polymerization of the oil. This pro-
cess is beneficial to increase the yield of pyrolysis oil and gas, however, 
the yield of tire char is reduced [215]. For example, the influence of the 
hydropyrolysis  process  on  the  product  distribution  of  waste  tires  was 
investigated  [216],  and  the  yield  of  tire  char  was  33.83  wt.  %  at  a 
process temperature of 430 
C, which was lower than that of other re-
ported pyrolysis processes. The changes in the hydro-pyrolysis products 
of waste tires using a fixed bed reactor to adjust the pyrolysis process 
were studied [217]. The specific surface area of tire char that was ob-
(cid:0) 1  and the ash 
tained from hydro-pyrolysis varied from 50 to 70 m2⋅g
content of the char was close to 12 wt. % resulting in the low yield of tire 
char  obtained  from  waste  tires  hydro-pyrolysis.  The  purpose  of 
hydro-pyrolysis of waste tires was to obtain high-quality pyrolysis oil 
and gas, not tire char. Compared with conventional tire pyrolysis tech-
for  reaction 
nology,  hydro-pyrolysis  has  higher  requirements 

tire,  some  advantages  of  waste 

the  waste 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102211N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

equipment, and higher investment costs, and the quality of the tire char 
is relatively poor. 

3.2.6. Co-pyrolysis 

Co-pyrolysis technology is a technology in which two materials of 
different compositions can complement each other’s advantages during 
the pyrolysis process, have a synergistic effect and improve the quality 
of  pyrolysis  products.  The  synergistic  co-pyrolysis  of  waste  tires  with 
coal [218,219], cooking oil [220],plastic [221], and biomass has been 
studied widely, with an emphasis on liquid yield and quality [153,222, 
223]. Since the waste tire rubber and especially waste plastics are rich in 
hydrogen, co-pyrolysis with coal, biomass, and other materials has po-
tential, since the waste tire acts as a hydrogen donor and improves the 
quality of the pyrolysis volatiles and increases the yield of pyrolysis oil 
[224,225]. The pyrolysis oil obtained from the co-pyrolysis of the waste 
tire with biomass represents a promising alternative to fossil fuels. The 
pyrolysis oil obtained from biomass cannot easily be directly used as fuel 
oil because of its high oxygen content, low chemical stability and high 
corrosion potential related to the presence of organic acids [226]. It is 
reported  that  biomass  and  waste  tire  co-pyrolysis  produced  a 
high-quality  oil  in  terms  of  polycyclic  aromatic  hydrocarbon  content 
[227].  In  addition,  a  significant  reduction  of  sulfur  content  in  the 
product oil is achieved from the co-pyrolysis of tires and biomass. Ac-
cording  to  the  analysis  of  product  composition  and  yield,  the  results 
show that there exists a synergistic effect in the co-pyrolysis of waste 
tires and other materials. In the initial and final stages of the pyrolysis 
process, biomass acts as an activator and promotes thermal decompo-
sition of the waste tire with a significant synergistic effect [228]. Onay 
et al. [229] studied the effect of co-pyrolysis of lignite and waste tire on 
pyrolysis products under different pyrolysis temperatures and material 
ratios (waste tire: lignite ratio) using a fixed bed. The TG curves obtained 
are illustrated in Fig. 11. No matter which ratio was used, the yield of 
char from the tire/lignite mixture was higher than that obtained from 
only the waste tire. With the increase in temperature, the yield of tire 
char from the mixture or waste tire only decreased. 

Comparing the properties of the co-pyrolysis products of bituminous 
coal and waste tire, Bicakova et al. [218] found that the co-pyrolysis of 
the waste tire and coal have a synergistic promoting effect. The yields of 
pyrolysis products are presented in Fig. 12. Under suitable conditions, 
the gas products had high hydrogen and methane volumetric concen-
trations, of  more than 60% and 20% respectively, and  the content of 
aromatic hydrocarbons in the pyrolysis oil was low. The yield of tire char 
from the raw mixture (waste tire and coal) was higher than that from 
only waste tire pyrolysis. The experimental process of co-pyrolysis and 

Fig. 11. TG analysis of waste tire, lignite and tire/lignite mixture (5/5) [229].  

Fig. 12. Yields of pyrolysis products from lignite (black columns), tire: lignite 
mixture (wt.%), and waste tire at different ratios of waste tires and coal [218]. 

gasification of coal and waste tire for power generation were reported in 
the literature [230]. The emissions of CO, CO2, SO2, and NOx from the 
combustion of the syngas produced from co-gasification of the mixture 
of tire and coal decreased by 3.4, 23.28, 22.9, and 0.85% respectively 
when  using  a  1:1  mixture  ratio  (coal/waste  tire).  Biomass/tires 
co-pyrolysis  has  been  widely  reported,  but  only  limited  studies  have 
been  carried  out  in  continuous  pyrolysis  reactor  units.  A  screw  kiln 
(cid:0) 1 of forestry 
reactor was used for the continuous co-pyrolysis of 5 kg⋅h
waste  and  tires  [227],  an  oil  with  good  quality  and  stability  was  ob-
tained, moreover, the obtained char showed a heating value of around 
30 MJ⋅kg

(cid:0) 1. 

Wang et al. [153] studied bamboo sawdust and tire co-pyrolysis and 
in-line catalytic cracking in a reaction unit made up of a fluidized bed 
and a fixed bed reactor. The increase of tire content in the feed promoted 
char yield, moreover, the production of valuable chemicals such as BTX 
(benzene, toluene, xylenes) was also improved. Recently, the continuous 
pyrolysis of pine wood and waste tire in a conical spouted bed reactor 
was  investigated  [231],  co-pyrolysis  produced  a  liquid  with  a  lower 
oxygen and water content and a solid product with lowered ash content. 
The co-pyrolysis of the waste tire and other materials has obvious ad-
vantages on co-pyrolysis gas and oil, but its disadvantages in relation to 
the product char should also not be ignored. Although char yield from 
the waste tire co-pyrolysis process is higher than that of bio-char [231] 
or plastic char [232] and lower than that of tire char, the tire char has a 
relatively low carbon content due to the presence of the co-feedstock 
and  high  ash  content  [233–235].  However,  the  char  yield  from  the 
co-pyrolysis of waste tires with coal was lower than that from coal py-
rolysis [218]. The quality of tire char from the co-pyrolysis process was 
poor, where the ash content reached 8.68 wt. % [176,221]. Wang et al. 
[236] reported that the yield of co-pyrolysis char from waste tires and 
pine bark was lower than that of waste tire produced char but higher 
than that from pine bark. The specific surface area of the product char 
(cid:0) 1. Compared with the research reports of 
varied from 40 to 110 m2⋅g
other researchers, the study of Wang et al on the co-pyrolysis synergistic 
mechanism  of  waste  tires  and  pine  bark  is  relatively  in-depth  and 
thorough. Comparing the experimental results of blends with the results 
of separate pyrolysis of different raw materials under the same pyrolysis 
conditions, the synergistic effect of the co-pyrolysis was calculated to 
quantify the synergistic effect. The results showed that a blend of waste 
tires and pine bark increased the evolution of syngas. However, the in-
fluence of co-pyrolysis on the properties of char was not discussed. The 
elemental composition of solid wastes is different, and consequently, the 
quality, ash content, and specific surface area of tire char produced by 
the co-pyrolysis process are different. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102212N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

It  can be  concluded  from the  above  cases  of  co-pyrolysis research 
that the synergistic mechanism of different substances involving waste 
tires  co-pyrolysis  is  different.  The  different  co-pyrolysis  mechanism 
leads to the production of a tire char with different morphology. The 
results reported by different authors are significantly different, and the 
insights  into  the  co-pyrolysis  of  waste  tires  and  other  materials  are 
limited. The co-pyrolysis of waste tires and other waste materials has 
different effects on tire char, but the addition of most materials to the 
pyrolysis of waste tires could reduce the quality of tire char and increase 
the ash content. 

3.2.7. Catalytic pyrolysis 

Obtaining the target products from non-catalytic pyrolysis of waste 
tires  requires  high  temperature,  long  duration,  and  high  energy  con-
sumption. The addition of catalysts to the waste tire pyrolysis process 
reduces the activation energy of pyrolysis reactions, promotes the fast 
pyrolysis of the waste tire, affects the product composition, increases the 
yield of low molecular weight hydrocarbons, and effectively improves 
the  distribution  of  pyrolysis  products  [47,94,237].  Compared  with 
non-catalytic pyrolysis, the main advantages of catalytic pyrolysis are: 
(i)  promoting  the  pyrolysis  efficiency;  (ii)  reducing  the  reaction  tem-
perature and activation energy of pyrolysis; (iii) improving the quality of 
pyrolysis products and the yield of valuable chemicals [238,239]. The 
yield, composition, and quality of pyrolysis products could be promoted 
and more valuable chemical products obtained with the use of catalysts 
in the waste tire pyrolysis process [240,241]. When the catalysts and 
waste tires are mixed, utilization of catalysts is not only conducive to the 
conversion  of  heavy  oil  to  light  oil  [242]  but  also  encourages  the 
recombination of the surface chemical structure of tire char and reduces 
the content of functional groups of impurities on the surface of the tire 
char [127,243]. The commonly used catalysts for the catalytic pyrolysis 
process  are  zeolites,  alkaline  compounds  (e.g.  KOH,  Ca(OH)2,  and 
Al2O3)  [34],  ores,  and  steel  slag  [159,244].  Zeolite  catalysts  have 
become popular due to their unique pore and channel structure, which 
may  be  loaded  with  a  highly  active  metal  to  obtain  higher  quality 
products.  Moreover,  most  alkaline  compounds  with  a  high  specific 
surface area could be used as catalysts. Cheap minerals (e.g. dolomite) 
are widely investigated since they contain a variety of catalytic elements 
[245,246]. 

Zhang  et  al. [247] studied the  influence of  nickel catalysis on the 
pyrolysis gas yield from waste tires using a two-stage pyrolysis-catalytic 
steam reforming process. Nickel as a catalyst promotes the secondary 
reactions of pyrolysis volatiles, at the same time, carbon deposition on 
the catalyst produced and blocked the pore structure on the surface of 
the catalyst. The ratio of catalyst support material and active metal plays 
an important role in the yield of carbon deposition on the surface of the 
catalyst. When Al2O3  and SiO2  served as the support material for the 
nickel catalyst, and the ratio of carrier and catalyst changed from 1:1 to 
2:1,  the  content  of  carbon  deposition  on  the  surface  of  the  catalyst 
decreased from 19.0% to 13.0%, and more than 95% of carbon depo-
sition was in the form of filamentous carbon nanotubes. Osorio-Vargas 
et  al.  [40,248,249]  analyzed  the  performance  of  different  supported 
noble metal catalysts based on Ni, Pd, Pt, and Co in waste tire pyrolysis 
performed  in  a  Py-GC/MS  instrument.  Interestingly,  these  catalysts 
showed a remarkable selectivity for the production of valuable aromatic 
compounds such as benzene, toluene, xylenes, or cymene. The influence 
of catalysts on the batch pyrolysis of waste tires has been studied in the 
literature  [243].  The  results  showed  that  ZSM-5,  Al2O3,  CaCO3,  and 
MgO can cause the delay in the initial degradation temperature, where it 
was  shown  that  the  initial  degradation  temperature  (329 
C)  of  tire 
◦
rubber increased to 371 
C with Al2O3, 
◦
402 
C with MgO. The presence of CaCO3 and 
(cid:0) 1  in 
MgO reduced the pyrolysis activation energy from 246.89 kJ⋅mol
(cid:0) 1  and to 128.34 
the absence of the catalyst material to 121.82 kJ⋅mol
(cid:0) 1, respectively. The high acidity of the zeolite catalyst promoted 
kJ⋅mol
the  pyrolysis  of  the  waste  tire  more  thoroughly.  The  yield  of  char 

◦
C in the presence of CaCO3, 340 

◦
C with ZSM-5, and to 371 

◦

obtained from the waste tire pyrolysis catalyzed by zeolite was low due 
to the mix of zeolite catalysts and waste tires. Catalysts are beneficial to 
the  recombination  of  tire  char  chemical  structure.  Fig.  13  shows  the 
effect of catalysts on the product yield and HHV of the liquid and solid 
products. In Fig. 13a, the yield of char obtained from zeolite with added 
Ca(OH)2 was higher than when no catalyst was added. While the yield of 
char from added Al2O3  was lower than in the non-catalyst experiment 
(Fig. 13b). The HHV of the solid char is related to the product char yield 
(Fig. 13b and 13c). 

There are some disadvantages of incorporating catalysts in-situ in the 
waste tire pyrolysis process, for example, some catalysts have high costs 
and are not easy to be separated from tire char after the pyrolysis pro-
cess. In the past, most of the catalytic pyrolysis of waste tires was carried 
out after blending the waste tire with catalysts. This blending process of 
waste tires with catalysts improved the tire oil quality and the yield and 
quality of pyrolysis gas but decreased the quality of tire char. The cat-
alytic pyrolysis behavior much depends on the contact of catalysts and 
tire pyrolysis volatiles. Because the particle size and shape of the waste 
tire and catalysts are much different, their contact with any degree of 
confidence remains unknown. Also, a major problem that existed in this 
type of catalytic pyrolysis is how to extract and recycle the catalyst from 
the catalyst/char mixture after reaction. At present, it is difficult to find 
literature on the recovery of the catalyst from the product tire char and 
the  presence  of  used  catalyst  also  leads  to  poor  quality  tire  char. 
Moreover, the direct contact of the catalysts with the waste tire impu-
rities could provoke a fast catalyst deactivation and thereby shorten the 
lifetime  of  the  catalyst.  In  this  regard,  the  use  of  the  catalysts  ex-situ 
represents a more effective alternative. However, the use of catalysts at 
full scale  requires  a suitable  process to overcome  fast catalyst deacti-
vation  and  requires  the  implementation  of  processes  with  continuous 
catalyst  regeneration.  In  this  scenario,  the  increase  in  material  and 
operational costs should be balanced with the improvements in product 
yields and their quality in relation to thermal pyrolysis to determine the 
full potential of catalytic pyrolysis [47]. 

However,  there  are  some  interesting  studies  for  enhancing  the 
quality of pyrolysis oil and gas that will not decrease the quality of tire 
char.  Fengchao  et  al.  [24]  reported  a  promising  pyrolysis  process  in 
which waste tires were placed in a two-stage fixed bed separately. The 
pyrolysis tire char was prepared in the lower fixed bed reactor and used 
as a catalyst for catalytic cracking of the volatiles from the upper fixed 
bed. In this way, three advantages were obtained: (i) the volatiles from 
the upper fixed bed were cracked into light oil with a high content (high 
content of single ring aromatics) and light gas with a high yield; (ii) the 
tire char was not influenced by the presence of the catalysts in the lower 
bed; (iii) after the catalytic process, the yield of tire char obtained from 
the  lower  fixed  bed  increased;  this  was  because  the  carbon  deposits 
generated  on  the  surface  of  tire  char  resulted  in  an  increased  carbon 
content and decreased ash content. Another process for improving the 
quality and yield of pyrolysis oil and char was also reported involving 
pressurized catalytic pyrolysis of waste tires where it was shown that the 
yield of tire char increased and the carbon content of the char increased 
at  high  pressure  [191].  At  the  same  time,  pressurized  catalytic 
co-pyrolysis of waste tire and oil sludge [251] or pine sawdust [252] 
using a two-stage fixed bed reactor with bottom ash obtained from oil 
sludge combustion, showed that the produced tire char yield increased 
and ash content decreased. Comparing the position of catalysts in the 
catalytic  pyrolysis  processing  of  waste  tires,  as  either  blending,  or 
stratification of the catalysts, it can shown that the stratification method 
improves the quality of pyrolysis products without reducing the quality 
of tire char. This two-stage catalytic pyrolysis process solves the problem 
of catalytic recovery. However, there are few studies on the fluid me-
chanics, turbulence, and local heat/mass transfer of waste tires catalytic 
pyrolysis. 

Much  literature  on  the  catalytic  pyrolysis  of  waste  tires  has  been 
reported  and  clearly  it  has  been  shown  that  different  catalysts  have 
different  catalytic  effects.  However,  most  researchers  focus  on  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102213N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Fig. 13. Effect of catalytic and non-catalytic pyrolysis on products yields. (a): catalysts were in contact with tires [250], (b) and (c): catalysts were not in contact with 
tires [82], (d): catalysts were covered on tires, and (e): catalysts were placed over tires [243]. 

quality improvement of waste tire pyrolysis oil and gas, seldom was any 
attention placed on the quality and characteristics of the tire char from 
the catalytic pyrolysis, an aspect that should be studied more in future 
work. 

Table 4 summarizes the reaction mechanism of tire pyrolysis and also 
compares the advantages and disadvantages of different waste tire py-
rolysis processes. According to the target pyrolysis product, the accurate 
selection of suitable pyrolysis technology and the process type could be 
conducive  to  saving  resources,  reducing  energy  consumption,  and 
improving the quality of the products. An individual pyrolysis process 
has  different  advantages  and  disadvantages  so  that  it  is  difficult  to 

further improve the quality of pyrolysis products. To reduce the cost and 
improve  the  quality  of  pyrolysis  products,  some  researchers  have 
coupled  multiple  pyrolysis  technologies  for  waste  tire  processing 
together and optimized the pyrolysis process. The feasibility and eco-
nomic  benefit  of  waste  tire  pyrolysis  technology  depend  on  the 
comprehensive utilization of the end-use of the pyrolysis products. The 
pyrolysis oil and gas product of waste tire pyrolysis could be used as fuel 
due to their high calorific value with some restrictions mainly associated 
with their composition of, for example, sulfur content. Moreover, py-
rolysis  oil  can  be  co-fed  and  upgraded  in  existing  petroleum  refinery 
units  through  fluid  catalytic  cracking  and  hydrocracking  to  meet  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102214N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Table 3 
The effect of catalysts on waste tire pyrolysis.  

Catalysts 
Catalysts 

Zeolite 
HZSM- 
5 

HY 

zeolite 

H- 
SDUSY 

Al2O3 

Ca(OH)2 

Oyster shells +
CaCO3 

Al2O3  MgO 

CaCO3 

Al2O3 

MgO 

Reactor 

Conical Bed 

Fixed bed 

Fixed bed 

Fixed bed 

Tire size (mm) 
Feeding speed 
Catalysts to 
tire ratio 

Pressure 
(MPa) 

(cid:0) 1 

- 
2 g⋅min
0.66- 
10.9 
ambient pressure 

1.66- 
7.5 

2-3.5 
- 
0.1 

2-3 
- 
0.03 

2-3 
- 
0.03 

ambient pressure 

ambient pressure 

ambient pressure 

425-500 

- 

450 

10 

550 

1-5 

550 

8-10 

20 ms 

75 min 

55-65 min 

55-65 min 

Tire 
tread 
char 

Fixed 
bed 
2 
- 
0-1.0 

ambient 
pressure 
600 

30 

60 

Side 
wall 
char 

Fixed 
bed 
2 
- 
0.35 

0.1-2.0 

600 

30 

60 

15- 
100 
Separate 

15 

100 

- 

- 

0-3.5 

0-1.4 

separate 

separate 

cover/separate 

separate 

separate 

High activity and 
selectivity of 
zeolite owing to 
its high specific 
surface area. 

High activity and 
selectivity of 
zeolite owing to 
its high specific 
surface area. 

Disadvantages 

Zeolite is easily 
poisoned and has 
a short life due to 
high carbon 
deposits yield. 

Zeolite is easy 
poisoned and has 
a short life. Char 
yield increased. 

High activity 
and 
selectivity, 
high gas 
yield. 
Catalysts 
recycled 
easily. 
Zeolite is 
easy 
poisoned 
and has a 
short life. 
Char yield 
decreased. 
- 

High char 
yield and 
oil-gas 
quality. 
Catalysts 
recycled 
easily. 

Low oil gas 
conversion 
rate. 

High oil gas conversion 
rate, high quality of oil 
and gas. Catalysts 
recycled easily. 

High oil gas conversion rate, 
high quality of oil and gas. 
Catalysts recycled easily. 

Char yield decreased. 

Char yield decreased. 

High activity and 
selectivity, high oil 
gas conversion. 
Catalysts could be 
recycled and used 
directly. 

High carbon deposit 
yield. 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0-19.11 

0-8.57 

Temperature 

◦

(

C) 

◦

(

Heating rate 
(cid:0) 1) 
C⋅min
Residence 
time 
Catalysts 

Dosage (g) 

Addition 
method 
Advantages 

Carbon 

deposits 
(wt.%) 
Oil (wt.%) 

2.1- 
37.5 

7.9- 
33.8 

- 

- 

22.0 

Gas (wt.%) 

28.83- 
14.90 
7.60- 
19.38 
34.15- 
34.95 
Ultimate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
C (wt.%) 

42.92- 
32.25 
3.42- 
2.57 
34.54- 
35.49 

Char (wt.%) 

- 

- 

- 

53.4 

24.6 

H (wt.%) 

N (wt.%) 

S (wt.%) 

O (wt.%) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Proximate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
Ash (wt.%) 

- 

- 

- 

M (wt.%) 
FC (wt.%) 
V (wt.%) 
SBET (m2⋅g
HHV 

(MJ⋅kg

Refs. 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

20.0 

32.0 

37.4 

34.1 

42.6 

33.9 

26.0 

18.4 

55.6 

24.32 

33.83 

31.48 

29.91 

27.30 

28.09 

43.67 

37.22 

36.38 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

-  

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

79.49 

87.04 

86.17 

1.16 

1.14 

1.29 

0.31 

0.27 

0.29 

2.17 

2.59 

2.53 

5.55 

0.8 

2.4 

11.32 

8.16 

7.32 

- 
- 
- 
- 
10.53 

- 
- 
- 
- 
11.42 

- 
- 
- 
- 
16.25 

39.42/ 
22.55 
23.41/ 
36.94 
37.17/ 
40.36 

83.45/ 
82.74 
1.21/ 
1.22 
0.32/ 
0.25 
2.21/ 
2.00 
5.50/ 
5.59 

7.27/ 
8.17 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10.49/ 
9.16 
[243] 

32.23/ 
26.26 
30.13/ 
32.93 
37.84/ 
40.95 

87.00/ 
84.17 
1.20/ 
1.23 
0.27/ 
0.22 
2.35/ 
2.63 
3.88/ 
4.49 

5.26/ 
7.29 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15.41/ 
10.84 
[243] 

42.29/ 
38.43 
16.73/ 
20.03 
40.45/ 
41.25 

86.12/ 
85.21 
1.27/ 
1.34 
0.29/ 
0.31  
2.43/ 
2.68 
3.25/ 
3.55 

6.59/ 
6.88 
- 
- 
- 
- 
16.18/ 
14.31 
[243] 

18.57- 
63.71 
2.41- 
25.26 
33.3 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

35.09- 
54.32 
4.16- 
20.02 
34.47- 
42.43 

88.21- 
88.83 
- 

- 

1.04- 
1.73 
9.28- 
10.37 

- 

- 
- 
- 
35-64 
- 

[24] 

[191] 

[159] 

[159] 

[250] 

[250] 

[250] 

[250] 

[82] 

[82] 

[82] 

- not described in the reference text. 

strict requirements of commercial fuels [253]. The tire char has some 
characteristics such as small particle size, uniform size distribution, and 
small  specific  surface  area,  which  suggest  that  it  could  be  used  as  a 
rubber reinforcing agent, carrier of catalysts, and as an adsorbent [254]. 
The yield of tire char is 30-37 wt. % of the initial material and is one of 
the  main  product  of  waste  tire  pyrolysis.  The  utilization  of  tire  char 

largely determines the feasibility and economics of the waste tire py-
rolysis process. Thus, the economy of the waste tire pyrolysis and re-
covery process is significantly influenced by the quality of tire char and 
market application demand. Therefore, in the development of processes 
for the pyrolysis of waste tires, it is necessary to consider the market 
application demand and develop a technology to rapidly improve the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102215N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Table 4 
Comparison of advantage and disadvantage of waste tire pyrolysis strategies  

Vacuum pyrolysis 

Pressurized pyrolysis  Microwave 

Plasma pyrolysis 

Hydro-pyrolysis 

Co-pyrolysis 

Catalytic pyrolysis 

Pyrolysis 
process 

Reaction 

mechanism 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Tire size 
Temperature 

◦

(

C) 
Microwave 

power (kw) 

◦

(

Heating rate 
(cid:0) 1) 
C⋅min
Power input 
(KVA) 
Pressure 
(MPa) 

N2 

(cid:0) 1) 

(mL⋅min
Residence 

time (min)  

The vacuum 
pyrolysis is to 
generate negative 
pressure, peel 
volatiles off solid 
wastes in time, and 
reduce the 
residence time of 
volatiles in the 
pyrolysis reactor. 
Lower pyrolysis 
temperature and 
less organic matter 
on the surface of 
char. Reducing 
secondary cracking, 
increasing oil yield. 

Heat transfer mode 
of pyrolysis furnace 
is external heat 
transfer type, low 
heat transfer 
efficiency, need to 
increase heat. 
0.63-20 mm 
425-500 

- 

- 

- 

The pressurized 
pyrolysis inhibits the 
diffusion movement 
of volatiles, increases 
the residence time of 
the volatile and the 
probability of 
secondary cracking 
reactions. 

Increased the yield of 
oil and char. 

pyrolysis 

The microwave is a 
process whereby 
materials absorb 
the microwave heat 
energy and convert 
it into heat energy, 
this results in the 
pyrolysis of waste 
tires.  

Heating up quickly 
and uniform 
heating; Reduced 
particles in the oil. 
Automatic thermal 
stabilization to 
avoid overheating. 

Tire char has melting 
phenomenon. High 
requirements for 
pyrolysis equipment. 

Pyrolysis products 
are greatly affected 
by the pyrolysis 
reactor 

2 mm 
600 

- 

30 

- 

0.425 mm - 3 cm 
450 

1.5-6 

2.5 

- 

0.025 - 0.1 

0.1-2.0 

Ambient pressure 

Electric current 
passes through 
the gas to 
produce a 
continuous arc 
and promotes 
the secondary 
cracking of 
volatiles. 

Increase the 
yield of 
pyrolysis gas 
and quality of 
pyrolysis oil. 

High-voltage 
discharge is 
dangerous and 
needs to be 
prevented from 
exploding. High 
operating costs. 
0.18-0.30 mm 
370-450 

Hydro-pyrolysis has 
the effect of 
regulating pyrolysis 
volatiles to generate 
more saturated 
volatiles. 

Reduce secondary 
re-condensation, 
polymerization, and 
energy 
consumption. 

Hydrogen pressure 
has great influence 
on the products 
distribution. 
Expensive and 
complex 

Two materials of 
different 
compositions can 
complement each 
other advantages, 
have a synergistic 
effect, and improve 
the quality of 
pyrolysis products. 

The quality of 
pyrolysis oil is 
improved. This 
technology could 
make up for the high 
energy consumption 
of waste tire 
pyrolysis. 
Pyrolysis products 
are affected by the 
heating rate and the 
ash content in tire 
char is high. 

0.5-2 mm 
430 

0.68-1.5 cm 
400-700 

- 

- 

- 

5-80 

26.4-62.5 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Catalysts are 
conducive to 
reducing the 
activation energy 
of pyrolysis and 
promoting the 
rapid pyrolysis of 
the waste tire. 

Increase the yield 
of target product, 
decrease the 
activation energy, 
short the reaction 
time and reduce 
energy 
consumption. 
Large amount of 
catalyst required, 
catalyst sintering, 
high content of ash 
in tire char. 
Difficult to scale 
up. 
6-10 mm 
425-600 

- 

1-40 

- 

Ambient pressure 

Ambient pressure 

Ambient pressure 

3.0-9.5 L⋅min

(cid:0) 1 

60 

- 

(cid:0) 1 

3 g⋅min
32.9-48.8 
1.75-21.8 
34.8-51.7 

Dosage 
Oil (wt.%) 
Gas (wt.%) 
Char (wt.%) 
Ultimate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
C (wt.%) 
H (wt.%) 
N (wt.%) 
S (wt.%) 
O (wt.%) 
Proximate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
Ash (wt.%) 
M (wt.%) 
FC (wt.%) 
V (wt.%)  
SBET (m2⋅g
HHV 

90.0 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

(cid:0) 1) 

- 
- 
- 

4 g 
52.02-56.45 
2.17-5.11 
32.51-35.89 

88.65-88.63 
- 
- 
1.04-1.73 
9.28-10.12 

- 
- 
- 
- 
58.02-64.33  
- 

(cid:0) 1) 

(MJ⋅kg

Refs. 

Ambient 
pressure 
80 

- 

14-100 min 

- 

- 

- 

60-1500 
20.7-47.6 
9.0-27.4 
36.5-65.0 

82.31-92.03 
0.32-3.21 
0-0.78 
1.3-2.3 
6.45-7.87 

5.88-9.50 
- 
76.23-89.30 
1.77-17.90 

30-36 

20-100 g/min 
-  
30.98-77.0  
21.6-69.02 

3-20 g 

33.83 

80-85.06 
0.24-0.42 
0.38-0.42 
1.97-2.70 
12.35-13.9 

15.14-16.25 
- 
- 
- 
61-70 
28.5-28.7 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

12 
- 
- 
- 
50-70 
- 

- 

- 

200 g 
20-25 
39-46 
30-35 

84.5-87.1 
10.1-10.2 
0.6-0.7 
0.6-0.9 
1.1-4.2 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
41.3 

30- 00 

20 ms - 75 min 

1-4 g 
14.90-63.71 
2.57-50.1 
34.15-53.4 

82.74-87.00 
1.20-1.34 
0.22-0.32 
2.00-2.68 
3.25-5.59 

5.26-8.17 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9.16-16.18 

[156,184,188] 

[191] 

[197,202, 204] 

[209,210] 

[214,216] 

[226,228,229,236, 
255] 

[159,243,244,247, 
250,256,257] 

-Not described in the reference text. 

quality and value of tire char. 

yields and composition of pyrolysis products. 

3.3. Pyrolysis process conditions 

Pyrolysis process conditions are an indispensable influencing factor 
in the pyrolysis of the waste tires. Generally speaking, the general py-
rolysis  conditions  include  tire  particle  size,  pyrolysis  temperature, 
heating rate, pressure, and the presence of a catalyst. These conditions 
greatly  affect  the  tire  degradation  reaction  mechanism,  therefore  the 

3.3.1. Particle size 

With the increase in waste tire production, how to process the waste 
tire quickly and obtain higher value is the main goal pursued at present. 
To  industrialize  and  commercialize  the  pyrolysis  of  waste  tires,  the 
particle size of the waste tire was often ignored in most earlier studies. 
Therefore,  in  these  early  preliminary  studies  often  performed  in 
laboratory-scale units, the significant  effect of  heat and mass transfer 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102216N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

limitations  associated  with  tire  particle  size  was  not  considered.  The 
particle size of tires affects the rate of heat transfer and heat absorption, 
thereby affecting the rate of tire pyrolysis. It is worth noting that the 
influence of the tire particle size requirement strongly depends on the 
technology and reactor used in the pyrolysis process. The tire particle 
size typically ranges from 0.5 mm in a fluidized bed reactor to the use of 
whole, un-shredded tires in a fixed bed. The particle size is important for 
fast  pyrolysis  using  a  fluidized  bed  reactor  where  it  is  essential  to 
maintain fluidization, whereas using slow pyrolysis processing with a 
fixed bed reactor; even, a whole tire can be pyrolyzed via batch treat-
ment. The increase in particle size from 75 µm to 850 µm has been re-
ported to lead to a significant increase in the temperature gradient range 
inside  the  particle  [258].  Moreover,  the  larger  the  particle  size,  the 
lower the tire particle effective heating rate. Accordingly, the pyrolysis 
reaction  takes  place  at  a  lower  temperature  and  the  reaction  rate  is 
reduced [259,260]. Particle size (165 µm – 1000 µm) has also been re-
ported is an important influencing factor in the yield of the waste tire 
pyrolysis products and their characteristics [261]. The waste tire with a 
small particle size will generate more yield of pyrolysis oil and less yield 
of  tire  char.  The  smaller  particle  size  helps  to  increase  a  convective 
energy  flow  in  the  sample  and  to  accelerate  the  particle  degradation 
[262]. The yield of tire char showed an increase with particle size in-
crease,  which  was  also  reported  elsewhere  in  the  literature  [85,100, 
263].  The  particle  size  of  the  waste  tire  in  the  pyrolysis  process  de-
termines the magnitude of the overall energy used and the completion 
time of the pyrolysis reaction [260]. Mui et al. [264] reported that tire 
char yield increased from 35.15 to 37.15 wt. % with the particle size of 
tire feedstock increasing from 0.5 to 2.0 mm. Also, the carbon content 
(88.88 wt. %) in the tire char obtained from the smaller particle size 
feedstock was higher than that (81.24 wt. %) obtained from the larger 
particle size, while the sulfur (1.67 wt. %) and ash (8.93 wt. %) content 
in tire char obtained from the large particle size were higher than those 
(sulfur content 1.40 wt. % and ash content 7.84 wt. %) obtained from 
the  smaller  particle  size.  Also,  the  specific  surface  area  of  tire  char 
(cid:0) 1 with the feedstock particle size 
increased from 117 m2⋅g
increase. This phenomenon was also reported in other papers [86,265], 
where the tire char yield reached 37.8 wt. % with a large particle size 
feedstock (3 cm × 1.5 cm) [265]. The carbon content in tire char could 
reach 95.9 wt. %, sulfur content reached 2.3 wt. %, and ash content was 
(cid:0) 1. Tanet 
2.6 wt. %. The specific surface area was low at only 65 m2⋅g
et al. [98] studied the effect of pyrolysis conditions on the yield of py-
rolysis products from the pyrolysis of waste tires. The yield of tire char 
increased with the increase of particle size (0.5-15 mm). It should be 
finally noted that the grinding of waste tires to reduce the particle size is 
an  energy-intensive  process,  moreover,  energy  requirement  grows 
exponentially with waste tire size reduction [266]. 

(cid:0) 1 to 156 m2⋅g

It should be also noted that the original tire particle size determines 
that of the produced char. Char particle size has a great impact on the 
porosity development throughout the activation process as long as the 
process is controlled by pore diffusion and the accessibility of the acti-
vation agent, commonly steam and carbon dioxide. In large char parti-
cles,  efficient  diffusion  is  hindered  provoking  non-homogeneous 
gasification and therefore activated carbon is highly mesoporous with 
poor microporous development [40]. Overall, it is clear that the particle 
size of the waste tire feedstock affects the tire char yield and compo-
nents,  accordingly,  the  particle  size  of  the  tire  should  be  carefully 
assessed in the tire pyrolysis process development. 

3.3.2. Tire type 

The pyrolysis products vary in terms of field and chemical compo-
sition depending on the source of the tires. Tire type and brand affect the 
tire char yield and quality due to the different components used in the 
manufacture  of  the  tire  and  consequently  the  pyrolysis  behavior  of 
components  and  how  they  affect  the  tire  rubber  degradation  process 
during pyrolysis will be different. The pyrolysis products obtained from 
two different tire types (passenger car tires and truck tires) was reported 

◦

◦

[51]. Under the same pyrolysis condition, the yield of tire char obtained 
from passenger car tires reached 42.0 ± 2.5 wt. %, while, truck tire char 
yield reached 33.8 ± 2.8 wt. % at 550 
C pyrolysis temperature. The 
carbon contents in passenger car tires and truck tires were 74.30 and 
83.20 wt. %, respectively and the ash contents were 18.9 and 5.0 wt. %, 
respectively. The higher ash content in the passenger car tire resulting in 
a higher tire char yield. Rohit et al. [52] reported the pyrolysis product 
distribution of three different tire types, LVT (motorcycle tires, bicycle 
tires), MVT (car tires), and HVT (bus tires, lorry tires). The ash contents 
in LVT, MVT, and HVT are 7.4, 15.32, and 5.67 wt. %, respectively. The 
carbon contents in LVT, MVT, and HVT ranged very little, from 84.2 wt. 
% in LVT to 89.5 wt. % in HVT. The tire char yields of LVT, MVT, and 
HVT were approximately 38.0, 43.0, and 33.0 wt. % at 700 
C, respec-
tively. High ash content in MVT resulted in high tire char yield. How-
ever, it was reported that the yields of tire char from HVT are lower than 
those  from  LVT  and  MVT  [49].  The  tire  char  yields  obtained  from 
different brands  of  tire  are different  [50], which  were  reported to  be 
37.5 (Debica brand), 38.1 (Dunlop brand), 37.1 (Goodyear brand), 38.0 
(Courier  brand),  41.7  (Michelin  brand),  and  38.3  wt.  %  (Continental 
brand), respectively. The ash contents in these six brands of tires were 
reported as 2.66, 4.81, 4.98, 3.39, 2.39, and 6.23 wt. %, respectively. 
The tire char yields obtained from the different parts of the waste tire are 
also variable due to the different components used in the manufacture of 
the tire. For example, the ash content in the tire tread was reported as 
18.04 wt. %, while in the tire side wall it was only 2.14 wt. % [69]. This 
will also influence the production and characteristics of the product tire 
char, for example, the specific surface area of tire tread char (121.47 
(cid:0) 1). The high 
m2⋅g
ash content in the tire tread resulted in a higher tire char yield of the tire 
tread than that of the side wall, and low carbon content in the tire tread 
char. The shortcoming of these studies is that they have not carried out 
further research on the characteristics of the product tire char. 

(cid:0) 1) is higher than that of side wall char (44.72 m2⋅g

3.3.3. Temperature 

◦

◦

◦

Pyrolysis  temperature  plays  a  vital  role  in  whatever  the  pyrolysis 
process  is  sued  and  the  derived  pyrolysis  product  yields  and  their 
composition. The temperature determines the amount of energy input 
and affects the degree of molecular bonds breakage. It has been reported 
that the tire char yield dropped from 86 to 41 wt. % when the pyrolysis 
temperature  was  increased  from  300  to  500 
C,  and  then  remained 
constant at higher temperatures [261]. The lower pyrolysis temperature 
indicating incomplete pyrolysis and a consequent increase in the solid 
residue.  Thus,  500 
C  is  usually  regarded  as  the  optimum  pyrolysis 
temperature as long as it is the minimum temperature to ensure com-
plete rubber devolatilization and at the same time attenuate secondary 
reactions. The pyrolysis temperature for maximum oil production has 
been  usually  reported  for  waste  tire  pyrolysis  for  several  different 
reactor designs at approximately 500 
C [72,84,97]. The influence of 
pyrolysis  temperature  could  be  divided  into  initial  temperature,  final 
temperature, and heating rate [267]. The pyrolysis temperature mainly 
affects the pyrolysis time and the yield of pyrolysis products. (i) Within a 
certain  temperature  range,  the  increased  temperature  gives  a  higher 
pyrolysis rate and a shorter pyrolysis time. (ii) When the temperature is 
◦
less than 500 
C, the pores of the tire char are not expanded, resulting in 
incomplete pyrolysis of the waste tire, high yield of tire char, and poor 
quality of char due to the surface adhesion of pyrolysis volatiles [114, 
◦
268]. When the pyrolysis temperature is higher than 500 
C, the partial 
pores of the tire char are expanded, and thereby the specific surface area 
of the char is increased. However, at high temperatures, tire char is easy 
to be sintered, resulting in the blockage of char pores, the reduction of 
micropore/mesoporous volume, the reduction of specific surface area, 
and poor surface properties [237]. With the increase of pyrolysis tem-
perature and heating rate, the pyrolysis time is shortened, the yield of 
char decreased, and finally reaches a stable value [269]. The influence of 
temperature on pyrolysis products was studied [270] and showed that 
◦
when the temperature was increased from 500 to 700 
C, the increase in 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102217N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

◦

temperature resulted  in a decrease in  the yield of char. The tire char 
contains O, Si, Na, Al, Ca, Zn, and other elements, and with a temper-
C there is the potential for loss of volatile addi-
ature higher than 700 
tives such as zinc and sulfur [271]. It should be noted that the increase in 
temperature is usually associated with higher ash and sulfur contents in 
the produced char, this effect is related to the lower char yield obtained 
and the concentration of the ash metals in the char, moreover, it can be 
attributed to the reaction between sulfur and zinc oxide (added in tire 
vulcanization), producing ZnS [32,76,272,273]. However, a further in-
◦
crease in temperature above 650 
C showed no increase in the tire char 
ash content [274,275], these results may be associated with the removal 
of an organometallic component like Zn at high temperature [275]. 

With the increase in temperature, the specific surface area of char 
firstly increased and then decreased [264]. The total pore volume and 
specific surface area showed the same trend, with fewer microporous 
structures  and  resulting  in  mainly  a  char  consisting  of  mesoporous 
structures. Low temperature leads to incomplete pyrolysis of the waste 
tire, resulting in a higher content of phenols, alcohols, and other sub-
stances attached to the char surface than that of high-temperature tire 
char, therefore the content of hydrogen and sulfur in tire char obtained 
at low pyrolysis temperature was higher than that obtained from high 
temperature [264]. This phenomenon of sulfur distribution in tire char 
was also confirmed in the reports by Wang et al. [269]. 

◦

Moreover, pyrolysis temperature significantly affects char reactivity 
which  is  of  special  relevance  for  its  upgrading  to  activated  carbons. 
Thus, Zabaniotou et al. [276] analyzed the air reactivity of tire chars 
obtained  from  tire  pyrolysis  over  the  temperature  range  of  390  to 
860 
C. The increase in pyrolysis temperature improved char reactivity 
for  chars  produced  at  temperature  of  up  to  ~600-650 
C,  however, 
reactivity  gradually  decreased  at  higher  pyrolysis  temperatures.  The 
reduction of char reactivity at high temperatures may be associated with 
thermal  annealing  [277].  In  fact,  at  pyrolysis  temperatures  of  about 
800
C, the char structure gradually becomes more ordered, and conse-
quently more refractory and less reactive. 

◦

◦

3.3.4. Heating rate 

The heating rate of the tire during the pyrolysis process has an effect 
on  the  yield  and  characteristics  of  the  product  tire  char.  In  fact,  the 
heating  rate is  a key  variable  in waste tire  pyrolysis as  long as it  de-
termines pyrolysis temperature. The heating rate affects the rate of heat 
transfer,  the  effective  actual  temperature,  and  the  pyrolysis  thermal 
degradation of the tire. Thus, the higher the heating rate, the higher the 
effective pyrolysis temperature [137,267]. Depending on the pyrolysis 
technology and reactor used, different situations can occur: (i) slow and 
controlled  heating  rate  conditions  when  using  batch  reactors,  mainly 
fixed beds [1,112]; (ii) non-controlled very fast heating rates typical of 
fast pyrolysis technologies, i.e., fluidized beds, spouted beds or ablative 
reactors [96,100,155,278]; (iii) intermediate heating rates such as those 
of  microwave  reactors  or  rotary  kilns  [94,203,204].  As  waste  tires 
processed to a suitable particle size are directly fed into a fluidized bed 
reactor, the tire particles are heated with a very high heating rate. Since 
it is very difficult to measure the heating rate of particles directly, few 
researchers  obtained  the  information  through  the  way  of  process 
calculating. 

The  kinetics  and  heat  flow  modelling  of  waste  tires  at  different 
heating  rates  was  studied  [280]  and  it  was  reported  that  during  the 
pyrolysis  process  of  the  tire,  the  reaction  performance  of  the  first 
endothermic  peak  is  independent  of  the  heating  rate.  Because  the 
magnitude of the heat of vaporization is much higher than that of the 
exothermic  reaction  heat,  the  thermal  absorption  performance  of  py-
rolysis is stronger at a higher heating rate. It was also found that more 
uncondensed  gas  was  produced  and  the  average  molecular  weight  of 
pyrolysis oil decreases. At the same time, the tire char yield decreased 
with the increase in heating rate at the same temperature in a fixed bed 
batch reactor. When the temperature was at 600 
C, the tire char yield 
decreased from 40.2 wt. % to 32.8 wt. % with a heating rate increase 

◦

◦

◦

◦

C min

C min

C min

C  min

(cid:0) 1  to 80 

(cid:0) 1. These results also have been investi-
from 5 
gated in the earlier literature [137]. The yield of tire char under a fast 
(cid:0) 1) was higher than that under a slow heating 
heating rate (110 
(cid:0) 1)  [98].  Fig.  14  shows  the  TG  and  DTG  curves  at 
◦
rate  (10 
different heating rates for waste tires for experiments undertaken using 
thermogravimetric analysis. The increase in heating rate results in the 
weight  loss  thermogram  move  towards  the  high-temperature  region. 
◦
When the temperature is higher than 550 
C, the waste tire pyrolysis is 
complete. The heating rate has an effect on the yield of tire char. When 
◦
the temperature is lower than 550 
C, the char yield is increased with the 
increase in heating rate [36,279]. These TG analyses showed that the 
heating rate had an influence on the yield of tire char under low tem-
perature but also at high temperature. The heating rate of TG experi-
ments provided little value since the heating rate is usually relatively 
slow in TG experiments, however, TG analyses provides a basic theo-
retical mechanism for the effect of heating rate on tire char yield. 

The effect of heating rate in the range of 1 to 20 

(cid:0) 1  for tire 
pyrolysis using a fixed bed reactor was studied [264], and it was shown 
that  the  increase  in  heating  rate  reduced  the  char  yield  from 38.7  to 
36.8%. This decreasing trend of tire char yield is in good agreement with 
those observed by Wang et al.  [269] pyrolyzing tires with fixed beds 
(cid:0) 1 range, and 
◦
C⋅min
under much higher heating rates, in the 60 to 6000 
◦
C. At the same 
operating with final temperatures between 425 and 575 
final pyrolysis temperature, the tire char yield decreased as the heating 
rate was increased. When the temperature was at 575 
C, the tire char 
yield  decreased  from  43  wt.  %  to  41  wt.  %  with  the  heating  rate 
(cid:0) 1. The higher yield at the 
increasing from 60 
lower  heating  rates  can  be  attributed  to  the  homogeneous  and  slow 
heating  of  tire  particles,  which  increases  the  time  for  secondary  re-
actions of polymerization and condensation to occur between degrada-
tion intermediates involved in the formation of carbon deposits on char 
particles [99,267,281]. 

(cid:0) 1 to 6000 

C⋅min

C min

C min

◦

◦

◦

◦

C⋅min

◦
C, and with heating rates between 5 and 80 

The heating rate not only plays a significant role in char yield but 
also  in  the  char  characteristics.  In  this  respect,  Williams  et  al.  [137] 
reported a positive effect of the heating rate increase on the features of 
tire derived char. The authors investigated tire pyrolysis in a fixed bed 
reactor operated at different final temperatures of, 300, 420, 600, and 
(cid:0) 1. Thus, at all 
◦
720 
the  pyrolysis  temperatures  the  increase  in  heating  rate  improved  the 
surface area of the produced chars given that tire particle fast heating 
promotes rubber devolatilization and attenuates pore blockage by the 
formation of carbonaceous deposits. Mui et al [264], reported that the 
BET surface area of product tire char was improved with the increase in 
(cid:0) 1  however, a further in-
tire pyrolysis heating rate from 1 to 5 
crease  of  heating  rate  showed  a  negative  effect.  However,  in  another 
report, the char yield decreased when the heating rate was increased 
[269]. The sulfur distribution in tire char  decreased with the heating 
rate increasing at the same temperature, and more than half of the sulfur 
existed in the tire char. 

C⋅min

◦

3.3.5. Pressure 

The  pressure  involved  in  the  pyrolysis  process  plays  a  role  in  the 
yield and quality of pyrolysis products and also affects the movement 
behavior of volatiles. Increasing the pressure prevents the removal of 
volatiles  from  the  raw  materials  and  increases  the  residence  time  of 
volatiles  in  the  reactor.  The  pyrolysis  volatiles  could  be  cracked  into 
smaller organic compounds under the conditions of increasing pressure. 
It has been reported that with the decrease of pressure, the residence 
time of pyrolysis volatiles on the surface and within the pores of the solid 
phase was shortened, resulting in a high yield of pyrolysis oil and gas but 
a low yield of tire char [191]. Under vacuum conditions, the volatiles 
matter  is  promoted  to  release  from the  surface  of  the  waste  tire,  this 
resulted  in  the  pyrolysis  volatiles  of  waste  tires  remaining  for  only  a 
short time in the reactor, which helped to reduce the secondary cracking 
reactions  of  the  volatile  phase  in  the  pyrolysis  reactor  [156,181]. 
Moreover, the operation under vacuum conditions and the subsequent 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102218N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Fig. 14. The TG thermograms of waste tire at different heating rate, (a) [279] and (b) [36].  

pressure gradient promotes the diffusion of pyrolysis volatiles formed 
inside the tire particle towards the outside, reducing the impact of sec-
ondary  reactions [156].  In addition, this effect also  improves the  tire 
degradation rate and eases tire conversion [282]. The carbon deposition 
on the surface of char obtained from the waste tire under vacuum con-
ditions has been reported to be low [184], accordingly, the surface area 
of the resultant char was improved [156]. According to Roy et al. [187], 
vacuum  conditions  should  be  combined  with  high  pyrolysis  tempera-
tures to minimize hydrocarbon adsorption on the carbon black surface 
and  the  subsequent  formation  of  carbonaceous  deposits.  Accordingly, 
char properties similar to those of the original virgin carbon black added 
during  the  tire  formulation  process  can  be  obtained.  Under  vacuum 
◦
conditions, the char yield was 34.8 wt. % at 600 
C [93] and lower than 
◦
that 35.89 wt. % at 600 
C under 2.0 MPa. Under vacuum conditions, it 
is conducive to the gas yield rather than tire char yield. Under atmo-
spheric pressure, the residence time of pyrolysis volatiles in the reactor 
was longer, which increased the secondary reactions of these volatiles. 
The pyrolysis oil attached to the surface of tire char blocked the pores of 
the char, resulting in a high yield, but the char was of poor quality, with 
a low specific surface area. The change of pressure not only affects the 
yield of char but also affects the specific surface area and pore diameter 
distribution  of tire  char [191]. With  the  increase of  pressure  (0.1-2.0 
MPa),  the  yield  of  tire  char  increased  from  32.51  to  35.89  wt.  %  at 
◦
600 
C, and the specific surface area of tire char decreased from 64.33 to 
(cid:0) 1.  The  product  tire  char  from  the  pressurized  pyrolysis 
58.06  m2⋅g
process had a distinct catalytic role in the cracking of volatiles. 

3.3.6. Residence time 

Residence time directly affects the secondary reactions of pyrolysis 
volatiles attached to the surface and within the pores of the tire char and 
the pyrolysis degree of the waste tire. Residence time includes two as-
pects:  one  is  the  residence  time  of  pyrolysis  volatiles;  another  is  the 
residence time of feedstock in the reactor. The carrier gas flow rate is 
inversely  proportional  to  the  residence  time,  that  is,  the  higher  the 
carrier  gas  flow  rate,  the  shorter  the  residence  time.  In  the  pyrolysis 
process, the carrier gas is often required to facilitate the volatiles to leave 
the pyrolysis reactor thereby separating the gases from the raw tire to 
achieve the purpose of obtaining pyrolysis oil, gas, and char. Carrier gas 
mainly affects the yield and quality of pyrolysis products through flow 
rate and gas type [21]. Some research workers studied the influence of 
residence  time  on  the  yield  and  quality  of  pyrolysis  products  by 
manipulating the carrier gas flow rate [283,284]. The yield of tire char 
under long residence time was significantly higher than that under short 
residence  time  [98].  In  addition,  the  increase  in  residence  time  also 
promotes secondary cracking reactions with the subsequent reduction in 
oil yield [100,112]. Moreover, carrier gas type also affects the pyrolysis 
products derived from waste tires. Compared with nitrogen as carrier 
gas used in the waste tire pyrolysis process [285], the use of recycled 

pyrolysis gas and steam as carrier gas both were beneficial to increase 
the yield of tire char. The yield of tire char obtained in a CO2 atmosphere 
was lower than that in an N2 atmosphere [286]. When the temperature is 
◦
C, the yield of tire char will continue to decline under a 
higher than 800 
CO2  atmosphere  due  to  its  partial  gasification  by  the  CO2.  This  phe-
nomenon has been reported in the literature [5,287]. The yield of char 
obtained from a mixture of different carrier gases (CO2, CO2  + steam) 
was lower than that where only an argon atmosphere was used [98]. 

To  ensure  complete  waste  tire  pyrolysis  and  completely  remove 
volatiles, the residence time of the tire in the pyrolysis reactor should be 
extended as far as possible. But, the yield of tire char obtained with long 
residence times was less than that in short residence times. This has been 
investigated by Edward et al. [264] and showed that the tire char yield 
decreased with the increase of the residence time of the feedstock in the 
reactor (1-4 h). The longer the residence time of feedstock, the carbon 
content in tire char was reduced, and the ash and sulfur content of the 
tire  char  was  higher.  The  pyrolysis  of  waste  tires  is  an  endothermic 
process and is relatively slow. When the absorbed energy reaches the 
required  energy  for  waste  tire  pyrolysis,  the  waste  tire  could  be 
completely pyrolyzed. The heat energy absorbed in a short time cannot 
satisfy the energy for the complete cracking of the waste tire, and this 
short residence time results in a higher yield of tire char generated in the 
pyrolysis of waste tires. The more energy that is absorbed over a long 
time, leads to complete cracking of the tire rubber and the generation of 
a low yield of tire char. The residence time of the waste tire in the reactor 
clearly affects the yield of tire char. The effect of the residence time of 
feedstock is particularly obvious in moving bed reactors, such as rotary 
kiln reactors and fluidized beds. If the residence time is too short, no 
matter how high the pyrolysis temperature, the waste tire could not be 
decomposed completely, and resulted in a high yield and poor quality of 
tire char. If the residence time is long and the temperature is too low, the 
waste tire also could not be completely decomposed, and this resulted 
again in high yield and poor quality of tire char. It has been reported that 
◦
the tire char yield was 33 wt. % at 500 
C where the residence time of the 
tire was 30 min using a moving bed reactor [99], and the sulfur content 
in tire char was 3.8%. However, the tire char yield could reach 45 wt. % 
◦
at a pyrolysis temperature of 500 
C maintained for tire pyrolysed for 20 
min with a fixed bed reactor, and produced a char with a specific surface 
(cid:0) 1, and with a sulfur content in tire char of 1.31% 
area of only 50.03 m2⋅g
[288]. In another study, the tire char yield was 41.2 wt. % when the 
◦
waste tire residence time was 15 min at 850 
C with a rotary kiln reactor, 
(cid:0) 1, with a 
while the specific surface area of the tire char was only 40 m2⋅g
sulfur content of 3.0% [169]. These differences in the yield and char-
acteristics of the tire char are mainly because the residence time was 
different, but also other reasons are the reactor configuration and the 
feed  mode  of  the  waste  tires.  The  high  temperature  was  suitable  for 
removing volatiles and produced a lower yield of tire char, but, a certain 
improvement in tire char quality, especially its BET surface area [155, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102219N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

180,289], resulted in a high cost to the waste tire pyrolysis process. 

It  can be  observed from Table  5  that the  pyrolysis  process  has  an 
important  influence  on  the  quality  of  the  products  from  pyrolysis  of 
waste tires. The mechanism of different pyrolysis conditions is different. 
Tire type as the source of tires for the pyrolysis process affects the quality 
of waste tire pyrolysis products in the pyrolysis process due to different 
components within the tire. Particle size and heating rate affect the rate 
of  heat  transfer  in waste  tire  pyrolysis and  the  final  temperature and 
residence time determine the degree of tire pyrolysis. To obtain a high- 
quality  tire  char,  the  pyrolysis  process  needs  to  be  considered 
comprehensively. 

To sum up from Sections 3.1 to 3.3, the yield and quality of tire char 
are influenced by various factors. The source of tire rubber is the original 
influential factor in relation to pyrolysis product distribution because its 
composition  can vary considerably depending on the requirements of 
the tire use. The pyrolysis conditions, technology and equipment used 

are factors in the treatment process in the waste tire pyrolysis step. To 
acquire  the  target  product,  these  influencing  factors  should  be 
comprehensively considered. 

4. Tire char characteristics 

The physical and chemical characteristics of the waste tire char have 
been reported in many research articles [21,148,155,290,291]. It is of 
great interest to understand the structural characteristics of tire char for 
its further application. The modification scheme of tire char could be 
determined by its structural characteristics. 

4.1. Physical structure characteristics 

The physical characteristics of tire char mainly include pore diam-
eter, pore volume, specific surface area, and composition. The common 

Table 5 
The effect of pyrolysis process conditions on products quality.  

Particle size 

Tire type 

Temperature 

Heating rate 

Pressure 

Process 
condition 

Mechanism of 

action 

Tire type 
Temperature 

◦

(

C) 
Particle size 

(mm) 

◦

(

Heating rate 
(cid:0) 1) 
C⋅min
Pressure 
(MPa) 

(cid:0) 1)  

N2 

(mL⋅min
Residence 
time (h) 

The particle 
size of tires 
affects the rate 
of heat transfer 
and heat 
absorption, 
thereby 
affecting the 
rate of tire 
pyrolysis. 

The components of different types of tires are different, and the 
pyrolysis behavior of components is different. 

The 
temperature 
determines the 
amount of 
energy and 
affects the 
degree of 
molecular 
bonds 
breakage. 

The heating rate 
affects the rate 
of heat transfer, 
the effective 
actual 
temperature, 
and the pyrolysis 
degradation of 
the tire. 

- 
500 

1.0-2.0 

1.0-20.0, 60- 
6000 
Ambient 
pressure 
200 

36.8-38.7, 
42.39-43.41 
- 

- 
500 

PCT 
550 

TT 

LVT 

MVT 

HVT 

TTR 
500 

SWR 

- 
400-900 

1.5-2.0 mm 

1-3 cm 

3 × 2.0 cm 

0.5-2.0, 
3 × 1.5 cm 
5 

Ambient 
pressure 

1.5-2.0 

7 

20 

Ambient pressure 

- 

1.0 

- 

- 

1.0-2.0, 
3 × 1.5 cm 
5 

Ambient 
pressure 

10 

100  

0.5 

12 g 
- 

Dosage 
Oil (wt.%) 

100 g-3.0 kg 
55.93 

130g 
47.4 

55.6 

200 g 
43.10 

53.51 

43.18 

Gas (wt.%) 

5.79 

7.4 

7.6 

12.06 

12.74 

17.29 

- 

- 

- 

100 g 
52.72-58.17 

100 g, 5 mg 
-, 56.04-56.38 

4.87-9.46 

-, 0.17-1.45 

Char (wt.%) 

35.15-38.16 

42.0 

3.0 

44.16 

32.59 

38.41 

42.72 

32.21 

32.34-50.10 

- 

3.2 

33.8 

- 
- 
40.3 
56.3 

0.4 
2.8 
7.84-11.9 
- 

Water (wt.%) 
Proximate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
- 
M (wt.%) 
- 
V (wt.%) 
14.3 
Ash (wt.%) 
FC (wt.%) 
82.4 
Ultimate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
C (wt.%) 
H (wt.%) 
N (wt.%) 
S (wt.%) 
O (wt.%) 
SBET (m2⋅g

81.24-90.6 
0.20-1.58 
0.24-0.7 
1.40-2.3 
1.19-6.34 
117-156 

- 
- 
- 
0.8 
- 
55.5 

- 
- 
- 
2.1 

(cid:0) 1) 

56.5 

- 

14.8 

33.9 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

-   

- 

- 

- 

3.05 
4.83 
46.54 
45.58 

50.65 
0.40 
0.47 
- 

1.02 
4.89 
6.54 
87.55   

88.81 
0.57 
0.48 
- 

121.47 

44.72 

0.3-0.5 
2.3-3.0 
7.25-12.96 

- 
- 
- 

80.26-95.9 
0.99-2.12 
0.20-1.1 
1.67-2.62 
0.07-7.66 
10-156 

-   

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
94-156 

HHV 

(MJ⋅kg

(cid:0) 1) 

Refs. 

- not described in the reference text. 
PCT- passenger car tire, TT- truck tire, TTR-tire tread rubber, SWR-side wall rubber. 

Residence 
time 

The 
residence 
time affects 
the 
secondary 
reaction of 
tire volatiles 
and the 
pyrolysis 
degree of the 
tire. 

- 
500 

1.0-2.0 

5 

Ambient 
pressure 

The pressure 
affects the 
movement 
behavior of 
volatiles. 
Increasing the 
pressure prevents 
the leave of 
volatiles from the 
raw materials and 
increase the 
residence time of 
volatiles in the 
reactor. 
- 
450- 
600 
0.2-0.8 
mm 
20 

SWR 
600 

2 mm 

30 

0.0035- 
0.004 
- 

0.1- 
2.0 
60  

100 
32.9- 
48.8 
15.4- 
21.8 
34.8- 
51.7 
- 

- 
- 
13.25 
85.18 

85.18 
1.15 
0.639 
2.03 
- 
67.96 

4 g 
52.03- 
56.45 
22.17- 
5.11 
32.51- 
35.89 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
58.06- 
64.33 

100 g 
- 

- 

35.66-38.45 

- 

- 
- 
8.86-9.24 
- 

76.50-82.39 
1.16-1.58 
0.20-0.24 
1.67-2.29 
5.68-10.36 
86-156 

- 

[264,265] 

[51] 

[52] 

[69] 

[264,265] 

[264,269] 

[93] 

[191] 

[264] 

1.5-2.0 

2.0 

- 

1.0 

1.0-4.0 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102220N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

detection  techniques  of  physical  characteristics  include  elemental 
analysis,  proximate  analysis,  SEM,  EDS,  TGA,  XRF,  BET,  and  Raman 
spectroscopy  [292].  Further  characterization  of  tire  char  is  through, 
element analysis, proximate analysis, the fixed carbon content, and ash 
content. The ash content also could be determined by TGA under an air 
atmosphere [293]. 

Tire  char  is  a  carbonaceous  material  with  high  carbon  content, 
usually, it is higher than 85%, whose main origin is the carbon black 
added  in  the  tire  formulation  process.  Moreover,  throughout  the  py-
rolysis process, the formation of carbonaceous deposits over the tire char 
surface  takes  place,  produced  from  the  pyrolysis  volatiles  secondary 
condensation  and  depolymerization  reactions.  The  extent  of  these  re-
actions  greatly  depends  on  process  conditions  [156,187,294].  The 
heating value of tire char is associated with high carbon content. The 
HHV of tire char is reported in the literature to range between 25 and 32 
(cid:0) 1, [75,164,295–297]. However, the interest in tire char as a solid 
MJ⋅kg
fuel is hindered by the high sulfur content. 

The stability of tire char could be tested by analysis using TGA under 
an inert gas atmosphere. Compared with the tire char obtained at high 
temperatures, the properties of low-temperature tire char are more un-
stable due to the waste tire not being completely thermally degraded. 
This may be due to the decomposition of inorganic compounds on the 
surface of tire char at high temperatures [69]. The presence of disorder 
in carbon and graphene 2D hexagonal lattice in the tire char with Raman 
spectra has been reported [69]. Meanwhile, the results of elemental and 
proximate analysis of the char produced from pyrolysis of the side wall 
of the tire were totally different from those of the char produced from 
the pyrolysis of the tire tread. The ash content in the side wall rubber 
char  was  lower  than  that  in  the  tread  rubber  char  [24].  The  specific 
surface  area  and  pore  diameter  could  be  determined  by  N2 
C.  Many  reports  have 
adsorption-desorption  (BET)  analysis  at  -196 
(cid:0) 1 
shown that the specific surface area of tire char was less than 140 m2⋅g
[296,298], in addition, there are more mesopores and few micropores in 
tire  char  [24,69].  Table  6  shows  the  comparison  of  tire  char 

◦

Table 6 
Comparison of tire char reported in the literature.   

characteristics reported in the literature. 

As Table 6 shows, the physical structure of the tire char produced 
from different tires is very different. It should be noted that these fea-
tures  strongly  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  carbon  black  used  in  tire 
formulation and on pyrolysis conditions, especially, temperature, resi-
dence time, and pressure. A large difference was shown to exist in the 
char produced from the pyrolysis of the tire side wall rubber and the tire 
tread rubber. 

4.2. Chemical structure characteristics 

The chemical characteristics of tire char mainly include the surface 
functional  groups  and  calorific  value.  The  chemical  characteristics  of 
tire char could be determined by FT-IR, XRD, and HHV [69]. The type 
and strength of the surface functional groups could be clearly shown by 
FT-IR. Usually, the surface functional groups of tire char include phe-
nols,  alcohols,  carboxylic  acid  [300],  and  C-O/C-O-C  chemical  struc-
tures  [301].  It  has  been  reported  that  higher  sulfur  retention  on  the 
surface of tire char was obtained at low temperature compared with that 
obtained  at  high  temperature,  which  was  due  to  the  relatively  high 
sulfur volatility at high temperature and some stable metallic sulfides 
which  remain  in  the  tire  char  [302].  XRD  results  also  indicated  that 
some graphitization appeared in the tire char, which was reflected by 
two  main  peaks  at  around  2θ= 24
[303].  In  addition,  these 
results were also confirmed by Raman spectra, illustrated in Fig. 15. The 
degree of graphitization of tire char was different for chars produced at 
different pyrolysis temperatures and residence times [69,304] (Fig. 15). 
Also, high pressure promotes high yield and graphitization of tire char 
(cid:0) 1 (Table 6). 
[191]. The heat value of tire char is typically ~30.7 MJ⋅kg
The surface nature of activated char from the waste tire was reported to 
be hydrophobic [305]. 

and  45

○ 

○

Side wall char-550 (ad) 

Tire tread char-550 (ad) 

Tire char 

Tire char (ad) 

Tire char 

Tire char (db) 

Tire char (ar) 

Proximate analysis of tire char 
M (wt.%) 
FC (wt.%) 
V (wt.%) 
Ash (wt.%) 
Ultimate analysis of tire char 
C (wt.%) 
H (wt.%) 
N (wt.%) 
O* (wt.%) 
S (wt.%) 
Zn/(ZnO) 
Si/(SiO2) 
Al/(Al2O3) 
Ca/(CaO) 
Na/(Na2O) 
Fe/(Fe2O3) 
Mg/(MgO) 
S/(SO3) 
K/(K2O) 
Ti/(TiO2) 
Fe/(Fe2O3) 
(cid:0) 1) 
SBET(m2⋅g
Micropore volume (cm3⋅g

(cid:0) 1) 

1.02 
87.55 
4.89 
6.54 

88.81 
0.57 
0.48 
- 
0.52 
0.38(Zn) 
0.12(Si) 
0.08(Al) 
0.10(Ca) 
0.05(Na) 
0.04(Fe) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.04 
44.72 
- 

Mesopore volume (cm3⋅g

(cid:0) 1) 

- 

(cid:0) 1) 

Vtot(cm3⋅g
Dp(nm) 
HHV(MJ⋅kg
Refs. 

(cid:0) 1) 

0.17 
14.96 
- 
[69] 

3.05 
45.58 
4.83 
46.54 

50.65 
0.40 
0.47 
- 
0.98 
1.47(Zn) 
0.30(Si) 
0.01(Al) 
0.05(Ca) 
0.22(Na) 
0.04(Fe) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.04 
121.47 
- 

- 

1.10 
36.15 
- 
[69] 

3.5 (ar) 
79.0 (db) 
4.2 (db) 
13.3 (db) 

82.5 (daf) 
0.8 (daf) 
0.0 (daf) 
12.7 (daf) 
4.0 (daf) 
37.0(ZnO) 
40.6(SiO2) 
2.3(Al2O3) 
6.6(CaO) 
1.2(Na2O) 
1.4(Fe2O3) 
1.4(MgO) 
7.5(SO3) 
1.0(K2O) 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
[292] 

1.4 
62.7 
25.0 
11.0 

84.8 
0.5 
0.3 
- 
2.9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
32.0 
- 
0.0 
- 
0.2 
0.2 
- 
30.69 
[296] 

3.00 (ar) 
81.44 (db) 
3.32 (db) 
15.24 (db) 

93.77 
1.04 
0.42 
0.08 
4.70 
32.36(ZnO) 
46.18(SiO2) 
2.36(Al2O3) 
7.54(CaO) 
0.43(Na2O) 
1.31(Fe2O3) 
1.39(MgO) 
6.62(SO3) 
1.03(K2O) 
0.12(TiO2) 
- 
31.26 
- 

- 

- 
32.1 
- 
[299] 

- 
85.7 
1.8 
12.5 

86.3 
0.3 
0.3 
10.3 
2.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
29.7 
[295] 

0.09 
90.8 
0.67 
8.41 

90.27 
0.26 
0.16 
- 
1.22 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
63 
- 

- 

0.32 
- 
- 
[72] 

- means not tested; * by difference; ar: As received basis; db: Dry basis; daf: Dry-and-ash-free basis 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102221N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

◦
Fig. 15. Raman spectra: (a) side wall rubber char and tread rubber char obtained at 500 

◦
C [69] and (b) rubber char at 1550 

C with different pyrolysis time [304].  

5. Modification of tire char 

Some researchers have reported that untreated tire char could be a 
substitute for commercial carbon black for rubber additives and has a 
potential value for recycling [155,306]. The ash content in tire char can 
limit the end-use application of tire char [307]. The high sulfur content 
of tire char also represents a major drawback for its utilization [148]. A 
further drawback of tire char is the potential for ash and volatile oily 
matter to stick to the surface of tire char during the pyrolysis process, 
causing pores to clog and act as agglomerating particles. Therefore, tire 
char  is  required  to  be  modified  and  purified  before  use  because  its 
quality was shown to be poorer than that of commercial carbon black 
[35]. 

It is worthy of note that the high ash content of tire char is mainly 
related to the minerals added in the tire manufacturing process [278]. 
Different processes have been proposed for tire char demineralization 
and the improvement of its commercial value. For example, ash leaching 
can be performed prior to or after tire pyrolysis. The ashes present in the 
tire rubber can modify the reaction pathway and selectivity of the py-
rolysis reactions. Moreover, the demineralization of the feedstock can 
also  promote  the  reduction  of  process  equipment  corrosion  and  the 
formation of hazardous species during pyrolysis [308]. 

The main constituent of waste tires ashes is ZnO, moreover, other 
metallic species commonly present are Fe, Al, Ca, and Mg [291,307,309, 
310]. The preferred process for tire demineralization is leaching. The 
performance of this liquid-solid extraction process depends on several 
factors, especially, the properties of the feedstock (particle size or initial 
porosity),  operating  conditions  (temperature,  contact  time,  leaching 
rate, or agitation) the composition of the ashes and its solubility [311]. 
Different  leaching  reagents  have  been  used  in  the  tire  or  tire  char 
demineralization, depending on the pH, solvents are classified into three 
groups:  water,  acid,  and  alkaline.  Amongst them,  acid  leaching  (HCl, 
H2SO4, or HNO3) are more commonly used in previous literature reports 
[303,312–314]. The porous nature of tire char eases the leaching pro-
cess with respect to that of the original tire rubber, in fact, the efficient 
ash removal only occurs on the surface of tire rubber [315]. 

Tire char demineralization is an especially interesting prior activa-
tion  process,  thus,  minerals  removal  promotes  the  creation  of  new 
mesopores and micropores, where these pores then act as active sites in 
the  subsequent  activation  step  [33,316].  Moreover,  this  strategy  is 
especially interesting to avoid an increase in ash content associated with 
the high burn-off carbon losses throughout activation [35,317]. More-
over, acid treatment has also demonstrated a positive effect on the sulfur 
content of tire char, for example, Akyildiz et al. [318] used an HCl and 
HNO3 mixture for leaching of tire char that resulted in highly efficient 
desulfurization of tire char (95.3%). However, H2SO4 used for tire char 

demineralization  could  provoke  the  addition  of  more  residual  sulfur. 
The application of  alkaline reagents  can also  promote  the removal of 
certain forms of sulfur in carbonaceous materials [319]. 

In the physical activation process, tire char undergoes partial gasi-
fication using different oxidizing agents, mainly steam and carbon di-
oxide.  The  operating  conditions  usually  considered  are  particle  size, 
temperature, activation agent, and activation time [320,321]. Accord-
ing  to  different  applications,  different  modification  processes  are 
needed. The conventional modification processes of tire char are shown 
in Fig. 16. 

Compared with the original tire char, the particle size of tire char 
after  superfine  pulverization  decreased  significantly  and  the  product 
powder was closely packed. The finer the particle size was, the easier the 
particle  agglomeration.  The  production  of  activated  carbon  obtained 
from waste tires is typically divided into two steps: (i) waste tires are 
pyrolyzed under the condition of the inert gas atmosphere and produce 
carbon materials, pyrolysis oil, and gas for energy utilization. (ii) The 
tire  char  is  activated  by  chemical  [322]  or  physical  methods  [35]. 
However, complex processes and low efficiency are the disadvantages of 
traditional  activation  methods.  According  to  the  application  require-
ment, the modification process of tire char needs to be adjusted to reach 
the standard specifications required for commercial carbon black. 

5.1. Comparison of properties of tire char with commercial carbon black 

Carbon is the main component of tire char, and its content in tire char 
is higher than 80 wt. %. Tire char contains a certain content of ash [204], 
(cid:0) 1 [21]. According to 
and the specific surface area is typically ~90 m2⋅g
EDS and XRF analyses of tire char, the inorganic elements in ash include 
Zn, Si, Al, Na, Ca, and Fe. The content of Si that exists in ash is relatively 
higher than other elements, up to 3.47% [69]. Some nano-sized particles 
in tire char coalesce into micro-sized particles. The tire char has uneven 
size distribution, rough surface, irregular shape, and smaller pores. But, 
the particle size of tire char  is smaller than commercial carbon black 
(N550) (Fig. 17A) [323]. 

From  Fig.  17Ac, the  distribution range  of  tire  char particle  size  is 
narrow and the average particle size is 8 μm, whereas for carbon black 
N550, the distribution range of particle size is wide, mostly ranging from 
20  to  40μm  and  most  of  the  particles  are  observed  to  have  a  higher 
particle size of ~40 μm (Fig. 17Ad). In addition, very few aggregations 
are  observed  in  N550  carbon  black  than  that  in  tire  char.  The  mean 
primary particle size of commercial carbon is mostly in the nanometer 
range (from 8 nm to 100 nm) with particles often aggregating in grape- 
like  clusters  of  size  up  to  500  nm.  Tire  char  has  a  developed  porous 
structure, with an average pore diameter of 25-30 nm, with fewer micro- 
pores  but  more  mesopores.  This  phenomenon  was  also  proved  in  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102222N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Fig. 16. The flow chart of waste tire pyrolysis carbon black modification process  

Fig. 17. (A) SEM image of tire char (a) and N550 (b), particle size distribution of tire char (c), and N550 (d) [323]. (B) TEM image of tire char (a, b) and N550 (c, 
d) [324]. 

literature by Helleur et al. [278], they compared the particle size of tire 
char and commercial carbon with TEM photos and indicated that the 
aggregation  of  tire  char  appeared  under  a  low  power  microscope. 
However, higher homogeneity was found in commercial carbon black 
N550 than that in tire char (Fig. 17B) [324]. The tire char as received 
was odourous, which was because pyrolysis volatiles composed of aro-
matic rings and ester chemical groups were attached to the surface of the 
tire char. This also resulted in poor quality and a small specific surface 
area of tire  char. The amount of ash in  tire char results in  a reduced 
content of carbon in the tire char, which seriously affects the quality and 
value of the product char. 

The mentioned poorer features compared with commercial carbon 
black  hinder  the  direct  reutilization  in  tire  manufacturing  [155,325]. 
Table  7  compares  the  properties  of  tire  char  with  some  commercial 
carbon  blacks  (N375,  N110,  rubber  carbon  black  GB  3778-2011, 
pigment  carbon  black  GB/T  7044-2003,  and  activated  wood  carbon 
for water purification GB/T 13804-2). The components of tire char were 

different from that of a commercial carbon black standard. Therefore, 
untreated  tire  derived  char  can  be  principally  used  as  a  low-grade 
reinforced  filler  in  the  production  of  low-quality  rubber  and  as 
pigment for ink [326]. In this scenario, different alternatives have been 
proposed  to improve  char  quality  and  ease  its reutilization  as  carbon 
black. The simplest approach is the optimization of the pyrolysis process 
conditions to improve char quality, in this respect, the operation under 
vacuum conditions has demonstrated promising results by reducing re-
sidual carbon black adulteration [93,302]. Tire char demineralization is 
another common strategy for char upgrading. Thus, the structure of the 
tire char is modified by removing ash and improving the relative mass of 
carbon in the tire char, expanding the pores and increasing the specific 
surface  area  of  the  tire  char  and  has  the  potential  to  be  used  as  a 
high-value commodity and used to obtain more value [327]. In spite of 
the suitable demineralization efficiencies reported in the literature using 
acid treatments [316,318], the modification in char surface properties 
associated with the oxidation under concentrated acids, such as HCl and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102223N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Table 7 
The component properties of tire char and commercial carbon black.   

Proximate analysis (wt.%) 
M 
FC 
V 
Ash 
Ultimate analysis (wt.%)           
C 
H 
N 
S 
O 
BET surface area (m2⋅g
Absorbing iodine value (mg⋅g
Particle diameter (nm) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

C⋅mm

◦
Liquidity (35
pH 
Heating loss (wt.%) 
Tinting 
Methylene blue discoloration 

(cid:0) 1) 

(mg⋅g

Refs. 

Tire char 

ar 
1.02 
87.55 
4.89 
12.21 

83.01 
0.38 
0.40 
4.52 
- 
77.63 
- 
14- 
36 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

db 
- 
86.4 
3.7 
9.9 

70.77 
0.76 
- 
3.05 
25.42 
- 
-    
-     

-     
-      
-    
-     
-     

Rubber carbon black 
N375 

N110 

Pigment carbon black 
(C111) 

Activated carbon 
for water 
purification 

db 
- 
89.3 
1.77 
7.93 

89.33 
0.35 
0.15 
2.3 
7.87 
49 

ar 
0.09 
90.8 
0.67 
7.41 

90.27 
0.26 
0.16 
1.22 
- 
63  

db 
- 
78.61 
5.58 
15.81 

78.83 
1.51 
0.38 
2.98 
16.30 

db     
- 
81.75 
3.36 
14.89 

79.45 
0.60 
0.35 
3.39 
16.21 
50.03 
161.97 

1.54 

- 
- 
- 
- 

97.26 
0.33 
0.35 
0.57 
- 
86-100 
90± 6 
- 

- 

≤ 2.0 
107-121 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

96.01 
0.26 
- 
- 
- 
120-134 
145± 8 
- 

- 
- 
≤ 3.0 
115-131 
- 

- 
- 
> 3.0 
< 0.5 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
200-600 
- 
9-37 

> 16 
2.0-6.0 
< 6.0 
> 109 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
> 800 
80 

- 
7.0-11.0 
- 
- 
> 6.0 

[36] 

[329] 

[204] 

[72] 

[138] 

[288] 

GB 3778- 
2011 

GB 3778- 
2011 

GB/T 7044-2003 

GB/T 13804- 
2 

ar: As received basis; db: Dry basis. 

HNO3  represents  a  significant  challenge  for  their  reutilization  after 
leaching [328]. From Table 7, compared with the commercial carbon 
black, the current research on tire char is relatively shallow. In the past, 
the study of tire char mainly focuses on the observation and research of 
basic analyses such as proximate analysis and ultimate analysis. How-
ever, there are relatively few other performance tests reported for tire 
char.  Currently,  researchers  are  beginning  to  pay  attention  to  the  in-
dustrial characteristics of tire char. However, there is a certain deviation 
from the research matched to the characteristics of commercial carbon 
black. In future research, more attention should be paid to the charac-
teristics and application performance of tire char related to the required 
specifications of the end-use. 

5.2. CO2  physical activation 

Gas activation of tire char for the production of activated carbons is 
◦
usually performed with steam or CO2 at temperatures above 800 
C. It is 
worthy of note that CO2  activation requires higher temperatures than 
that of steam (H2O) due to the slower reaction rates attained with the 
former activation agent moreover, steam also has a better capacity for 
the development of micropores [264]. The different behavior of CO2 and 
H2O lies in the smaller molecular size of water, which facilitates diffu-
sion within the porous structure of the char [330]. However, air used as 
an activation agent is limited due to the fast reaction rate and difficulty 
to control the process. 

CO2 is a major gas that contributes to global warming. Therefore, the 
use of CO2 is an activation agent for tire char, not only activates tire char 
but through this utilization also provides an alternative to the release of 
CO2 to the atmosphere and represents an environmentally friendly way 
to deal with CO2. Betancur et al. [286] proposed and studied the direct 
pyrolysis and activation of waste tires in a CO2  atmosphere. When the 
◦
C, the pyrolysis characteristics of the 
temperature was lower than 760 
waste tires in the CO2  atmosphere were similar to that in an N2  atmo-
sphere. When the temperature was higher than 760 
C, the redox reac-
tion occurred between tire char with CO2: 

◦

C + CO2→2RO

The activation reaction mechanism of tire char with CO2: 

C + CO2→C(O) + CO

(1) 

(2)  

C(O)→CO

CO + C→C(CO)

(3)  

(4) 

◦

The  CO  generated  in  the  reaction  could  briefly  cover  the  reactive 
activation site,  which  prevents  the further  reaction  between tire  char 
and CO2, and reduces the loss rate of carbon in tire char [331]. When the 
temperature is higher than 900 
C, tire char was activated in the CO2 
(cid:0) 1, 
atmosphere [322] and the specific surface area could reach 414 m2⋅g
these results were similarly reported elsewhere in the literature [332]. 
The  main  factors  influencing  the  activation  process  of  tire  char  are 
temperature,  activation  time  or  burn-off,  particle  size,  and  the  CO2 
partial pressure [35]. The main reason for the increase of the specific 
surface area of CO2  activated char is the small pore size development 
throughout  the  activation  of  the  product  and  high  pore  volume.  Tire 
◦
C, and the 
char was activated with CO2 at the final temperature of 950 
(cid:0) 1 
produced  activated  carbon  had  a  specific  surface  area  of  437  m2⋅g
[36]. There are many reports in relation to kinetic models of tire char 
activated  in  a  CO2  atmosphere,  describing  the  reaction  rate  versus 
conversion curve [28,333]. 

5.3. Steam physical activation 

Tire char physically activated with steam produced not only high- 
quality activated carbon  but also hydrogen-rich syngas. Many studies 
have reported that steam activation was an efficient activating process 
in the activation field of tire char [334,335]. Moreover, the use of steam 
as  an  activation  agent  also  contributes  to  the  sulfur  reduction  in  the 
obtained  carbon  [336],  this  point  is  of  great  interest  for  the  final 
application as activated carbon. 

The high specific surface area of activated carbon obtained from tire 
char under a steam atmosphere has been reported to be as high as 1260 
(cid:0) 1, however, the yield of the product activated carbon was only 9 
m2⋅g
wt. % [337]. According to the results from Merchant and Petrich [294], 
the yield of activated carbon was 60 wt. %, and the specific surface area 
of the tire derived activated carbon was 500 m2⋅g
C produced 
in an atmosphere of nitrogen: steam of 1:5. A specific surface area of 
(cid:0) 1 with a carbon burn-off of 25.9 
steam activated tire char of 272 m2⋅g
wt. % at 900 
C was reported [278]. In another study, the specific sur-
(cid:0) 1  with a 
face area of activated carbon from waste tires was 985 m2⋅g

(cid:0) 1 at 850 

◦

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102224N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

burn-off of 65.0 wt. % [305]. The relation between the specific surface 
area and carbon burn-off of tire char with steam activation at 850 and 
900 

C was analyzed and reported [336] (Fig. 18). 

◦

The activation reaction mechanism of tire char with H2O has been 

proposed [338]: 

C + H2O→H2 + CO

CO + H2O→CO2 + H2

(5)  

(6) 

This activation reaction mechanism could be confirmed by the re-
sults  of  activation  syngas  analysis  [339].  In  the  steam  activation,  the 
(cid:0) 1  with  78.4  wt.  % 
specific  surface  area  of  the  char  was  786  m2⋅g
burn-off. This result is better than that reported in the literature using 
CO2 as the activating agent using [336]. 

5.4. Chemical activation by impregnation methods 

Impregnating tire char with a chemical reagent has the potential to 
remove the  inorganic matter  of the ash of tire char, enlarge  the pore 
diameter,  improve  the  relative  content  of  carbon,  and  increase  the 
specific surface area of tire char [36,340]. A wide variety of chemical 
activation  agents  have  been  proposed  in  the  literature  for  activated 
carbons  products  such  as  alkali  hydroxides  (NaOH/KOH),  inorganic 
acids  (H3PO4,  HCl,  and  H2SO4),  or  ZnCl2  [35].  Some  metallic  and 
non-metallic elements in the ash of tire char can be dissolved in HCl, and 
the  ash  content  of  tire  char  modified  by  HCl  is  also  reduced  corre-
spondingly [341]. The surface of tire char modified with H2SO4 exposed 
several  loose  surfaces.  As  H2SO4  has  a  strong  corrosive  effect,  some 
pores inside the activated char are cross-linked by acid corrosion, so that 
small  pore  connections  become  larger  pores,  thereby  increasing  the 
specific surface area [273]. After impregnation with NaOH, the quality 
of tire char was improved, for example, the sulfur content in tire char 
modified with alkali washing was significantly decreased, but the con-
(cid:0) 1 with an 
tent of oxygen was increased. The surface area was 215 m2⋅g
increase in the micro-pore ratio [26]. The characteristics of activated 
carbon  from  tire  char  with  NaOH  and  KOH  solution  were  reported 
(cid:0) 1  and  951 
[342],  and  their  specific  surface  area  reached  738  m2⋅g
(cid:0) 1,  respectively.  The  removal  rate  of  ash  and  sulfur  in  tire  char 
m2⋅g
modification was investigated [343] using HCl and HF under the con-
ditions  of  ultrasound  processing.  The  ash  in  tire  char  was  mainly 
composed of metal oxides, sulfides, and silica. The modified tire char 
produced was similar to commercial carbon black in terms of surface 
properties,  porosity,  and  morphology,  which  could  be  an  alternative 
product for commercial carbon black N326 for making tire rubber. Only 

1.2  wt.  %  ash  in  the  char  was  reported  with  HCl  leaching.  After 
(cid:0) 1 and most 
upgrading with HCl, the specific surface area was 76.3 m2⋅g
ash components were removed [324]. Heras et al. [344] used nitric acid 
(HNO3) as a cyclic activator to increase the specific surface area of tire 
(cid:0) 1, which provides a reference for tire char activation 
char to 750 m2⋅g
technology. 

In summary, Table 8 shows that, different activation methods have 
different effects on the tire char. The specific surface area of activated 
(cid:0) 1, which depended on activation 
carbon varied from 90 to 1317 m2⋅g
method, carbon burn-off, activation time, temperature, gas flow rate, etc 
[278,334,339,348,349].  Some  researchers  reported  that  the  activated 
carbon obtained from the steam activation of tire char had better quality 
than that from CO2 activation at certain conditions, since the molecular 
size of steam is smaller than that of CO2 [350,351]. Except for steam and 
CO2, tire char could also be modified using NO and O2 [352]. However, 
the quality of the activated carbon product was determined by various 
factors, which not only depended on the activation agent. 

The quality and characteristics of activated carbon derived from tire 
is not only related to the composition of tire char but also related to the 
more  complicated  activation  technology.  Activation  produces  open 
pores, expansion and generation of new pores, therefore, developing the 
existing pores of the tire char. Comparing gas activation and chemical 
regent  activation,  there  are  no  chemical  reagents  and  secondary 
washing  processes  in  the  gas  activation  process.  Also,  the  quality  of 
activation tire char by physical activation depends on high temperature 
and  long  residence  time.  There  is  no  equipment  corrosion  and  envi-
ronmental  pollution  in  the  gas  activation  process.  The  tire  activated 
carbon from the gas activation process can be used directly. However 
there is a need to improve the speed of reaction, shorten the reaction 
time,  and  reduce  energy  consumption  as  key  issues  that  need  to  be 
solved in the gas activation process. The temperature of chemical regent 
activation is usually lower than that of physical activation. The largest 
disadvantage  of  chemical  regent  activation  is  the  reagents  used  are 
usually corrosive to equipment. The product activated carbon needs to 
be washed to neutrality after chemical regent impregnation activation of 
tire char, which may cause significant water pollution. Therefore, the 
overall cost of the process is markedly increased and hinders its imple-
mentation at a large scale [353]. Reagents could remove the ash in the 
tire  char,  but  physical  activation  could  not.  The  single  activation 
modification  technology  has  some  drawbacks,  for  example,  activated 
carbon  with  a  high  specific  surface  area  has  a  large  burn-off  using  a 
steam atmosphere, and the ash content in activation tire char is high in 
the  gas  activation  process.  Mixtures  of  activation  methods  could 
improve  the  quality  of  activated  char  and  decrease  the  burn-off  and 

Fig. 18. (a) Evolution of burn-off in the activation process at the two temperatures studied. (b) BET surface area values of the active carbons obtained at different 
burn-off levels [336]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102225N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Table 8 
Comparison of the modification of tire char.  

Method 

Experimental 
condition 

Temperature 
◦
(
C) 
Dosage 

CO2 

H2O 

HCl+ H2O 

HCl+ CO2 

Chemical reagent 
Acid solution 

750-950 

750-920 

850-950 

800-950 

20 

70 

0.05-5 
L⋅min

(cid:0) 1 

0.6 
L⋅min
kg⋅h

(cid:0) 1 - 3 
(cid:0) 1 

(cid:0) 1 

1 mol⋅L
HCl 

(cid:0) 1 

1 mol⋅L
HCl 

Alkaline solution 

Room 
temperature 
1-3 g/g (tire 
char/NaOH) 

Room 
temperature 
1-3 g/g (tire 
char/KOH) 

(cid:0) 1 

2-4 
mol⋅L
HCl 

tire char/ 
HNO3 (15- 
65 %) 1g/ 
10 mL 
24 

3 

24 

24 

Fenton 

20 

tire char/ 
H2O2 (15-35 
%) 1g/10 
mL 
24 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Active time 
(h) 

1-3 

1-4 

Simple production 
process, no equipment 
corrosion, combustion 
gas generated, low 
environmental pollution. 
High temperature, 
energy consumption, and 
cost, ash content high, 
slow reaction rates. 

Acid wash 2- 
16 h + CO2 
(1-4 h) 

Acid wash 
24 h + H2O 
(1-4 h) 
combustion gas generated, 
low ash content, high carbon 
content. 

Equipment corrosion, 
complex process, long time, 
energy consumption, high 
cost. 

Low tire char loss, high 
carbon content, low ash 
and sulfur content. 

Low sulfur content, higher SBET 
and Iodine. 

Higher SBET 

Equipment corrosion, 
complex process, long 
time. 

Equipment corrosion, complex process, low 
carbon content, high hydrogen and oxygen 
content. 

Proximate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
M (wt.%) 
FC (wt.%) 
V (wt.%) 
Ash (wt.%) 

- 
- 
- 
12.68- 
14.36 
Ultimate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
81.35- 
C (wt.%) 
84.52 
0.10-0.20 
0.14-0.15 
2.55-4.87 
- 
6.0-61.0 
99-483 
146-302 
[286,334, 
345,346] 

H (wt.%) 
N (wt.%) 
S (wt.%) 
O (wt.%) 
Burn-off (wt.%) 
(cid:0) 1) 
SBET (m2⋅g
Iodine (mg⋅g
Refs. 

(cid:0) 1) 

- 
- 
- 
11.9 

- 
- 
- 
18.3 

- 
- 
- 
2.7 

- 

- 

95.67 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
9-87.5 
154-1317 
234-277 
[334,339] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
33.1-78.6 
585-1177 
- 
[33] 

0.11 
0.18 
1.33 
- 
- 
203-1014 
- 
[345,346] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
12-90 
100-750 
- 
[344] 

- 
- 
- 
1.26-3.30 

3.16-4.35 
78.63-80.82 
10.65-13.78 
4.18-5.88 

3.45-4.12 
76.09-80.59 
10.05-14.16 
5.69-5.91 

95.55- 
96.12 
0.11-0.20 
0.12-0.20 
0.96-1.19 
- 
- 
- 
- 
[345] 

71.99-75.3 

72.55-76.44 

2.41-8.04 
1.14-1.40 
0.16 
12.26-25.15 
- 
116-700 
556-720 
[26,342,347] 

2.67-3.49 
1.40-2.24 
- 
19.49-21.79 
- 
798-951 
635-752 
[342] 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
7-89 
95-400 
- 
[344] 

- not described in the reference text. 

activation cost [354]. 

6. Applications of tire char 

The  global  annual  increase  in  the  yield  of  waste  tires,  with  their 
associated very low or even negative cost as a process feedstock, makes 
the consequent cost of producing tire char low, which is also the main 
reason for the rapid growth of the tire char market. Due to the different 
sources and pyrolysis processes of waste tires, tire char accounts for 30- 
37 wt. % of tire pyrolysis products, with an ash content of about 7.0-15 
wt. %. There are many applications that have been suggested for the use 
of tire char. For example, printing ink is a colloid dispersive system that 
is  composed  of  filler,  linking  material,  pigment,  and  auxiliary  agent, 
where tire char could be used as pigment added to printing ink [355]. 
For example, the performance of tire char as a pigment in offset printing 
ink has been reported [356]. The application of tire char as solid fuel has 
also been reported in the literature [357]. It was also suggested that tire 
char could be used as filler in modifying asphalt [358,359]. The specific 
surface area, pore diameter, and surface properties of tire char are also 
different when obtained under different tire pyrolysis conditions [360]. 
Tire char has the characteristics of developed pores and small pore di-
ameters. However, due to its low specific surface area, it cannot meet the 
application  requirements  of  commercial  carbon  black.  Thus,  its  eco-
nomic value is relatively low [250,361]. Therefore, attention is focused 
on how to effectively increase the added value of tire char. At present, 
the applications of tire char are wide and these utilization alternatives 
are  represented  in  Fig.  19.  The  main  application  includes  activated 
carbon  as  adsorbents  prepared  by  modifying  tire  char  [351],  rubber 
reinforcing  materials  (commercial  carbon  black)  [362],  battery 

Fig. 19. The main high added value applications of tire char.  

materials, catalyst support materials, and asphalt additives [187]. 

6.1. Tire char gasification for fuel gas 

Tire char could be gasified with steam and carbon dioxide to produce 
a fuel gas due to the high carbon content of tire char. In Sections 5.2 and 
5.3, the gasification mechanism with CO2 and steam was discussed. The 
products of gasification are used as fuel gas, which has a high heating 
value, and its use results in low secondary pollution. Moreover, the use 
of steam as a gasifying agent allows for hydrogen-rich gas production. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102226N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

◦

◦

Tire char showed higher reactivity with steam than that with CO2 [276]. 
The low reactivity of tire char with CO2 also was investigated in different 
reports [363,364] (Fig. 20). The activation energy of tire char in the CO2 
(cid:0) 1 reported by Pooya et al. [363], while, it 
atmosphere was 250 kJ⋅mol
(cid:0) 1 reported by Jung et al. [364]. Carbon conversion 
was 57.06 kcal⋅mol
has a crucial relationship with high temperature, the high temperature 
increased the carbon conversion rate and decreased the time for com-
plete carbon conversion. The data (Fig. 20) show that the reaction time 
of 40 min was rather long even at a high temperature (1000 
C) in the 
CO2 atmosphere, and it can be shorted to about 20 min for a high carbon 
conversion through the co-gasification of tire char and other bio-char. 
Carbon conversion reached 1.0 required a reaction time of 2.8 h at 
the condition of 10 vol.% steam and 900 
C [349]. The initial weight 
(10-15 mg) did not show any remarkable influence on the carbon con-
version in TGA experiments in the steam atmosphere. Without consid-
ering  the  initial  weight,  the  gas  atmosphere,  activator  dosage,  and 
temperature are the main factors affecting the carbon conversion time. 
Because  the  initial  weight  of  tire  char  was  only  8  mg  and  with  a  50 
(cid:0) 1  CO2  flow rate in the gasification of tire char at 1000 
ml⋅min
C, the 
reaction time of 40 min reported by Pooya et al. [363] was shorter than 
that  in  the  report  by  Aranda  et  al.  [349].  However,  more  time  was 
needed  to  reach  carbon  conversion  when  the  initial  weight  was 
increased  to  5  mg  [365],  requiring  4  h  when  the  carbon  conversion 
could only  reach 60%  at 950 
C with  66.7 vol.% steam. Carbon con-
version was around 30-70 % higher for steam activated chars than for 
◦
CO2-activated chars between 950 and 1050 
C. This showed that steam 
activation  yielded  higher  carbon  conversion  than  that  with  CO2  acti-
vation  under  the  same  activation  conditions.  The  activation  energy 
required for tire char gasification using steam was lower than that with 
CO2  [349]. The results indicated that a higher syngas yield was gener-
ated with steam gasification at high temperatures, which could reach 86 
(cid:0) 1 heating 
◦
wt. % at 1000 
value [366]. The gasification of tire char is a two-way process. Excessive 
gasification of tire char will convert all the carbon into fuel gas. When 
the carbon conversion of tire char reached 70-80% [365], it not only 
produces a high yield fuel gas but also obtains a high quality activated 
carbon. The activation energy of tire char in a steam atmosphere could 
(cid:0) 1. The specific surface area of gasification tire char 
reach 114.3 kJ⋅mol
increased  80%  compared  with  the  initial  specific  surface  area  of  tire 
char. 

C and produce a product gas with a 25 MJ⋅kg

◦

◦

Although there are many studies on tire char activation to generate 
fuel  gas,  most  of  the  research  focuses  on  the  carbon  conversion  and 
activated  energy  of  the  tire  char.  It  is  difficult  to  find  literature  to 
calculate the lower heating value of fuel gas generated from tire char 
activation, let alone the energy analysis of tire char activation. 

Fig.  20. Carbon  conversion  of  tire-char  at  several  gasification  temperatures 
with TGA [363]. 

6.2. Tire char as adsorbent (activated carbon) 

Compared with other technologies of wastewater treatment (reverse 
osmosis  [367],  ion  exchange  [368],  extraction  (liquid-liquid)  [369], 
electrodialysis  [370],  and  electrolysis  [371]),  adsorption  has  the  ad-
vantages of low treatment cost and easy operation [372]. The quality 
and cost of adsorption materials have a great influence on the effect of 
wastewater  treatment.  Carbon  materials  have  been  widely  used  in 
removing  harmful  substances  that  exist  in  industrial  wastewater  and 
waste gas because of their cheap and wide resource availability [373]. 
Usually, activated carbon used in liquid adsorption applications should 
be  mesoporous  materials.  It  has  been  widely  demonstrated  that  acti-
vated tire char is mesoporous, the application of chemical and physical 
activation processes may further develop the tire char porous structure. 
Tire derived carbon materials could be used as an absorbent [334,351] 
in removing harmful substances that may exist in wastewater. Augustine 
et al. [309] prepared tire char and studied the characterization of tire 
char for removing copper. The removal rate of copper could reach 24 
(cid:0) 1 with tire char. The maximum adsorption capacity of methylene 
mg⋅g
(cid:0) 1 with activated tire char [374]. 
blue reached 120 mg⋅g

Guerrero-Esparza et al. [375] adjusted the pyrolysis process of waste 
tires and modified the product tire char. The adsorption of Fe ions in 
water by modified tire char was also studied. The results indicated that 
the  specific  surface  area  of  tire  char  is  the  main  factor  affecting  the 
adsorption of Fe ions. The oxygen electrons on the surface structure of 
tire  char  (carbonyl,  carboxyl,  ester)  electrostatically  interact  with  Fe, 
which  enables  Fe  ions  to  enter  abundant  adsorption  sites,  thus 
increasing  the  adsorption  performance  of  tire  char  for  Fe  ions.  The 
adsorption of organic compounds 1,3-dichlorobenzene (DCB), 1,3-dini-
trobenzene (DNB), and 2,4-dichlorophenol (DCP) by using tire char has 
been investigated [376]. The results showed that tire char had a good 
adsorption effect on organic matter, and the specific surface area of the 
char was the main factor affecting the adsorption quantity. The treat-
ment  capacity  of  methylene  blue  between  acid-treated  activated  tire 
char and commercial carbon was compared [316]. It was reported that 
the adsorption capacity of activated tire char was higher than that of 
commercial carbon. The adsorption capacity of Cd (II) and Pb (II) could 
(cid:0) 1  respectively with chemically activated tire 
reach 201 and 196 mg⋅g
char [377]. After regeneration, the chemically activated tire char could 
be used repeatedly ten times, before the adsorption capacity decreased. 
According  to  Makrigianni  et  al.  [378],  the  maximum  adsorption  ca-
pacities  of  phenol  and  methylene  blue  on  acid-treated  tire  char  were 
(cid:0) 1, respectively. KOH-treated 
found to be 51.92 mg⋅g
(cid:0) 1, presented maximum 
tire char, with a surface area as high as 700 m2⋅g
(cid:0) 1 [379]. 
adsorption of tetracycline of 312 mg⋅g

(cid:0) 1 and 65.81 mg⋅g

The use of tire char as commercial activated carbon after pretreat-
ment and activation using different strategies has been widely investi-
gated, especially in wastewater treatment. The efficiency and capacity of 
its  use  in  wastewater  treatment  are  remarkable,  which  reinforces  its 
potential application as an adsorbent. 

6.3. Tire char as supporting material and catalyst 

The catalyst support material plays an important role in the prepa-
ration  of  catalysts.  The  properties  of  the  support  materials  affect  the 
loading capacity, the interaction between the active phase and support, 
and the dispersion of active components. Modified tire char has some 
characteristics, such as light weight, soft texture, small particle size, and 
large specific surface area that demonstrate its potential as a catalyst 
support  material.  The  influence  of  tire  char  as  support  material  was 
studied by Zhang et al. [380] for supported platinum catalyst in relation 
to the yield and composition of methyl cyclohexane cracking products. 
The  results  showed  that  platinum  had  a  good  loading  capacity  and 
dispersion on the modified tire char, and formed Pt nanoparticles with a 
particle size of about 2.5 nm, which were well dispersed on the surface 
of the modified tire char. The catalyst activity was mainly influenced by 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102227N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

the  capacity  of  Pt  and  temperature.  The  conversion  rate  of  methyl 
cyclohexane to hydrogen and toluene was up to 95 %. Ji et al. [381] 
prepared  heterogeneous  catalysts  supported  by  two  chiral  Mn  (III) 
complexes on tire char, which had a good catalytic performance in the 
asymmetric epoxidation of nonfunctional olefin with a conversion rate 
of 99%. For the asymmetric epoxidation of 1-phenyl cyclohexene, the 
two  heterogeneous  catalysts  synthesized  had  better  catalytic  perfor-
mance  and  higher  enantio-selectivity  than  the  homogeneous  catalyst, 
which could be recycled three times. Sulfuric acid was used [382] as the 
source of the SO3H group to load on tire char and was investigated for 
the transesterification and esterification of waste oil under subcritical 
conditions.  Compared  with  other  reported  literature,  the  tire  char 
catalyst  had  the  advantage  of  short  reaction  time  and  low  energy 
consumption. 

Catalysts  have  been  widely  used  in the  reforming  of  pyrolysis  oil, 
increasing the yield of pyrolysis gas. The effect and mechanism of tire 
char  in  the  oxygen  reduction  reaction  for  alkaline  fuel  cells  were  re-
ported  in  the  literature  [383].  The  large  specific  surface  area  and 
porosity  of  the  tire  char  were  the  main  factors  contributing  to  the 
enhanced oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity. The high concen-
tration  of  ZnO  in  the  tire  char  was  another  factor  for  enhanced  ORR 
activity. This study showed that tire char could be easily transformed 
into a high performance and stable electro-catalyst for the ORR. Heated 
tire char increased the quality of waste tire pyrolysis oil and gas [24]. 
The yield of the waste tire pyrolysis gas could reach 10.5 wt. % after 
catalytic  pyrolysis  with  a  heated  tire  char,  which  was  significantly 
higher than that without catalysts. A high yield of single ring aromatic 
compounds was obtained at the catalytic condition with the heated tire 
char. Tire char could be used as a catalyst in the waste tire pyrolysis 
process and could decrease the production of large-size aromatic com-
pounds  in  the  product  pyrolysis  oil  due  to  its  mesoporous  structure 
[121], the effect of acid-treated tire char was higher than that of tire 
char. The effect of tire char on the decarboxylation and dehydration of 
bio-oil was studied [292], the extent of deoxygenation of bio-oil could 
reach 40.3 wt. % under the conditions of tire char loading of 80% in the 
catalytic process. ZnS in tire char played a positive role in the catalytic 
reaction. Tire char also appeared in a positive role in biomass gasifica-
(cid:0) 1 with the use of 
tion, the yield of hydrogen could reach 39.20 mmol⋅g
tire char [384]. 

6.4. Tire char as reinforcing agent for tire rubber 

Carbon black plays a reinforcing role in rubber processing, which is 
an important member of the reinforcing system. Carbon black added to 
rubber could also improve rubber wear resistance and reduce industry 
costs.  The  characteristics  of  tire  char  have  a  certain  similarity  with 
commercial carbon black, which provides support for its use as a rubber 
reinforcing additive. Tire char has a small particle size, so it would have 
good dispersion in rubber [385]. Modified tire char has a reinforcing 
effect,  which  enhances  the  mechanical  properties  of  rubber,  such  as 
tensile strength and hardness [323]. However, tire char as a reinforcing 
agent represents a significant challenge due to the impurities present. 
Tire char was used [386] as the reinforcing filler for SBR, which would 
not affect the solidification of rubber. The good dispersion of tire char 
makes  the  tear  strength  and  fracture  mechanical  properties  of  SBR 
higher than that of commercial carbon black added as N330, which leads 
to the expansion of the damaged area at the crack tip of the binder. In the 
comparison of tire char with N330, it was found that the good trend of 
tearing  characteristics  is  an  additional  effect  of  the  dispersion  of  tire 
char. In terms of other properties, tire char has some similar properties 
to commercial carbon black and could be a potential alternative. The 
performance  of  tire  char  used  with  ethylene-propylene  rubber  was 
investigated [323] and it was shown that the reinforcing effect and the 
cross-link density of tire char were good but slightly lower than that of 
commercial carbon black (N550). The function of acid-treated tire char 
as an additive in styrene-butadiene rubber was investigated [324], the 

poor  mechanical  properties  of  SBR  added  with  acid-treated  tire  char 
were  ascribed  to  the  presence  of  higher  mineral  matter  and  poorer 
structure in tire char. Despite these negative properties, it was demon-
strated that acid-treated tire char showed relevant reinforcing effects. 
Tire char separated from the cross-linked network of ground tire rubber 
demonstrated 
solution 
excellent 
styrene-butadiene rubber [387]. 

reinforcing 

effect 

on 

an 

6.5. Tire char as battery and capacitor material 

Super-capacitors and batteries are devices for storing energy and are 
used in electric cars, mobile phones, computers, nano-generators, and 
other electronic equipment [45,388]. At present, the research on acti-
vated carbon-based capacitors has attracted much attention, especially 
carbon nanomaterials as capacitors, have been widely studied owing to 
their  exceptional  combination  of  intrinsic  properties.  Carbon  nano-
materials can be used as both matrices and functional additives due to 
their miscellaneous structures and dimensionality ranging from 0D to 
3D.  And  most  notably,  their  tunable  surface  chemistry  and  versatile 
surface functionalization has led to important roles in charge-transfer 
systems  and  trending  energy  sources  [389].  The  electrochemical  per-
formance  of  carbon  nanomaterials  was  usually  enhanced  by  doping 
heteroatoms.  Xiaoqiang  et  al.  [390]  designed  and  prepared  a 
nano-silica/carbon hybrid matrix layer on silicon nanoparticles as anode 
materials for lithium-ion batteries. With the introduction of nano-silica, 
the multifunctional nano-silicon/carbon hybrid matrix can significantly 
maintain structural integrity during the volume change of silicon, pro-
vide a higher capacity than the traditional single carbon coating layer 
and enhance the conductivity of the materials. Carbon-based materials 
have been widely promoted due to their good electrical conductivity and 
chemical stability. The characteristics of boron-doped graphene aerogels 
(B-Gas) prepared  through  the hydrothermal method  were reported in 
the  literature  [391].  The  combination  of  mesoporous  structure,  high 
specific surface area, and abundant defects of B-Gas enhanced the per-
formance of super-capacitors. The cost of traditional carbon materials 
(carbon  paper, carbon  cloth,  and  graphite) is  expensive, which  limits 
their wide application. The costs of using the waste tires for processing 
are  cheap,  while  tire  char  as  electrode  materials  could  increase  the 
economic viability of the waste tire treatment process [392]. 

There are many advantages of tire char, specially modified tire char 
with a high specific surface area, high conductivity, and other charac-
teristics. The characteristics of modified tire char meet the requirements 
of super-capacitor materials, which could be an ideal electrode material 
for super-capacitors. Activated tire char displayed good electrochemical 
properties  [393]  and  were  demonstrated  as  suitable  material  for 
super-capacitors.  The  highly  porous  carbon  from  the  waste  tire  was 
produced and used as a super-capacitor with long cycle life [394]. Shilpa 
et al. [395] removed the ash in the tire char and obtained a high purity 
carbon  by  using  hydrochloric  acid  (HCl)  and  hydrofluoric  acid  (HF) 
processing. The tire char was further activated by potassium hydroxide 
(KOH)  to  adjust  the  surface  characteristics  of  carbon,  producing  an 
(cid:0) 1. The processed 
activated carbon of a specific surface area of 870 m2⋅g
carbon was used as an anode of lithium-ion batteries, whose high spe-
(cid:0) 1  with  80%  of  the  capacity 
cific  capacitance  reached  880  mA⋅h⋅g
retention after 100 times recycling. Activated carbon from tire char was 
used  as  super-capacitor  material  [396]  and  the  effects  of  physical 
characteristics (pore size, etc.) of activated carbon on the capacitance 
and charge and discharge rate of super-capacitor materials were studied. 
The  results  showed  that  the  capacitance  of  activated  carbon  was 
controlled  by  micropore  volume,  the  charge  and  discharge  rate  was 
greatly influenced by the volume ratio of mesopore with micropore and 
has nothing to do with the absolute value of mesopore volume. Naskar 
et  al.  [397]  produced  tire  char,  with  a  high  content  and  ordered  as-
sembly of graphite, from tire rubber pretreated with a hot oleum bath 
and pyrolysis under a nitrogen atmosphere. The reversible capacity of 
(cid:0) 1  after 100 
the cell with the char used as the anode was 390 mA⋅h⋅g

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102228N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

cycles, with nearly 100% coulombic efficiency. Li et al. [398] reported 
the influence of pyrolysis temperature on the energy capacities of tires 
and then used the char as an anode for sodium-ion batteries. But the 
(cid:0) 1  after  100  cycles,  was 
result,  with  the  best  capacity  of  203  mA⋅h⋅g
worse than that reported by Naskar et al. [397]. 

6.6. Tire char applications in construction and materials 

In spite of the fact that tire crumb has been widely used as a concrete 
additive to improve its mechanical properties [399–401], the positive 
features  of  tire  char  as  reinforcements  for  concrete  were  recently  re-
ported by Mahmood et al. [402]. The addition of only 1.0% to concrete 
formulation  enhanced  the  fracture  toughness  of  treated  concrete  by 
48.8%.  At  the  same  time,  the  compressive  strength  was  remarkably 
improved (49%) after tire char incorporation. 

The  use  of  tire  char  for  the  production  of  phase  change  materials 
(PCM) was proposed [403,404], which could be used as an additive to 
cement mortar. PCM materials have the ability to accumulate heat and 
ensure a high energy storage capacity which is of special relevance for 
energy-saving construction. In this respect, the use of tire char showed a 
promising performance in the application as PCM which allows for the 
development of new and sustainable heat-accumulating building mate-
rial for application in the construction industry. 

Another relevant application of tire char in the construction sector is 
the production of road bitumen as a binding agent used for road pave-
ments, parking areas, and driveways. It is notable that the incorporation 
of tire derived char demonstrated a capacity to improve the rheological 
properties of bitumen [405–408]. A positive effect of tire char addition 
to  bitumen  has  also  been  reported  [409],  apart  from  improving  the 
rheological  properties,  it  enhances  the  electrothermal  properties  of 

Table 9 
The application of tire char and key properties.  

bitumen,  making  the  modified  binder  feasible  for  multifunctional  ap-
plications.  Moreover,  pyrolysis  char  addition  also  contributes  to 
improving  thermal  and  photo-oxidative  ageing  resistance  of  bitumen. 
Thus, Feng et al. [407] performed a complete ageing study of asphalt 
binders  incorporating  tire  char  employing  penetration,  ductility,  soft-
ening  point,  and  viscosity  tests  prior  to  and  after  thermo-oxidative 
ageing and photo-oxidative ageing. Tire char addition demonstrated a 
remarkable improvement in ageing resistance in relation to unmodified 
binders. Also, the potential of tire derived char as sustainable asphalt 
binder modifiers was reported, where the ageing properties and basic 
mechanical features were improved [410]. 

Another field of application of tire char is composites production. A 
composite of low density polyethylene and tire char with different po-
tential applications was reported [411] and showed that the produced 
composites  demonstrated  excellent  mechanical  and  dielectric  proper-
ties.  Moreover,  tire  char  was  used  for  the  production  of  castor-based 
polyurethane  composites  with  promising  results  [412].  Pyrolytic  tire 
char was used as a carbon precursor in silicon carbide production where 
the process was carried out in a plasma reactor and showed tire char 
with a promising performance in this novel application [413]. 

Table  9  summarized  the  applications  of  tire  char  and  some  key 
performance  parameters  reported  in  the  literature.  From  the  applica-
tions of tire char as an adsorbent, catalyst carrier, and energy storage 
material,  it  is  required  for  the  char  to  be  activated  and  expanded  to 
increase the specific surface area to achieve better adsorption, catalytic, 
and  energy  storage  effects.  The  process  of  gasification  of  tire  char  to 
produce fuel gas cannot only produce combustible gas but also obtain 
activated  carbon  with  a  high  specific  surface  area.  Tire  char  can  be 
directly used as a filler without activation because char as an additive 
exists in tire rubber. As asphalt modified material, tire char can be used 

Application 

Gasification for 
fuel gas 

Adsorbent 

Catalysts 

Supporting 
material 

Reinforcing agent for 
tire rubber 

Battery and 
capacitor material 

Printing 
ink 

Filler in 
modifying asphalt 

74.6-82.5 
0.8-1.06 
0-0.49 
2.46-4.0 
12.7 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

3.5 
13.3 
4.2 
79.0 
59-80 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
57-116 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 

72.9-88.0 
1.5 
0.4 
2.5-3 
10.29 

- 
13.2-22.0 
4.7 
82.1 
46.1-75 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

2-15 
- 

- 

86.58-87.9 
3.33 
- 
- 
- 

Ultimate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
- 
C (wt.%) 
- 
H (wt.%) 
- 
N (wt.%) 
- 
S (wt.%) 
O (wt.%) 
- 
Proximate analysis of tire char (air dry basis) 
- 
M (wt.%) 
- 
Ash (wt.%) 
- 
V (wt.%) 
- 
FC (wt.%) 
SBET (m2⋅g
50-814 
HHV (MJ⋅kg
- 
- 
Conversion 
- 
Time (min) 
50-352 
Activation time 

0.1-1.65 
10.3 
- 
- 
800-1100 
7.4-34.32 
1.0 
60-100 
- 

(cid:0) 1) 

(cid:0) 1) 

(min) 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 

8-120 

28-312 

3-48 
5-24 

- 
- 

- 

methylene blue 

(mg⋅g

(cid:0) 1) 
Tetracycline 
(cid:0) 1) 

(mg⋅g

(cid:0) 1) 
Phenol (mg⋅g
Copper remove 

(mg⋅g

(cid:0) 1) 

char size (um) 
specific capacitance 

(F⋅g

(cid:0) 1) 
Capacitance 
(cid:0) 1) 
(m⋅Ah⋅g
blackness 
Jetness value 
Fluidity (mm) 
Viscosity (pa⋅s) 
Refs. 

- not described in the reference text. 

- 
- 
- 
- 
[276,364] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
[309,374,378, 
379] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
[24,121, 
292] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
[380–382] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
[323,324,385,386] 

82.1-95.5 
- 
- 
0.5-1.1 
3.6-14.8 

- 
- 
- 
- 
72-190 
- 
- 
- 
– 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 
200-480 

203-390 

- 
- 
- 
- 
[393,394, 
396–398] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
16.18 
- 
- 
69.23 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

1.1 
18.7 
4.4 
76.9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 

2.17 
342 
26.5 
3150 
[355,356] 

- 
- 
- 
- 
[358,359] 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102229N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

directly without activation and can still meet the performance of asphalt 
materials. At present, researchers have explored the different applica-
tion performances of tire char, but there is no main performance stan-
dard for each application of tire char. The specific surface area is the 
most  discussed  factor  in  various  applications.  The  larger  the  specific 
surface area, the better the adsorption, catalytic, carrier load capacity, 
and battery energy storage performance. 

7. Conclusions and prospects 

This  work  summarizes  the  generation,  influencing  factors,  activa-
tion, research results, and applications of tire char. The advantages and 
disadvantages  of  waste  tire  pyrolysis  from  different  reports  are  also 
compared. Some conclusions are as follows:  

(1)  The pyrolysis process and product recovery of the waste tire are 
complicated technological processes. The yield and quality of tire 
char  are  affected  by  many  factors,  for  example,  the  pyrolysis 
technology, equipment,  conditions, and  the composition  of the 
raw tire feedstock. Different influencing mechanisms exist along 
with  different  influencing  factors  for  the  waste  tire  pyrolysis 
process.  

(2)  There  is  a  need  to  understand  the  characteristics  of  tire  char 
before  activation.  Because they  are  the  theoretical  basis  of  the 
modification  scheme  used  for  tire  char.  The  aim  of  tire  char 
modification is to improve the quality of tire char and reach (or 
surpass)  the  standardized  characteristics  of  commercial  carbon 
black. Tire char modification can improve the business applica-
tion  performance  of  tire  char,  and  the  economy  and  market 
competitiveness of the overall waste tire pyrolysis process.  
(3)  Tire  char  is  widely  used  in  many  fields.  Unmodified  tire  char 
could be directly used as a solid fuel and tire rubber reinforcing 
agent. Tire char could also be directly used as a catalyst material 
to decrease the operational cost, and improve the quality of py-
rolysis  oil  and  gas.  The  modified  tire  char  with  high  specific 
surface area and lower ash content could be used as an activated 
carbon  adsorbent  material,  catalyst  and  catalyst  support,  and 
capacitor electrode to create higher commercial value.  

(4)  Most  of  the  applications  of  tire  char  are  at  the  preliminary 
research stage on a laboratory scale. In the reported studies, there 
is a lack of detailed technical and economic analysis of waste tire 
pyrolysis and tire char activation technology. This is a common 
flaw in the current research study of waste tire pyrolysis. 

With the gradual maturity and industrialization of waste tire pyrol-
ysis technology, the quality requirements of pyrolysis products will be 
higher.  At  present,  the  recycling  applications  of  tire  char  have  been 
developed, which has created a high level of potential economic pros-
pects for the waste tire pyrolysis industry. Despite the progress of waste 
tire  pyrolysis  technology  and  the  application  of  pyrolysis  products, 
many issues need to be resolved to meet different industry requirements. 
The pyrolysis industry of waste tires and the application of tire char need 
further improvement in the following aspects:  

(1)  Developing an integrated treatment system (pretreatment - feed - 
thermal cracking - pyrolysis oil refining - pyrolysis gas recycling - 
carbon black modification) will be the main direction of waste 
tire processing. It could convert the so-called "black pollution" of 
waste  tires  into  valuable  oil,  gas,  and  char  by  this  technology 
system, realizing economic, environmental, and social benefits. 
This  strategy  is  related  to  a  circular  economy  and  sustainable 
development  concepts,  and  moreover,  promotes  solid  waste 
resource recovery.  

(2)  The  waste  tire  feedstock  should  be  classified  by  brand  or  tire 
structure  and  then  pyrolyzed.  This  is  helpful  to  improve  the 
product  quality  of  tire  char.  Some  reasonable  classification 

recycling processes should be planned. In addition, there is also a 
requirement to reduce system investment and operating costs.  

(3)  According to the market demand for commercial carbon black, 
the pyrolysis process of waste tires and the modification process 
of tire char should be designed and optimized. The recycled tire 
char with different particle sizes and specific surface area could 
be obtained by multi-stage crushing and screening. Regenerated 
tire char should be classified according to particle size and spe-
cific surface area for applications in different fields, which could 
realize reasonable distribution and resource maximization of tire 
char.  

(4)  Heated tire char could be used as a reforming medium for waste 
tire  pyrolysis  volatiles,  which  is  beneficial  to  the  quality 
improvement of pyrolysis oil-gas and the surface functional group 
structure  of  tire  char.  Tire  char  could  be  used  as  a  catalyst  or 
modified to generate high specific surface area activated carbon. 
Moreover, graphene could be obtained from tire char. The eco-
nomic  analysis  of  tire  char  applications  should  be  the  future 
research work.  

(5)  Pressurized pyrolysis of waste tires could be used to produce high 
yield and high quality oil and char products. This may become a 
major  direction  for  the  future  development  of  waste  tire 
pyrolysis. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financia-
linterestsor personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgments 

This project has received funding from the Science and Technology 
Exchange Project of China Ministry of Science and Technology (2021- 
12-2)  and  Education  Cooperation  Project  between  China  and  Central 
Eastern European Countries (2021086) and Shaanxi Provincial Natural 
Science  Foundation  Research  Program  Shaanxi  Coal  Joint  Funding 
(2019JLZ-12). 

References 

[1] Li GQ, Stubblefield MA, Garrick G, et al. Development of waste tire modified 

concrete. Cem Concr Res 2004;34:2283–9. 

[2] Pedram A, Bin Yusoff N, Udoncy OE, et al. Integrated forward and reverse supply 

chain: A tire case study. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2017;60:460–70. 
[3] Williams PT, Bottrill RP. Sulfur-polycyclic aromatic-hydrocarbons in tyre 

pyrolysis oil. Fuel 1995;74:736–42. 

[4] Bockstal L, Berchem T, Schmetz Q, et al. Devulcanisation and reclaiming of tires 
and rubber by physical and chemical processes: a review. J Cleaner Prod 2019; 
236:117574. 

[5] Policella M, Wang Z, Burra KG, et al. Characteristics of syngas from pyrolysis and 

CO2-assisted gasification of waste tires. Appl Energy 2019;254:113678. 

[6] Oboirien BO, North BC. A review of waste tyre gasification. J Environ Chem Eng 

2017;5:5169–78. 

[7] Kim JK, Lee SH. New technology of crumb rubber compounding for recycling of 

waste tires. J Appl Polym Sci 2000;78:1573–7. 

[8] Lo Presti D. Recycled tyre rubber modified bitumens for road asphalt mixtures: A 

literature review. Constr Build Mater 2013;49:863–81. 

[9] Llompart M, Sanchez-Prado L, Lamas JP, et al. Hazardous organic chemicals in 
rubber recycled tire playgrounds and pavers. Chemosphere 2013;90:423–31. 

[10] Li XL, Berger W, Musante C, et al. Characterization of substances released from 
crumb rubber material used on artificial turf fields (vol 80, pg 279, 2010). 
Chemosphere 2010;80:1406–7. 

[11] Kardnkeyan S, Sathiskumar C, Moorthy RS. Effect of process parameters on tire 

pyrolysis: a review. J Sci Ind Res 2012;71:309–15. 

[12] Dabic-Ostojic S, Miljus M, Bojovic N, et al. Applying a mathematical approach to 
improve the tire retreading process. Resources Conserv Recycl 2014;86:107–17. 

[13] Simic V, Dabic-Ostojic S. Interval-parameter chance-constrained programming 
model for uncertainty-based decision making in tire retreading industry. 
J Cleaner Prod 2017;167:1490–8. 

[14] Amari T, Themelis NJ, Wernick IK. Resource recovery from used rubber tires. 

Resour Policy 1999;25:179–88. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102230N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[15] Wang F, Gao N, Quan C. Progress on pyrolysis technology of waste tire and 

upgrade and recycle utilization of carbon black product. Huagong Xuebao 2019; 
70:2864–75. 

[46] Lewandowski WM, Januszewicz K, Kosakowski W. Efficiency and proportions of 
waste tyre pyrolysis products depending on the reactor type-a review. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2019;140:25–53. 

[16] Singh S, Nimmo W, Gibbs BM, et al. Waste tyre rubber as a secondary fuel for 

[47] Arabiourrutia M, Lopez G, Artetxe M, et al. Waste tyre valorization by catalytic 

power plants. Fuel 2009;88:2473–80. 

[17] Uyumaz A, Aydogan B, Solmaz H, et al. Production of waste tyre oil and 

experimental investigation on combustion, engine performance and exhaust 
emissions. J Energy Inst 2019;92:1406–18. 

[18] Hoor A, Rowe RK. Application of tire chips to reduce the temperature of 

secondary geomembranes in municipal solid waste landfills. Waste Manage 
(Oxford) 2012;32:901–11. 

[19] Narani SS, Abbaspour M, Mir Mohammad Hosseini SM, et al. Sustainable reuse of 
waste tire textile fibers (WTTFs) as reinforcement materials for expansive soils: 
With a special focus on landfill liners/covers. J Cleaner Prod 2020;247:119151. 
[20] Li W, Huang CF, Li DP, et al. Derived oil production by catalytic pyrolysis of scrap 

tires. Chin J Catal 2016;37:526–32. 

pyrolysis-A review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2020;129:109932. 

[48] Donatelli A, Iovane P, Molino A. High energy syngas production by waste tyres 
steam gasification in a rotary kiln pilot plant. Experimental and numerical 
investigations. Fuel 2010;89:2721–8. 

[49] Singh RK, Mondal S, Ruj B, et al. Interaction of three categories of tyre waste 
during co-pyrolysis: effect on product yield and quality. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 
2019;141:104618. 

[50] Kyari M, Cunliffe A, Williams PT. Characterization of oils, gases, and char in 
relation to the pyrolysis of different brands of scrap automotive tires. Energy 
Fuels 2005;19:1165–73. 

[51] Ucar S, Karagoz S, Ozkan AR, et al. Evaluation of two different scrap tires as 

hydrocarbon source by pyrolysis. Fuel 2005;84:1884–92. 

[21] Martinez JD, Puy N, Murillo R, et al. Waste tyre pyrolysis-A review. Renew 

[52] Kumar Singh R, Ruj B, Jana A, et al. Pyrolysis of three different categories of 

Sustain Energy Rev 2013;23:179–213. 

[22] Williams PT. Pyrolysis of waste tyres: a review. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2013;33: 

1714–28. 

[23] Yaqoob H, Teoh YH, Sher F, et al. Current status and potential of tire pyrolysis oil 
production as an alternative fuel in developing countries. Sustainability 2021;13: 
3214. 

[24] Wang F, Gao N, Quan C, et al. Investigation of hot char catalytic role in the 

pyrolysis of waste tires in a two-step process. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2020;146: 
104770. 

automotive tyre wastes: product yield analysis and characterization. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2018;135:379–89. 

[53] Lee YS, Lee WK, Cho SG, et al. Quantitative analysis of unknown compositions in 
ternary polymer blends: a model study on NR/SBR/BR system. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2007;78:85–94. 

[54] Fernandez-Berridi MJ, Gonzalez N, Mugica A, et al. Pyrolysis-FTIR and TGA 

techniques as tools in the characterization of blends of natural rubber and SBR. 
Thermochim Acta 2006;444:65–70. 

[55] Xu T, Huang XM. Study on combustion mechanism of asphalt binder by using TG- 

[25] Wang YP, Dai LL, Fan LL, et al. Microwave-assisted catalytic fast co-pyrolysis of 

FTIR technique. Fuel 2010;89:2185–90. 

bamboo sawdust and waste tire for bio-oil production. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 
2017;123:224–8. 

[26] Acosta R, Nabarlatz D, Sanchez-Sanchez A, et al. Adsorption of bisphenol a on 
KOH-activated tyre pyrolysis char. J Environ Chem Eng 2018;6:823–33. 
[27] Trubetskaya A, Kling J, Ershag O, et al. Removal of phenol and chlorine from 

wastewater using steam activated biomass soot and tire carbon black. J Hazard 
Mater 2019;365:846–56. 

[28] Preciado-Hernandez J, Zhang J, Zhu MM, et al. An experimental study of CO2 
gasification kinetics during activation of a spent tyre pyrolysis char. Chem Eng 
Res Des 2019;149:129–37. 

[29] Czajczynska D, Krzyzynska R, Jouhara H, et al. Use of pyrolytic gas from waste 

tire as a fuel: a review. Energy 2017;134:1121–31. 

[56] Wang J, Zhong ZP, Ding K, et al. Co-pyrolysis of bamboo residual with waste tire 
over dual catalytic stage of CaO and co-modified HZSM-5. Energy 2017;133:90–8. 
[57] Menares T, Herrera J, Romero R, et al. Waste tires pyrolysis kinetics and reaction 
mechanisms explained by TGA and Py-GC/MS under kinetically-controlled 
regime. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2020;102:21–9. 

[58] de Faria JS, Manhaes RDT, da Luz FS, et al. Incorporation of unserviceable tire 

waste in red ceramic. J Mater Res Technol 2019;8:6041–50. 

[59] Danon B, Gorgens J. Determining rubber composition of waste tyres using 

devolatilisation kinetics. Thermochim Acta 2015;621:56–60. 

[60] Ding K, Zhong ZP, Zhang B, et al. Catalytic pyrolysis of waste tire to produce 
valuable aromatic hydrocarbons: an analytical Py-GC/MS study. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2016;122:55–63. 

[30] Murugan S, Ramaswamy MC, Nagarajan G. A comparative study on the 

[61] Quek A, Balasubramanian R. An algorithm for the kinetics of tire pyrolysis under 

performance, emission and combustion studies of a DI diesel engine using 
distilled tyre pyrolysis oil-diesel blends. Fuel 2008;87:2111–21. 

different heating rates. J Hazard Mater 2009;166:126–32. 

[62] Singh RK, Ruj B, Jana A, et al. Pyrolysis of three different categories of 

[31] Moulin L, Da Silva S, Bounaceur A, et al. Assessment of recovered carbon black 
obtained by waste tires steam water thermolysis: an industrial application. Waste 
Biomass Valorizat 2017;8:2757–70. 

[32] Cataldo F. Preparation of pyrolytic carbon black from scrap tire rubber crumb and 

evaluation in new rubber compounds. Macromol Mater Eng 2005;290:463–7. 
[33] Ariyadejwanich P, Tanthapanichakoon W, Nakagawa K, et al. Preparation and 

automotive tyre wastes: product yield analysis and characterization. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2018;135:379–89. 

[63] Nakanishi Y, Mita K, Yamamoto K, et al. Effects of mixing process on spatial 

distribution and coexistence of sulfur and zinc in vulcanized EPDM rubber. 
Polymer 2021;218:123486. 

[64] Ghosh P, Katare S, Patkar P, et al. Sulfur vulcanization of natural rubber for 

characterization of mesoporous activated carbon from waste tires. Carbon 2003; 
41:157–64. 

benzothiazole accelerated formulations: From reaction mechanisms to a rational 
kinetic model. Rubber Chem Technol 2003;76:592–693. 

[34] Danon B, van der Gryp P, Schwarz CE, et al. A review of dipentene (DL-limonene) 
production from waste tire pyrolysis. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2015;112:1–13. 

[65] Torretta V, Rada EC, Ragazzi M, et al. Treatment and disposal of tyres: two EU 

approaches. a review. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2015;45:152–60. 

[35] Antoniou N, Stavropoulos G, Zabaniotou A. Activation of end of life tyres 

[66] Wang Z, Burra KG, Lei T, et al. Co-gasification characteristics of waste tire and 

pyrolytic char for enhancing viability of pyrolysis-Critical review, analysis and 
recommendations for a hybrid dual system. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;39: 
1053–73. 

[36] Choi GG, Jung SH, Oh SJ, et al. Total utilization of waste tire rubber through 

pyrolysis to obtain oils and CO2 activation of pyrolysis char. Fuel Process Technol 
2014;123:57–64. 

[37] Farzad S, Mandegari M, G¨orgens JF. A novel approach for valorization of waste 
tires into chemical and fuel (limonene and diesel) through pyrolysis: Process 
development and techno economic analysis. Fuel Process Technol 2021;224: 
107006. 

[38] Ighalo JO, Iwuozor KO, Ogunfowora LA, et al. Regenerative desulphurisation of 
pyrolysis oil: a paradigm for the circular economy initiative. J Environ Chem Eng 
2021;9:106864. 

[39] Osorio-Vargas P, Menares T, Lick ID, et al. Tuning the product distribution during 
the catalytic pyrolysis of waste tires: The effect of the nature of metals and the 
reaction temperature. Catal Today 2021;372:164–74. 

pine bark mixtures in CO2  atmosphere. Fuel 2019;257:116025. 

[67] Lah B, Klinar D, Likozar B. Pyrolysis of natural, butadiene, styrene-butadiene 
rubber and tyre components: modelling kinetics and transport phenomena at 
different heating rates and formulations. Chem Eng Sci 2013;87:1–13. 
[68] Quek A, Balasubramanian R. Mathematical modeling of rubber tire pyrolysis. 

J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2012;95:1–13. 

[69] Wang MY, Zhang L, Li AM, et al. Comparative pyrolysis behaviors of tire tread 
and side wall from waste tire and characterization of the resulting chars. 
J Environ Manage 2019;232:364–71. 

[70] Danon B, de Villiers A, Gorgens JF. Elucidation of the different devolatilisation 
zones of tyre rubber pyrolysis using TGA-MS. Thermochim Acta 2015;614:59–61. 

[71] Xu FF, Wang B, Yang D, et al. TG-FTIR and Py-GC/MS study on pyrolysis 

mechanism and products distribution of waste bicycle tire. Energy Convers 
Manage 2018;175:288–97. 

[72] Munillo R, Aylon E, Navarro MV, et al. The application of thermal processes to 

valorise waste tyre. Fuel Process Technol 2006;87:143–7. 

[40] Osorio-Vargas P, Campos CH, Torres CC, et al. Catalytic pyrolysis of used tires on 

[73] Kan T, Strezov V, Evans T. Fuel production from pyrolysis of natural and synthetic 

noble-metal-based catalysts to obtain high-value chemicals: reaction pathways. 
Catal Today 2021. press. 

[41] Antoniou N, Zabaniotou A. Features of an efficient and environmentally attractive 

used tyres pyrolysis with energy and material recovery. Renew Sustain Energy 
Rev 2013;20:539–58. 

[42] Mohajerani A, Burnett L, Smith JV, et al. Recycling waste rubber tyres in 

construction materials and associated environmental considerations: a review. 
Resour Conserv Recycl 2020;155:104679. 

[43] Siddika A, Al Mamun MA, Alyousef R, et al. Properties and utilizations of waste 
tire rubber in concrete: a review. Constr Build Mater 2019;224:711–31. 
[44] Roychand R, Gravina RJ, Zhuge Y, et al. A comprehensive review on the 

mechanical properties of waste tire rubber concrete. Constr Build Mater 2020; 
237:117651. 

[45] Sathiskumar C, Karthikeyan S. Recycling of waste tires and its energy storage 
application of by-products: a review. Sustain Mater Technol 2019;22:e00125. 

rubbers. Fuel 2017;191:403–10. 

[74] Islam MR, Islam MN, Mustafi NN, et al. Thermal recycling of solid tire wastes for 
alternative liquid fuel: the first commercial step in Bangladesh. 5th BSME Int Conf 
Thermal Eng 2013;56:573–82. 

[75] Chen RJ, Lun LY, Cong KL, et al. Insights into pyrolysis and co-pyrolysis of 

tobacco stalk and scrap tire: thermochemical behaviors, kinetics, and evolved gas 
analysis. Energy 2019;183:25–34. 

[76] Li SQ, Yao Q, Chi Y, et al. Pilot-scale pyrolysis of scrap tires in a continuous rotary 

kiln reactor. Ind Eng Chem Res 2004;43:5133–45. 

[77] Han J, Li W, Liu DY, et al. Pyrolysis characteristic and mechanism of waste tyre: a 
thermogravimetry-mass spectrometry analysis. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2018;129: 
1–5. 

[78] Han J, Liu DY, Qin LB, et al. A modified temperature integral approximation 

formula and its application in pyrolysis kinetic parameters of waste tire. Energy 
Sources Part A 2018;40:220–6. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102231N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[79] Chen J, Ma X, Yu Z, et al. A study on catalytic co-pyrolysis of kitchen waste with 

tire waste over ZSM-5 using TG-FTIR and Py-GC/MS. Bioresour Technol 2019; 
289:121585. 

[113] Mkhize NM, van der Gryp P, Danon B, et al. Effect of temperature and heating rate 
on limonene production from waste tyre pyrolysis. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2016; 
120:314–20. 

[80] Kar Y. Catalytic pyrolysis of car tire waste using expanded perlite. Waste Manage 

[114] Laresgoiti MF, Caballero BM, de Marco I, et al. Characterization of the liquid 

(Oxford) 2011;31:1772–82. 

[81] Danon B, Mkhize NM, van der Gryp P, et al. Combined model-free and model- 

based devolatilisation kinetics of tyre rubbers. Thermochim Acta 2015;601: 
45–53. 

[82] Kordoghli S, Khiari B, Paraschiv M, et al. Impact of different catalysis supported 
by oyster shells on the pyrolysis of tyre wastes in a single and a double fixed bed 
reactor. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2017;67:288–97. 

[83] Banar M, Akyildiz V, Ozkan A, et al. Characterization of pyrolytic oil obtained 

from pyrolysis of TDF (Tire Derived Fuel). Energy Convers Manage 2012;62: 
22–30. 

[84] Berrueco C, Esperanza E, Mastral FJ, et al. Pyrolysis of waste tyres in an 

products obtained in tyre pyrolysis. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2004;71:917–34. 
[115] Garcia-Nunez JA, Pelaez-Samaniego MR, Garcia-Perez ME, et al. Historical 

developments of pyrolysis reactors: a review. Energy Fuels 2017;31:5751–75. 

[116] Lopez G, Artetxe M, Amutio M, et al. Thermochemical routes for the valorization 

of waste polyolefinic plastics to produce fuels and chemicals: a review. Renew 
Sustain Energy Rev 2017;73:346–68. 

[117] Akkouche N, Balistrou M, Loubar K, et al. Heating rate effects on pyrolytic vapors 

from scrap truck tires. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2017;123:419–29. 

[118] Islam MR, Haniu H, Beg MRA. Liquid fuels and chemicals from pyrolysis of 

motorcycle tire waste: product yields, compositions and related properties. Fuel 
2008;87:3112–22. 

atmospheric static-bed batch reactor: analysis of the gases obtained. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2005;74:245–53. 

[119] Zhang C, Wu RC, Hu EF, et al. Coal pyrolysis for high-quality tar and gas in 100 kg 

fixed bed enhanced with internals. Energy Fuels 2014;28:7294–302. 

[85] Bouvier JM, Charbel F, Gelus M. Gas solid pyrolysis of tire wastes - kinetics and 
material balances of batch pyrolysis of used tires. Resour Conserv 1987;15: 
205–14. 

[86] Aylon E, Callen MS, Lopez JM, et al. Assessment of tire devolatilization kinetics. 

J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2005;74:259–64. 

[120] Mkhize NM, Danon B, van der Gryp P, et al. Condensation of the hot volatiles 

from waste tyre pyrolysis by quenching. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2017;124:180–5. 
[121] Seng-eiad S, Jitkarnka S. Untreated and HNO3-treated pyrolysis char as catalysts 

for pyrolysis of waste tire: in-depth analysis of tire-derived products and char 
characterization. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2016;122:151–9. 

[87] Slopiecka K, Bartocci P, Fantozzi F. Thermogravimetric analysis and kinetic study 

[122] Leonard A, Meneses E, Le Trong E, et al. Influence of back mixing on the 

of poplar wood pyrolysis. Appl Energy 2012;97:491–7. 

[88] Jain AA, Mehra A, Ranade VV. Processing of TGA data: analysis of 
isoconversional and model fitting methods. Fuel 2016;165:490–8. 

[89] Iwarere S, Mkhize N. Pyrolysis of various tire types: Characteristics and kinetic 

studies using thermogravimetric analysis. Detritus 2019:1. Press. 

[90] Alsurakji I, El-Qanni A, El-Hamouz AM, et al. Thermogravimetric kinetics study of 
scrap tires pyrolysis using silica embedded with NiO and/or MgO nanocatalysts. 
J Energy Res Technol 2021;143:1–15. 

[91] Nisar J., Ali G., Shah A., et al. Pyrolysis of waste tire rubber: a comparative kinetic 

study using different models. Energy Sources, Part A. 2020:1-11. 

[92] Chen JH, Chen KS, Tong LY. On the pyrolysis kinetics of scrap automotive tires. 

J Hazard Mater 2001;84:43–55. 

[93] Zhang XH, Wang TJ, Ma LL, et al. Vacuum pyrolysis of waste tires with basic 

additives. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2008;28:2301–10. 

[94] Luo SY, Feng Y. The production of fuel oil and combustible gas by catalytic 

pyrolysis of waste tire using waste heat of blast-furnace slag. Energy Convers 
Manage 2017;136:27–35. 

[95] Quek A, Balasubramanian R. Liquefaction of waste tires by pyrolysis for oil and 

chemicals-A review. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2013;101:1–16. 

[96] Lopez G, Olazar M, Amutio M, et al. Influence of tire formulation on the products 
of continuous pyrolysis in a conical spouted bed reactor. Energy Fuels 2009;23: 
5423–31. 

[97] Leung DYC, Yin XL, Zhao ZL, et al. Pyrolysis of tire powder: influence of operation 
variables on the composition and yields of gaseous product. Fuel Process Technol 
2002;79:141–55. 

[98] Tan V, De Girolamo A, Hosseini T, et al. Secondary reactions of volatiles upon the 
influences of particle temperature discrepancy and gas environment during the 
pyrolysis of scrap tyre chips. Fuel 2020;259:116291. 

[99] Diez C, Sanchez ME, Haxaire P, et al. Pyrolysis of tyres: a comparison of the 

results from a fixed-bed laboratory reactor and a pilot plant (rotatory reactor). 
J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2005;74:254–8. 

[100] Dai XW, Yin XL, Wu CZ, et al. Pyrolysis of waste tires in a circulating fluidized-bed 

reactor. Energy 2001;26:385–99. 

[101] Olazar M, Alvarez S, Aguado R, et al. Spouted bed reactors. Chem Eng Technol 

2003;26:845–52. 

[102] Rastegar SO, Gu TY. Empirical correlations for axial dispersion coefficient and 
peclet number in fixed-bed columns. J Chromatogr A 2017;1490:133–7. 
[103] Ghoreishi SM, Akgerman A. Dispersion coefficients of supercritical fluid in fixed 

beds. Sep Purif Technol 2004;39:39–50. 

[104] Sanchez-Prieto J, Hernandez-Jimenez F, Garcia-Gutierrez LM, et al. Experimental 

study on the characteristic mixing time of solids and its link with the lateral 
dispersion coefficient in bubbling fluidized beds. Chem Eng J 2017;307:113–21. 

[105] Khaled G, Bourouina-Bacha S, Sabiri NE, et al. Simplified correlations of axial 
dispersion coefficient and porosity in a solid-liquid fluidized bed adsorber. Exp 
Therm Fluid Sci 2017;88:317–25. 

[106] Kashyap M, Gidaspow D. Computation and measurements of mass transfer and 
dispersion coefficients in fluidized beds. Powder Technol 2010;203:40–56. 

[107] Sanjose MJ, Olazar M, Penas FJ, et al. Correlation for calculation of the gas 

dispersion coefficient in conical spouted beds. Chem Eng Sci 1995;50:2161–72. 
[108] Olazar M, Sanjose MJ, Penas FJ, et al. A simplified model for gas-flow in conical 

spouted beds. Chem Eng J 1995;56:19–26. 

convective drying of residual sludges in a fixed bed. Water Res 2008;42:2671–7. 

[123] Lima DMF, Zaiat M. The influence of the degree of back-mixing on hydrogen 

production in an anaerobic fixed-bed reactor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37: 
9630–5. 

[124] di Luca C, Massa P, Grau JM, et al. Highly dispersed Fe3+

-Al2O3  for the Fenton- 

like oxidation of phenol in a continuous up-flow fixed bed reactor. Enhancing 
catalyst stability through operating conditions. Appl Catal, B 2018;237:1110–23. 

[125] Yang Y, Zhang HP, Yan Y. Synthesis of carbon nanotube on stainless steel 
microfibrous composite-Comparison of direct and indirect growth and its 
application in fixed bed m-cresol adsorption. Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 2018;139: 
162–73. 

[126] Luo SY, Xiao B, Hu ZQ, et al. Effect of particle size on pyrolysis of single- 

component municipal solid waste in fixed bed reactor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2010;35:93–7. 

[127] Yuwapornpanit R, Jitkarnka S. Cu-doped catalysts and their impacts on tire- 
derived oil and sulfur removal. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2015;111:200–8. 
[128] Demirbas A, Al-Sasi BO, Nizami A-S. Conversion of waste tires to liquid products 
via sodium carbonate catalytic pyrolysis. Energy Sources Part A 2016;38: 
2487–93. 

[129] Hooshmand Ahoor A, Zandi-Atashbar N. Fuel production based on catalytic 

pyrolysis of waste tires as an optimized model. Energy Convers Manage 2014;87: 
653–69. 

[130] He Z, Jiao Q, Fang Z, et al. Light olefin production from catalytic pyrolysis of 
waste tires using nano-HZSM-5/γ-Al2O3  catalysts. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2018; 
129:66–71. 

[131] Palza H, Aravena C, Colet M. Role of the catalyst in the pyrolysis of polyolefin 

mixtures and used tires. Energy Fuels 2017;31:3111–20. 

[132] Anuar Sharuddin SD, Abnisa F, Wan Daud WMA, et al. A review on pyrolysis of 

plastic wastes. Energy Convers Manage 2016;115:308–26. 

[133] D˜ung NA, Mhodmonthin A, Wongkasemjit S, et al. Effects of ITQ-21 and ITQ-24 as 
zeolite additives on the oil products obtained from the catalytic pyrolysis of waste 
tire. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2009;85:338–44. 

[134] Boxiong S, Chunfei W, Binbin G, et al. Pyrolysis of waste tyres with zeolite USY 

and ZSM-5 catalysts. Appl Catal, B 2007;73:150–7. 

[135] D˜ung NA, Tanglumlert W, Wongkasemjit S, et al. Roles of ruthenium on catalytic 
pyrolysis of waste tire and the changes of its activity upon the rate of calcination. 
J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2010;87:256–62. 

[136] Kordoghli S, Khiari B, Paraschiv M, et al. Production of hydrogen and hydrogen- 
rich syngas during thermal catalytic supported cracking of waste tyres in a bench- 
scale fixed bed reactor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:11289–302. 
[137] Williams PT, Besler S, Taylor DT. The pyrolysis of scrap automotive tires-the 

Influence of temperature and heating rate on product composition. Fuel 1990;69: 
1474–82. 

[138] Shipei X, Dengguo L, Xi Z, et al. Pyrolysis characteristics of waste tire particles in 
fixed-bed reactor with internals. Carbon Resour Convers 2018;1:228–37. 
[139] Acevedo B, Barriocanal C, Alvarez R. Pyrolysis of blends of coal and tyre wastes in 

a fixed bed reactor and a rotary oven. Fuel 2013;113:817–25. 

[140] Leung DYC, Wang CL. Fluidized-bed gasification of waste tire powders. Fuel 

Process Technol 2003;84:175–96. 

[141] Xiao G, Ni MJ, Chi Y, et al. Low-temperature gasification of waste tire in a 

fluidized bed. Energy Convers Manage 2008;49:2078–82. 

[109] Njeng ASB, Vitu S, Clausse M, et al. Effect of lifter shape and operating parameters 
on the flow of materials in a pilot rotary kiln: Part I. Experimental RTD and axial 
dispersion study. Powder Technol 2015;269:554–65. 

[110] Sherritt RG, Chaouki J, Mehrotra AK, et al. Axial dispersion in the three- 

[142] Jung SH, Kim SJ, Kim JS. Thermal degradation of acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene 
(ABS) containing flame retardants using a fluidized bed reactor: the effects of Ca- 
based additives on halogen removal. Fuel Process Technol 2012;96:265–70. 
[143] Milne BJ, Behie LA, Berruti F. Recycling of waste plastics by ultrapyrolysis using 

dimensional mixing of particles in a rotating drum reactor. Chem Eng Sci 2003; 
58:401–15. 

an internally circulating fluidized bed reactor. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1999;51: 
157–66. 

[111] Paredes IJ, Yohannes B, Emady H, et al. The effect of operating conditions on the 
residence time distribution and axial dispersion coefficient of a cohesive powder 
in a rotary kiln. Chem Eng Sci 2017;158:50–7. 

[112] Cunliffe AM, Williams PT. Composition of oils derived from the batch pyrolysis of 

tyres. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1998;44:131–52. 

[144] Lee JM, Lee JS, Kim JR, et al. Pyrolysis of waste tires with partial oxidation in a 

fluidized-bed reactor. Energy 1995;20:969–76. 

[145] Zang GY, Jia JX, Shi YY, et al. Modeling and economic analysis of waste tire 

gasification in fluidized and fixed bed gasifiers. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2019;89: 
201–11. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102232N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[146] Kaminsky W, Predel M, Sadiki A. Feedstock recycling of polymers by pyrolysis in 

a fluidised bed. Polym Degrad Stab 2004;85:1045–50. 

[147] Lopez G, Alvarez J, Amutio M, et al. Waste truck-tyre processing by flash pyrolysis 

in a conical spouted bed reactor. Energy Convers Manage 2017;142:523–32. 

[148] Antoniou N, Zabaniotou A. Features of an efficient and environmentally attractive 

used tyres pyrolysis with energy and material recovery. Renew Sustain Energy 
Rev 2013;20:539–58. 

[149] Karatas H, Olgun H, Engin B, et al. Experimental results of gasification of waste 
tire with air in a bubbling fluidized bed gasifier. Fuel 2013;105:566–71. 

[150] Wu SY, Su MF, Baeyens J. The fluidized bed pyrolysis of shredded tyres: the 

influence of carbon particles, humidity, and temperature on the hydrodynamics. 
Powder Technol 1997;93:283–90. 

[151] Williams PT, Brindle AJ. Fluidised bed catalytic pyrolysis of scrap tyres: influence 

of catalyst: tyre ratio and catalyst temperature. Waste Manage Res 2002;20: 
546–55. 

[152] Williams PT, Brindle AJ. Fluidised bed pyrolysis and catalytic pyrolysis of scrap 

tyres. Environ Technol 2003;24:921–9. 

[153] Wang J, Zhong ZP, Ding K, et al. Catalytic fast co-pyrolysis of bamboo sawdust 
and waste tire using a tandem reactor with cascade bubbling fluidized bed and 
fixed bed system. Energy Convers Manage 2019;180:60–71. 

[154] Raj RE, Kennedy ZR, Pillai BC. Optimization of process parameters in flash 

pyrolysis of waste tyres to liquid and gaseous fuel in a fluidized bed reactor. 
Energy Convers Manage 2013;67:145–51. 

[155] Kaminsky W, Mennerich C. Pyrolysis of synthetic tire rubber in a fluidised-bed 
reactor to yield 1,3-butadiene, styrene and carbon black. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 
2001;58:803–11. 

[156] Lopez G, Olazar M, Aguado R, et al. Vacuum pyrolysis of waste tires by 

continuously feeding into a conical spouted bed reactor. Ind Eng Chem Res 2010; 
49:8990–7. 

[157] Alvarez J, Lopez G, Amutio M, et al. Evaluation of the properties of tyre pyrolysis 
oils obtained in a conical spouted bed reactor. Energy 2017;128:463–74. 

[158] Erkiaga A, Lopez G, Amutio M, et al. Syngas from steam gasification of 

polyethylene in a conical spouted bed reactor. Fuel 2013;109:461–9. 
[159] Arabiourrutia M, Olazar M, Aguado R, et al. HZSM-5 and HY zeolite catalyst 

performance in the pyrolysis of tires in a conical spouted bed reactor. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2008;47:7600–9. 

[160] Alvarez J, Amutio M, Lopez G, et al. Sewage sludge valorization by flash pyrolysis 

in a conical spouted bed reactor. Chem Eng J 2015;273:173–83. 

[161] Amutio M, Lopez G, Artetxe M, et al. Valorisation of waste tires by pyrolysis over 
a FCC catalyst in a conical spouted bed reactor. In: Pres 2012: 15th International 
Conference on Process Integration, Modelling and Optimisation for Energy Saving 
and Pollution Reduction. 29; 2012. p. 817–22. 

[162] Arabiourrutia M, Lopez G, Elordi G, et al. Characterization of the liquid obtained 
in tyre pyrolysis in a conical spouted bed reactor. Int J Chem Reactor Eng 2007;5: 
88. 

[163] Yazdani E, Hashemabadi SH, Taghizadeh A. Study of waste tire pyrolysis in a 

rotary kiln reactor in a wide range of pyrolysis temperature. Waste Manage 
(Oxford) 2019;85:195–201. 

[164] Galvagno S, Casu S, Casabianca T, et al. Pyrolysis process for the treatment of 
scrap tyres: preliminary experimental results. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2002;22: 
917–23. 

[165] Aylon E, Fernandez-Colino A, Navarro MV, et al. Waste tire pyrolysis: comparison 
between fixed bed reactor and moving bed reactor. Ind Eng Chem Res 2008;47: 
4029–33. 

[166] Dai S, Nie H, Yi W, et al. Research on a new method of multi-zone high 

temperature point tracking of rotary kiln surface temperature based on equal 
angle scanning. Infrared Phys Technol 2019;103:103078. 

[167] Ayanoglu A, Yumrutas R. Rotary kiln and batch pyrolysis of waste tire to produce 
gasoline and diesel like fuels. Energy Convers Manage 2016;111:261–70. 
[168] Williams PT, Besler S, Taylor DT. The batch pyrolysis of tyre waste - fuel 

properties of the derived pyrolytic oil and overall plant economics. Proc Instit 
Mech Eng Part A 1993;207:55–63. 

[169] Galvagno S, Casciaro G, Casu S, et al. Steam gasification of tyre waste, poplar, and 

refuse-derived fuel: a comparative analysis. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2009;29: 
678–89. 

[178] Kaewluan S, Pipatmanomai S. Gasification of high moisture rubber woodchip 
with rubber waste in a bubbling fluidized bed. Fuel Process Technol 2011;92: 
671–7. 

[179] Amutio M, Lopez G, Alvarez J, et al. Fast pyrolysis of eucalyptus waste in a 

conical spouted bed reactor. Bioresour Technol 2015;194:225–32. 

[180] Lopez G, Olazar M, Aguado R, et al. Continuous pyrolysis of waste tyres in a 

conical spouted bed reactor. Fuel 2010;89:1946–52. 

[181] Roy C, Pakdel H, Brouillard D. The role of extractives during vacuum pyrolysis of 

wood. J Appl Polym Sci 1990;41:337–48. 

[182] Li XH, Zhang XL, Shao SS, et al. Catalytic upgrading of pyrolysis vapor from rape 
straw in a vacuum pyrolysis system over La/HZSM-5 with hierarchical structure. 
Bioresour Technol 2018;259:191–7. 

[183] Lam SS, Wan Mahari WA, Ok YS, et al. Microwave vacuum pyrolysis of waste 
plastic and used cooking oil for simultaneous waste reduction and sustainable 
energy conversion: Recovery of cleaner liquid fuel and techno-economic analysis. 
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;115:109359. 

[184] Yang J, Gupta M, Roy X, et al. Study of tire particle mixing in a moving and stirred 

bed vacuum pyrolysis reactor. Can J Chem Eng 2004;82:510–9. 

[185] Hidalgo-Herrador JM, Vr´ablík A, 

ˇ
Cerný R, et al. Effect of waste tires addition on a 
low-temperature hydrovisbreaking process of vacuum residue. Chem Pap 2017; 
71:1175–82. 

[186] Roy C, Darmstadt H, Benallal B, et al. Characterization of naphtha and carbon 

black obtained by vacuum pyrolysis of polyisoprene rubber. Fuel Process Technol 
1997;50:87–103. 

[187] Roy C, Chaala A, Darmstadt H. The vacuum pyrolysis of used tires-end-uses for oil 

and carbon black products. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 1999;51:201–21. 

[188] Hidalgo-Herrador JM, Vrablik A, Cerny R, et al. Effect of waste tires addition on a 
low-temperature hydrovisbreaking process of vacuum residue. Chem Pap 2017; 
71:1175–82. 

[189] Qin L, Wu Y, Hou Z, et al. Influence of biomass components, temperature and 

pressure on the pyrolysis behavior and biochar properties of pine nut shells. 
Bioresour Technol 2020;313:123682. 

[190] Zeng D, Fletcher TH. Effects of pressure on coal pyrolysis and char morphology. 

Energy Fuels 2005;19:1828–38. 

[191] Wang F, Gao N, Quan C. Effect of hot char and steam on products in waste tire 
pressurized pyrolysis process. Energy Convers Manage 2021;237:114105. 
[192] Ma S, Leong H, He L, et al. Effects of pressure and residence time on limonene 

production in waste tires pyrolysis process. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2020;151: 
104899. 

[193] Huang J, Xu G, Liang Y, et al. Improving coal permeability using microwave 

heating technology-a review. Fuel 2020;266:117022. 

[194] Falciglia PP, Roccaro P, Bonanno L, et al. A review on the microwave heating as a 
sustainable technique for environmental remediation/detoxification applications. 
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;95:147–70. 

[195] Song Z, Liu L, Yang Y, et al. Characteristics of limonene formation during 

microwave pyrolysis of scrap tires and quantitative analysis. Energy 2018;142: 
953–61. 

[196] Song Z, Yang Y, Zhou L, et al. Gaseous products evolution during microwave 
pyrolysis of tire powders. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:18209–15. 
[197] Bartoli M, Rosi L, Giovannelli A, et al. Microwave assisted pyrolysis of crop 
residues from vitis vinifera. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2018;130:305–13. 

[198] Song ZL, Yan YC, Xie MM, et al. Effect of steel wires on the microwave pyrolysis of 

tire powders. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2018;6:13443–53. 

[199] Song ZL, Yang YQ, Zhou L, et al. Pyrolysis of tyre powder using microwave 

thermogravimetric analysis: effect of microwave power. Waste Manage Res 2017; 
35:181–9. 

[200] Song ZL, Yang YQ, Zhou L, et al. Gaseous products evolution during microwave 

pyrolysis of tire powders. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:18209–15. 

[201] Song ZL, Yang YQ, Sun J, et al. Effect of power level on the microwave pyrolysis 

of tire powder. Energy 2017;127:571–80. 

[202] Undri A, Meini S, Rosi L, et al. Microwave pyrolysis of polymeric materials: waste 

tires treatment and characterization of the value-added products. J Anal Appl 
Pyrolysis 2013;103:149–58. 

[203] Undri A, Rosi L, Frediani M, et al. Upgraded fuel from microwave assisted 

pyrolysis of waste tire. Fuel 2014;115:600–8. 

[170] Acevedo B, Barriocanal C. Texture and surface chemistry of activated carbons 

[204] Undri A, Sacchi B, Cantisani E, et al. Carbon from microwave assisted pyrolysis of 

obtained from tyre wastes. Fuel Process Technol 2015;134:275–83. 
[171] Ayl´on E, Fern´andez-Colino A, Murillo R, et al. Valorisation of waste tyre by 
pyrolysis in a moving bed reactor. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2010;30:1220–4. 

[172] Martínez JD, Murillo R, García T, et al. Demonstration of the waste tire pyrolysis 
process on pilot scale in a continuous auger reactor. J Hazard Mater 2013;261: 
637–45. 

[173] Martínez JD, Campuzano F, Cardona-Uribe N, et al. Waste tire valorization by 

intermediate pyrolysis using a continuous twin-auger reactor: operational 
features. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2020;113:404–12. 

[174] Martínez JD, Campuzano F, Agudelo AF, et al. Chemical recycling of end-of-life 
tires by intermediate pyrolysis using a twin-auger reactor: validation in a 
laboratory environment. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2021;159:105298. 

[175] Campuzano F, Brown RC, Martínez JD. Auger reactors for pyrolysis of biomass 

and wastes. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;102:372–409. 

[176] Bunthid D, Prasassarakich P, Hinchiranan N. Oxidative desulfurization of tire 
pyrolysis naphtha in formic acid/H2O2/pyrolysis char system. Fuel 2010;89: 
2617–22. 

waste tires. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2013;104:396–404. 

[205] Yatsun AV, Konovalov PN, Konovalov NP. Gaseous products of microwave 

pyrolysis of scrap tires. Solid Fuel Chem 2008;42:187–91. 

[206] Chen GH, Wu DJ, Weng WU, et al. Exfoliation of graphite flake and its 

nanocomposites. Carbon 2003;41:619–21. 

[207] Tang L, Huang H. An investigation of sulfur distribution during thermal plasma 

pyrolysis of used tires. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2004;72:35–40. 

[208] Tang L, Huang HT, Zhao DQ. Study of the pyrolysis of waste tire in a capacitively 

coupled RF plasma reactor. J Fuel Chem Technol 2006;34:373–6. 

[209] Huang H, Tang L, Wu CZ. Characterization of gaseous and solid product from 

thermal plasma pyrolysis of waste rubber. Environ Sci Technol 2003;37:4463–7. 

[210] Huang H, Tang L. Pyrolysis treatment of waste tire powder in a capacitively 
coupled RF plasma reactor. Energy Convers Manage 2009;50:611–7. 
[211] Suppino RS, Landers R, Cobo AJG. Influence of noble metals (Pd, Pt) on the 
performance of Ru/Al2O3  based catalysts for toluene hydrogenation in liquid 
phase. Appl Catal A-Gen 2016;525:41–9. 

[212] Atsumi R, Kobayashi K, Xieli C, et al. Effects of steam on toluene hydrogenation 

[177] Dung NA, Klaewkla R, Wongkasemjit S, et al. Light olefins and light oil 

over a Ni catalyst. Appl Catal, A 2020;590:117374. 

production from catalytic pyrolysis of waste tire. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2009;86: 
281–6. 

[213] Pikhl’ OA, Soone YK, Kekisheva LV, et al. Tire processing using pyrolysis and 

hydrogenation methods. Solid Fuel Chem 2013;47:183–92. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102233N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[214] Murena F, Garufi E, Gioia F. Hydrogenative pyrolysis of waste tyres: kinetic 

analysis. J Hazard Mater 1996;50:143–56. 

[215] Pinto F, Miranda M, Costa P. Production of liquid hydrocarbons from rice crop 
wastes mixtures by co-pyrolysis and co-hydropyrolysis. Fuel 2016;174:153–63. 

[216] Murena F, Garufi E, Smith RB, et al. Hydrogenative pyrolysis of waste tires. 

J Hazard Mater 1996;50:79–98. 

[217] Mastral AM, Murillo R, Callen MS, et al. Influence of process variables on oils 

from tire pyrolysis and hydropyrolysis in a swept fixed bed reactor. Energy Fuels 
2000;14:739–44. 

[218] Bicakova O, Straka P. Co-pyrolysis of waste tire/coal mixtures for smokeless fuel, 
maltenes and hydrogen-rich gas production. Energy Convers Manage 2016;116: 
203–13. 

[247] Zhang YS, Tao YW, Huang J, et al. Influence of silica-alumina support ratio on H2 
production and catalyst carbon deposition from the Ni-catalytic pyrolysis/ 
reforming of waste tyres. Waste Manage Res 2017;35:1045–54. 

[248] Osorio-Vargas P, Lick ID, Sobrevía F, et al. Thermal behavior, reaction pathways 
and kinetic implications of using a Ni/SiO2 catalyst for waste tire pyrolysis. Waste 
Biomass Valorizat 2021;12:6465–79. 

[249] Osorio-Vargas P, Shanmugaraj K, Herrera C, et al. Valorization of waste tires via 
catalytic fast pyrolysis using palladium supported on natural halloysite. Ind Eng 
Chem Res 2021;60:18806–16. 

[250] Miandad R, Barakat MA, Rehan M, et al. Effect of advanced catalysts on tire waste 

pyrolysis oil. Process Saf Environ Prot 2018;116:542–52. 

[251] Wang F, Gao N, Quan C, et al. Product distribution from oil sludge and waste tires 

[219] Mastral AM, Alvarez R, Callen MS, et al. Characterization of chars from coal-tire 

under high pressure pyrolysis. Fuel 2021:122511. 

copyrolysis. Ind Eng Chem Res 1999;38:2856–60. 

[220] Dong RK, Zhao MZ, Xia WW, et al. Chemical and microscopic investigation of co- 
pyrolysis of crumb tire rubber with waste cooking oil at mild temperature. Waste 
Manage (Oxford) 2018;79:516–25. 

[221] Bernardo M, Lapa N, Goncalves M, et al. Study of the organic extraction and 
acidic leaching of chars obtained in the pyrolysis of plastics, tire rubber and 
forestry biomass wastes. Chisa 2012 2012;42:1739–46. 

[222] Ahmed N, Zeeshan M, Iqbal N, et al. Investigation on bio-oil yield and quality 

with scrap tire addition in sugarcane bagasse pyrolysis. J Cleaner Prod 2018;196: 
927–34. 

[223] Grioui N, Halouani K, Agblevor FA. Assessment of upgrading ability and 

limitations of slow co-pyrolysis: case of olive mill wastewater sludge/waste tires 
slow co-pyrolysis. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2019;92:75–88. 

[224] Fang SW, Gu WL, Dai MQ, et al. A study on microwave-assisted fast co-pyrolysis 
of chlorella and tire in the N2 and CO2 atmospheres. Bioresour Technol 2018;250: 
821–7. 

[225] Uzoejinwa BB, He X, Wang S, et al. Co-pyrolysis of biomass and waste plastics as a 
thermochemical conversion technology for high-grade biofuel production: recent 
progress and future directions elsewhere worldwide. Energy Convers Manage 
2018;163:468–92. 

[226] Shah SAY, Zeeshan M, Farooq MZ, et al. Co-pyrolysis of cotton stalk and waste tire 
with a focus on liquid yield quantity and quality. Renew Energy 2019;130: 
238–44. 

[227] Martinez JD, Veses A, Mastral AM, et al. Co-pyrolysis of biomass with waste tyres: 

upgrading of liquid bio-fuel. Fuel Process Technol 2014;119:263–71. 

[228] Wang LZ, Chai MY, Liu RH, et al. Synergetic effects during co-pyrolysis of biomass 
and waste tire: a study on product distribution and reaction kinetics. Bioresour 
Technol 2018;268:363–70. 

[229] Onay O, Koca H. Determination of synergetic effect in co-pyrolysis of lignite and 

waste tyre. Fuel 2015;150:169–74. 

[230] Ozonoh M, Aniokete TC, Oboirien BO, et al. Techno-economic analysis of 

[252] Wang F, Gao N, Magdziarz A, et al. Co-pyrolysis of biomass and waste tires under 
high-pressure two-stage fixed bed reactor. Bioresour Technol 2022;344:126306. 
[253] Boberto P, Alazne G, Francisco JV, et al. Waste refinery: the valorization of waste 

plastics and end-of-life tires in refinery units. A review. Energy Fuels 2021;35: 
3529–57. 

[254] Ji J, Chen G, Zhao J, et al. Efficient removal of Pb (II) by inexpensive magnetic 

adsorbents prepared from one-pot pyrolysis of waste tyres involved magnetic 
nanoparticles. Fuel 2020;282:118715. 

[255] Chao L, Zhang CT, Zhang LJ, et al. Catalytic pyrolysis of tire waste: impacts of 
biochar catalyst on product evolution. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2020;116:9–21. 
[256] Elbaba IF, Wu CF, Williams PT. Catalytic pyrolysis-gasification of waste tire and 
tire elastomers for hydrogen production. Energy Fuels 2010;24:3928–35. 
[257] Elbaba IF, Williams PT. Deactivation of nickel catalysts by sulfur and carbon for 
the pyrolysis-catalytic gasification/reforming of waste tires for hydrogen 
production. Energy Fuels 2014;28:2104–13. 

[258] Gao NB, Li AM, Li WJ. Research into fine powder and large particle tyre pyrolysis. 

Waste Manage Res 2009;27:242–50. 

[259] Larsen MB, Schultz L, Glarborg P, et al. Devolatilization characteristics of large 

particles of tyre rubber under combustion conditions. Fuel 2006;85:1335–45. 

[260] Oyedun A, Lam KL, Fittkau M, et al. Optimisation of particle size in waste tyre 

pyrolysis. Fuel 2012;95:417–24. 

[261] Ab Taleb D, Abd Hamid H, Deris RRR, et al. Insights into pyrolysis of waste tire in 
fixed bed reactor: thermal behavior. Mater Today-Proc. 2020;31:178–86. 
[262] Mangesh VL, Padmanabhan S, Tamizhdurai P, et al. Experimental investigation to 

identify the type of waste plastic pyrolysis oil suitable for conversion to diesel 
engine fuel. J Cleaner Prod 2020;246:119066. 

[263] Barbooti MM, Mohamed TJ, Hussain AA, et al. Optimization of pyrolysis 

conditions of scrap tires under inert gas atmosphere. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2004; 
72:165–70. 

[264] Mui ELK, Cheung WH, McKay G. Tyre char preparation from waste tyre rubber for 

dye removal from effluents. J Hazard Mater 2010;175:151–8. 

electricity and heat production by co-gasification of coal, biomass and waste tyre 
in South Africa. J Cleaner Prod 2018;201:192–206. 

[265] Cunliffe AM, Williams PT. Influence of process conditions on the rate of activation 

of chars derived from pyrolysis of used tires. Energy Fuels 1999;13:166–75. 

[231] Alvarez J, Amutio M, Lopez G, et al. Improving bio-oil properties through the fast 
co-pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass and waste tyres. Waste Manage (Oxford) 
2019;85:385–95. 

[232] Hu Q, Tang Z, Yao D, et al. Thermal behavior, kinetics and gas evolution 

characteristics for the co-pyrolysis of real-world plastic and tyre wastes. J Cleaner 
Prod 2020;260:121102. 

[266] Adhikari JDA, Sinha T, Saha P, et al. Chapter. Chapter 1 grinding of waste rubber. 

Rubber recycling: challenges and developments. R Soc Chem 2019. 

[267] Leung DYC, Wang CL. Kinetic study of scrap tyre pyrolysis and combustion. J Anal 

Appl Pyrolysis 1998;45:153–69. 

[268] Rodriguez ID, Laresgoiti MF, Cabrero MA. Pyrolysis of scrap tyres. Fuel Process 

Technol 2001;72:9–22. 

[233] Onay O. The catalytic co-pyrolysis of waste tires and pistachio seeds. Energy 

[269] Wang H, Hu HY, Yang YH, et al. Effect of high heating rates on products 

Sources Part A 2014;36:2070–7. 

[234] Ucar S, Karagoz S. Co-pyrolysis of pine nut shells with scrap tires. Fuel 2014;137: 

85–93. 

[235] Straka P, Bucko Z. Co-gasification of a lignite/waste-tyre mixture in a moving 

bed. Fuel Process Technol 2009;90:1202–6. 

[236] Wang Z, Burra KG, Zhang M, et al. Co-pyrolysis of waste tire and pine bark for 

syngas and char production. Fuel 2020;274:117878. 

[237] Alhassan Y, Kumar N, Bugaje IM. Catalytic upgrading of waste tire pyrolysis oil 

distribution and sulfur transformation during the pyrolysis of waste tires. Waste 
Manage (Oxford) 2020;118:9–17. 

[270] Nisar J, Ali G, Ullah N, et al. Pyrolysis of waste tire rubber: influence of 
temperature on pyrolysates yield. J Environ Chem Eng 2018;6:3469–73. 

[271] San Miguel G, Fowler GD, Sollars CJ. Pyrolysis of tire rubber: porosity and 

adsorption characteristics of the pyrolytic chars. Ind Eng Chem Res 1998;37: 
2430–5. 

[272] Manch´on-Vizuete E, Macı́as-Garcı́a A, Nadal Gisbert A, et al. Preparation of 

via supercritical esterification with deep eutectic solvents (green solvents and 
catalysts). J Energy Inst 2016;89:683–93. 

mesoporous and macroporous materials from rubber of tyre wastes. Microporous 
Mesoporous Mater 2004;67:35–41. 

[238] Hita I, Gutierrez A, Olazar M, et al. Upgrading model compounds and Scrap Tires 
Pyrolysis Oil (STPO) on hydrotreating NiMo catalysts with tailored supports. Fuel 
2015;145:158–69. 

[239] Shah J, Jan MR, Mabood F. Recovery of value-added products from the catalytic 

pyrolysis of waste tyre. Energy Convers Manage 2009;50:991–4. 

[240] Williams PT, Brindle AJ. Fluidised bed catalytic pyrolysis of scrap tyres: influence 

of catalyst: tyre ratio and catalyst temperature. Waste Manage Res 2002;20: 
546–55. 

[241] Ilkilic C, Aydin H. Fuel production from waste vehicle tires by catalytic pyrolysis 

and its application in a diesel engine. Fuel Process Technol 2011;92:1129–35. 

[242] Olazar M, Aguado R, Arabiourrutia M, et al. Catalyst effect on the composition of 

tire pyrolysis products. Energy Fuels 2008;22:2909–16. 

[243] Kordoghli S, Paraschiv M, Kuncser R, et al. Catalysts’ Influence on 

thermochemical decomposition of waste tires. Environ Prog Sustain Energy 2017; 
36:1560–7. 

[244] Shen BX, Wu CF, Wang R, et al. Pyrolysis of scrap tyres with zeolite USY. J Hazard 

Mater 2006;137:1065–73. 

[273] Chaala A, Darmstadt H, Roy C. Acid-base method for the demineralization of 

pyrolytic carbon black. Fuel Process Technol 1996;46:1–15. 

[274] Zolezzi M, Nicolella C, Ferrara S, et al. Conventional and fast pyrolysis of 

automobile shredder residues (ASR). Waste Manage (Oxford) 2004;24:691–9. 
[275] Conesa JA, Martín-Gull´on I, Font R, et al. Complete study of the pyrolysis and 
gasification of scrap tires in a pilot plant reactor. Environ Sci Technol 2004;38: 
3189–94. 

[276] Zabaniotou AA, Stavropoulos G. Pyrolysis of used automobile tires and residual 

char utilization. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2003;70:711–22. 

[277] Senneca O, Salatino P, Chirone R. A fast heating-rate thermogravimetric study of 

the pyrolysis of scrap tyres. Fuel 1999;78:1575–81. 

[278] Helleur R, Popovic N, Ikura M, et al. Characterization and potential applications 
of pyrolytic char from ablative pyrolysis of used tires. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2001; 
58:813–24. 

[279] Mkhize NM, Danon B, van der Gryp P, et al. Kinetic study of the effect of the 

heating rate on the waste tyre pyrolysis to maximise limonene production. Chem 
Eng Res Des 2019;152:363–71. 

[245] Elbaba IF, Williams PT. High yield hydrogen from the pyrolysis-catalytic 

[280] Cheung KY, Lee KL, Lam KL, et al. Integrated kinetics and heat flow modelling to 

gasification of waste tyres with a nickel/dolomite catalyst. Fuel 2013;106: 
528–36. 

optimise waste tyre pyrolysis at different heating rates. Fuel Process Technol 
2011;92:856–63. 

[246] Choi GG, Oh SJ, Kim JS. Scrap tire pyrolysis using a new type two-stage 

[281] Arion A, Baronnet F, Lartiges S, et al. Characterization of emissions during the 

pyrolyzer: Effects of dolomite and olivine on producing a low-sulfur pyrolysis oil. 
Energy 2016;114:457–64. 

heating of tyre contaminated scrap. Chemosphere 2001;42:853–9. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102234N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[282] Lopez G, Aguado R, Olazar M, et al. Kinetics of scrap tyre pyrolysis under vacuum 

[317] Doja S, Pillari LK, Bichler L. Processing and activation of tire-derived char: a 

conditions. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2009;29:2649–55. 

[283] Tan V, De Girolamo A, Hosseini T, et al. Scrap tyre pyrolysis: modified chemical 
percolation devolatilization (M-CPD) to describe the influence of pyrolysis 
conditions on product yields. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2018;76:516–27. 
[284] Song ZL, Liu L, Yang YQ, et al. Characteristics of limonene formation during 

microwave pyrolysis of scrap tires and quantitative analysis. Energy 2018;142: 
953–61. 

[285] Kaminsky W, Mennerich C, Zhang Z. Feedstock recycling of synthetic and natural 

rubber by pyrolysis in a fluidized bed. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2009;85:334–7. 

review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021:111860. 

[318] Akyıldız V, 

¨
Ozkan A, Çokaygil Z, et al. Improvement of solid product quality in 

pyrolysis of tyre derived fuels (TDF). Chem Eng Trans 2010:21. 

[319] Mukherjee S, Borthakur PC. Effect of leaching high sulphur subbituminous coal by 
potassium hydroxide and acid on removal of mineral matter and sulphur☆. Fuel 
2003;82:783–8. 

[320] Pastor-Villegas J, Duran-Valle CJ. Pore structure of chars and activated carbons 
prepared using carbon dioxide at different temperatures from extracted rockrose. 
J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2001;57:1–13. 

[286] Betancur M, Martínez JD, Murillo R. Production of activated carbon by waste tire 
thermochemical degradation with CO2. J Hazard Mater 2009;168:882–7. 
[287] Cho S-H, Oh J-I, Jung S, et al. Catalytic pyrolytic platform for scrap tires using 

[321] Zhang TY, Walawender WP, Fan LT, et al. Preparation of activated carbon from 
forest and agricultural residues through CO2  activation. Chem Eng J 2004;105: 
53–9. 

CO2  and steel slag. Appl Energy 2020;259:114164. 

[322] Lahijani P, Mohammadi M, Mohamed AR. Investigation of synergism and kinetic 

[288] Bing W, Hongbin Z, Zeng D, et al. Microwave fast pyrolysis of waste tires: effect of 

microwave power on product composition and quality. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 
2021;155:104979. 

analysis during CO2  co-gasification of scrap tire char and agro-wastes. Renew 
Energy 2019;142:147–57. 

[323] Sagar M, Nibedita K, Manohar N, et al. A potential utilization of end-of-life tyres 

[289] Juma M, Korenova Z, Markos J, et al. Experimental study of pyrolysis and 

combustion of scrap tire. Polym Adv Technol 2007;18:144–8. 

[290] Sahouli B, Blacher S, Brouers F, et al. Surface morphology and chemistry of 

commercial carbon black and carbon black from vacuum pyrolysis of used tyres. 
Fuel 1996;75:1244–50. 

[291] San Miguel G, Fowler GD, Sollars C. The leaching of inorganic species from 

activated carbons produced from waste tyre rubber. Water Res 2002;36:1939–46. 
[292] Zhou QQ, Zarei A, De Girolamo A, et al. Catalytic performance of scrap tyre char 
for the upgrading of eucalyptus pyrolysis derived bio-oil via cracking and 
deoxygenation. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2019;139:167–76. 

[293] Mocanu AM, Moldoveanu C, Odochian L, et al. Study on the thermal behavior of 

casein under nitrogen and air atmosphere by means of the TG-FTIR technique. 
Thermochim Acta 2012;546:120–6. 

[294] Merchant AA, Petrich MA. Pyrolysis of scrap tires and conversion of chars to 

activated carbon. AlChE J 1993;39:1370–6. 

[295] Lopez FA, Centeno TA, Alguacil FJ, et al. Gasification of the char derived from 
distillation of granulated scrap tyres. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2012;32:743–52. 

[296] Hadi P, Yeung KY, Guo JX, et al. Sustainable development of tyre char-based 

activated carbons with different textural properties for value-added applications. 
J Environ Manage 2016;170:1–7. 

[297] Cunliffe AM, Williams PT. Properties of chars and activated carbons derived from 

the pyrolysis of used tyres. Environ Technol 1998;19:1177–90. 

[298] Norris CJ, Hale M, Bennett M. Pyrolytic carbon: factors controlling in-rubber 

performance. Plastics Rubber Compos 2014;43:245–56. 

as recycled carbon black in EPDM rubber. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2018;74: 
110–22. 

[324] Martinez JD, Cardona-Uribe N, Murillo R, et al. Carbon black recovery from waste 
tire pyrolysis by demineralization: production and application in rubber 
compounding. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2019;85:574–84. 

[325] Antoniou N, Zabaniotou A. Experimental proof of concept for a sustainable end of 
life tyres pyrolysis with energy and porous materials production. J Cleaner Prod 
2015;101:323–36. 

[326] Xu J, Yu J, Xu J, et al. High-value utilization of waste tires: a review with focus on 
modified carbon black from pyrolysis. Sci Total Environ 2020;742:140235. 

[327] Hofman M, Pietrzak R. Adsorbents obtained from waste tires for NO2  removal 
under dry conditions at room temperature. Chem Eng J 2011;170:202–8. 

[328] Zhang X, Li H, Cao Q, et al. Upgrading pyrolytic residue from waste tires to 

commercial carbon black. Waste Manage Res 2018;36:0734242X1876429. 
[329] Siva M, Onenc S, Ucar S, et al. Influence of oily wastes on the pyrolysis of scrap 

tire. Energy Convers Manage 2013;75:474–81. 

[330] Wigmans T. Industrial-aspects of production and use of activated carbons. Carbon 

1989;27:13–22. 

[331] Lahijani P, Zainal ZA, Mohamed AR, et al. Ash of palm empty fruit bunch as a 
natural catalyst for promoting the CO2  gasification reactivity of biomass char. 
Bioresour Technol 2013;132:351–5. 

[332] Hamadi NK, Chen XD, Farid MM, et al. Adsorption kinetics for the removal of 

chromium(VI) from aqueous solution by adsorbents derived from used tyres and 
sawdust. Chem Eng J 2001;84:95–105. 

[299] Issac M, Dai B, Zhang L. Kinetics underpinning the C-CO2  gasification of waste 

[333] Betancur M, Natalia Arenas C, Daniel Martínez J, et al. CO2  gasification of char 

tyre char and its interaction with coal char upon co-gasification. Fuel 2019;256: 
115991. 

derived from waste tire pyrolysis: kinetic models comparison. Fuel 2020;273: 
117745. 

[300] Saleh TA, Danmaliki GI. Adsorptive desulfurization of dibenzothiophene from 

[334] Gonzalez JF, Encinar JM, Gonzalez-Garcia CM, et al. Preparation of activated 

fuels by rubber tyres-derived carbons: kinetics and isotherms evaluation. Process 
Saf Environ Prot 2016;102:9–19. 

carbons from used tyres by gasification with steam and carbon dioxide. Appl Surf 
Sci 2006;252:5999–6004. 

[301] Zakaria L, Mehrdad M, Mansooreh S, et al. Carbonization and CO2  activation of 
scrap tires: optimization of specific surface area by the Taguchi method. Korean J 
Chem Eng 2017;34:366–75. 

[335] Linares-Solano A, de Lecea CSM, Cazorla-Amoros D, et al. Porosity development 
during CO2 and steam activation in a fluidized bed reactor. Energy Fuels 2000;14: 
142–9. 

[302] Darmstadt H, Roy C, Kaliaguine S. Characterization of pyrolytic carbon-blacks 

[336] Lopez G, Olazar M, Artetxe M, et al. Steam activation of pyrolytic tyre char at 

from commercial tire pyrolysis plants. Carbon 1995;33:1449–55. 

[303] L´opez FA, Centeno TA, Rodríguez O, et al. Preparation and characterization of 
activated carbon from the char produced in the thermolysis of granulated scrap 
tyres. J Air Waste Manage Assoc 2013;63:534–44. 

[304] Maroufi S, Mayyas M, Sahajwalla V. Nano-carbons from waste tyre rubber: an 
insight into structure and morphology. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2017;69:110–6. 

[305] Tanthapanichakoon W, Ariyadejwanich P, Japthong P, et al. Adsorption- 

desorption characteristics of phenol and reactive dyes from aqueous solution on 
mesoporous activated carbon prepared from waste tires. Water Res 2005;39: 
1347–53. 

[306] Pantea D, Darmstadt H, Kaliaguine S, et al. Heat-treatment of carbon blacks 

obtained by pyrolysis of used tires. Effect on the surface chemistry, porosity and 
electrical conductivity. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2003;67:55–76. 
[307] Chan OS, Cheung WH, McKay G. Preparation and characterisation of 

demineralised tyre derived activated carbon. Carbon 2011;49:4674–87. 
[308] Yu C, Thy P, Wang L, et al. Influence of leaching pretreatment on fuel properties 

of biomass. Fuel Process Technol 2014;128:43–53. 

[309] Quek A, Balasubramanian R. Preparation and characterization of low energy post- 

pyrolysis oxygenated tire char. Chem Eng J 2011;170:194–201. 
[310] Selbes M, Yilmaz O, Khan AA, et al. Leaching of DOC, DN, and inorganic 

constituents from scrap tires. Chemosphere 2015;139:617–23. 

[311] Iraola-Arregui I, Van Der Gryp P, G¨orgens JF. A review on the demineralisation of 
pre- and post-pyrolysis biomass and tyre wastes. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2018;79: 
667–88. 

[312] Mui ELK, Cheung WH, Valix M, et al. Dye adsorption onto activated carbons from 
tyre rubber waste using surface coverage analysis. J Colloid Interface Sci 2010; 
347:290–300. 

[313] Shah J, Jan MR, Mabood F. Catalytic conversion of waste tyres into valuable 

hydrocarbons. J Polym Environ 2007;15:207–11. 

[314] Manocha S, Prasad G, Joshi P, et al. Preparation and characterization of activated 
carbon from demineralized tyre char. AIP Conf Proc 2013;1538:109–12. 
[315] Collins KJ, Jensen A, Mallinson JJ, et al. Environmental impact assessment of a 

scrap tyre artificial reef. ICES J Mar Sci 2002;59:S243–2S9. 

[316] Shah J, Jan MR, Mabood F, et al. Conversion of waste tyres into carbon black and 

their utilization as adsorbent. J Chin Chem Soc 2006;53:1085–9. 

different temperatures. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2009;85:539–43. 

[337] Ogasawara S, Kuroda M, Wakao N. Preparation of activated carbon by thermal- 

decomposition of used automotive tires. Ind Eng Chem Res 1987;26:2552–6. 
[338] Maya JC, Macias R, Gomez CA, et al. On the evolution of pore microstructure 

during coal char activation with steam/CO2 mixtures. Carbon 2020;158:121–30. 
[339] Molino A, Donatelli A, Marino T, et al. Waste tire recycling process for production 

of steam activated carbon in a pilot plant. Resour Conserv Recycl 2018;129: 
102–11. 

[340] Troca-Torrado C, Alexandre-Franco M, Fernandez-Gonzalez C, et al. Development 
of adsorbents from used tire rubber. Their use in the adsorption of organic and 
inorganic solutes in aqueous solution. Fuel Process Technol 2011;92:206–12. 
[341] Suuberg EM, Aarna I. Kinetics of tire derived fuel (TDF) char oxidation and 

accompanying changes in surface area. Fuel 2009;88:179–86. 

[342] Sirimuangjinda A, Hemra K, Atong D, et al. Comparison on pore development of 
activated carbon produced from scrap tire by potassium hydroxide and sodium 
hydroxide for active packaging materials. Key Eng Mater 2013;545:129–33. 

[343] Zhang X, Li HX, Cao Q, et al. Upgrading pyrolytic residue from waste tires to 

commercial carbon black. Waste Manage Res 2018;36:436–44. 

[344] Heras F, Jimenez-Cordero D, Gilarranz MA, et al. Activation of waste tire char by 

cyclic liquid-phase oxidation. Fuel Process Technol 2014;127:157–62. 
[345] Choi GG, Jung SH, Oh SJ, et al. Total utilization of waste tire rubber through 

pyrolysis to obtain oils and CO2 activation of pyrolysis char. Fuel Process Technol 
2014;123:57–64. 

[346] Mui ELK, Cheung WH, Valix M, et al. Mesoporous activated carbon from waste 
tyre rubber for dye removal from effluents. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2010; 
130:287–94. 

[347] Teng H, Lin YC, Hsu LY. Production of activated carbons from pyrolysis of waste 
tires impregnated with potassium hydroxide. Air Repair 2000;50:1940–6. 
[348] Lin YR, Teng HS. Mesoporous carbons from waste tire char and their application 

in wastewater discoloration. Microporous Mesoporous Mater 2002;54:167–74. 
[349] Aranda A, Murillo R, Garcia T, et al. Steam activation of tyre pyrolytic carbon 
black: kinetic study in a thermobalance. Chem Eng J 2007;126:79–85. 
[350] San Miguel G, Fowler GD, Sollars CJ. A study of the characteristics of activated 
carbons produced by steam and carbon dioxide activation of waste tyre rubber. 
Carbon 2003;41:1009–16. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102235N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[351] Mui ELK, Ko DCK, McKay G. Production of active carbons from waste tyres-a 

[383] Passaponti M, Rosi L, Savastano M, et al. Recycling of waste automobile tires: 

review. Carbon 2004;42:2789–805. 

[352] Suuberg EM, Aarna I. Porosity development in carbons derived from scrap 

automobile tires. Carbon 2007;45:1719–26. 

[353] Lin QH, Cheng H, Chen GY. Preparation and characterization of carbonaceous 

adsorbents from sewage sludge using a pilot-scale microwave heating equipment. 
J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2012;93:113–9. 

[354] Zabaniotoua A, Madau P, Oudennec PD, et al. Active carbon production from used 
tire in two-stage procedure: industrial pyrolysis and bench scale activation with 
H2O-CO2  mixture. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2004;72:289–97. 

[355] Wu IF, Liao YC. A chemical milling process to produce water-based inkjet printing 

ink from waste tire carbon blacks. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2021;122:64–70. 

[356] Zhou J, Wang JD, Ren XH, et al. Surface modification of pyrolytic carbon black 
from waste tires and its use as pigment for offset printing ink. Chin J Chem Eng 
2006;14:654–9. 

Transforming char in oxygen reduction reaction catalysts for alkaline fuel cells. 
J Power Sources 2019;427:85–90. 

[384] Al-Rahbi AS, Williams PT. Hydrogen-rich syngas production and tar removal from 
biomass gasification using sacrificial tyre pyrolysis char. Appl Energy 2017;190: 
501–9. 

[385] Du AH, Wu MS, Su CY, et al. The characterization of pyrolytic carbon black 

prepared from used tires and its application in styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR). 
J Macromol Sci Part B-Phys 2008;47:268–75. 

[386] Berki P, Karger-Kocsis J. Comparative properties of styrene-butadiene rubbers 
(SBR) containing pyrolytic carbon black, conventional carbon black, and 
organoclay. J Macromol Sci Part B-Phys 2016;55:749–63. 

[387] Song P, Wan CY, Xie YL, et al. Vegetable derived-oil facilitating carbon black 
migration from waste tire rubbers and its reinforcement effect. Waste Manage 
(Oxford) 2018;78:238–48. 

[357] Larsen MB, Hansen ML, Glarborg P, et al. Kinetics of tyre char oxidation under 

[388] Gnanaraj JS, Lee RJ, Levine AM, et al. Sustainable waste tire derived carbon 

combustion conditions. Fuel 2007;86:2343–50. 

[358] Chaala A, Roy C, AitKadi A. Rheological properties of bitumen modified with 

pyrolytic carbon black. Fuel 1996;75:1575–83. 

[359] Feng Z, Zhao P, Li X, et al. Preparation and properties of bitumen modified with 

waste rubber pyrolytic carbon black. Constr Build Mater 2021;282:122697. 

[360] Dong RK, Zhao MZ. Research on the pyrolysis process of crumb tire rubber in 

waste cooking oil. Renew Energy 2018;125:557–67. 

[361] Hijazi A, Boyadjian C, Ahmad MN, et al. Solar pyrolysis of waste rubber tires 
using photoactive catalysts. Waste Manage (Oxford) 2018;77:10–21. 

[362] Banar M, Ozkan A, Akyildiz V, et al. Evaluation of solid product obtained from 
tire-derived fuel (TDF) pyrolysis as carbon black. J Mater Cycles Waste Manage 
2015;17:125–34. 

[363] Lahijani P, Zainal ZA, Mohamed AR, et al. Co-gasification of tire and biomass for 
enhancement of tire-char reactivity in CO2  gasification process. Bioresour 
Technol 2013;138:124–30. 

[364] Lee JS, Kim SD. Gasification kinetics of waste tire-char with CO2  in a 

thermobalance reactor. Energy 1996;21:343–52. 

[365] Preciado-Hernandez J, Zhang J, Jones I, et al. An experimental study of CO2 

gasification kinetics during steam activation of a spent tyre pyrolysis char. 
J Environ Chem Eng 2021;9:105306. 

[366] Portofino S, Donatelli A, Iovane P, et al. Steam gasification of waste tyre: 
influence of process temperature on yield and product composition. Waste 
Manage (Oxford) 2013;33:672–8. 

[367] Wang Y, Wang Z, Wang JX. Lab-scale and pilot-scale fabrication of amine- 

functional reverse osmosis membrane with improved chlorine resistance and 
antimicrobial property. J Membr Sci 2018;554:221–31. 

[368] Millar GJ, Couperthwaite SJ, Papworth S. Ion exchange of sodium chloride and 
sodium bicarbonate solutions using strong acid cation resins in relation to coal 
seam water treatment. J Water Process Eng 2016;11:60–7. 

[369] Gouveia TIA, Silva AMT, Ribeiro AR, et al. Liquid-liquid extraction as a simple 

tool to quickly quantify fourteen cytostatics in urban wastewaters and access their 
impact in aquatic biota. Sci Total Environ 2020;740:139995. 

material as a potential anode for lithium-ion batteries. Sustainability 2018;10: 
2840. 

[389] Gholami P, Khataee A, Soltani RDC, et al. A review on carbon-based materials for 
heterogeneous sonocatalysis: fundamentals, properties and applications. Ultrason 
Sonochem 2019;58:104681. 

[390] Dai X, Liu H, Liu X, et al. Silicon nanoparticles encapsulated in multifunctional 
crosslinked nano-silica/carbon hybrid matrix as a high-performance anode for Li- 
ion batteries. Chem Eng J 2021;418:129468. 

[391] Li JW, Li XF, Xiong DB, et al. Enhanced capacitance of boron-doped graphene 

aerogels for aqueous symmetric supercapacitors. Appl Surf Sci 2019;475:285–93. 
[392] Ruwona W, Danha G, Muzenda E. A review on material and energy recovery from 

waste tyres. 2nd Int Conf Sustain Mater Process Manuf (SMPM 2019) 2019;35: 
216–22. 

[393] Zhao PP, Han Y, Dong XT, et al. Application of activated carbons derived from 

scrap tires as electrode materials for supercapacitors. ECS J Solid State Sci 
Technol 2015;4:M35–40. 

[394] Boota M, Paranthaman MP, Naskar AK, et al. Waste tire derived carbon-polymer 

composite paper as pseudocapacitive electrode with long cycle life. 
ChemSusChem 2015;8:3576–81. 

[395] Shilpa KR, Sharma A. Morphologically tailored activated carbon derived from 
waste tires as high-performance anode for Li-ion battery. J Appl Electrochem 
2018;48:1–13. 

[396] Zhi MJ, Yang F, Meng FK, et al. Effects of pore structure on performance of an 
activated-carbon supercapacitor electrode recycled from scrap waste tires. ACS 
Sustain Chem Eng 2014;2:1592–8. 

[397] Naskar AK, Bi ZH, Li YC, et al. Tailored recovery of carbons from waste tires for 
enhanced performance as anodes in lithium-ion batteries. RSC Adv 2014;4: 
38213–21. 

[398] Li YC, Paranthaman MP, Akato K, et al. Tire-derived carbon composite anodes for 

sodium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2016;316:232–8. 

[399] Li G, Stubblefield MA, Garrick G, et al. Development of waste tire modified 

concrete. Cem Concr Res 2004;34:2283–9. 

[370] Balster J, Punt I, Stamatialis DF, et al. Electrochemical acidification of milk by 

[400] Graeff AG, Pilakoutas K, Neocleous K, et al. Fatigue resistance and cracking 

whey desalination. J Membr Sci 2007;303:213–20. 

[371] Pan T, Nguyen TA, Shi XM. Assessment of electrical injection of corrosion 

inhibitor for corrosion protection of reinforced concrete. Transp Res Rec 2008: 
51–60. 

[372] Li Y-h, Chang F-m, Huang B, et al. Activated carbon preparation from pyrolysis 
char of sewage sludge and its adsorption performance for organic compounds in 
sewage. Fuel 2020;266:117053. 

[373] Lehmann CMB, Rostam-Abadi M, Rood MJ, et al. Reprocessing and reuse of waste 
tire rubber to solve air-quality related problems. Energy Fuels 1998;12:1095–9. 

[374] Shaid M, Zaini MAA, Nasri NS. Evaluation of methylene blue dye and phenol 

removal onto modified CO2-activated pyrolysis tyre powder. J Cleaner Prod 2019; 
223:487–98. 

[375] Guerrero-Esparza MM, Medina-Valtierra J, Carrasco-Marin F. Chars from waste 
tire rubber by catalytic pyrolysis and the statistical analysis of the adsorption of 
Fe in potable water. Environ Prog Sustain Energy 2017;36:1794–801. 

[376] Lian F, Huang F, Chen W, et al. Sorption of apolar and polar organic contaminants 
by waste tire rubber and its chars in single- and bi-solute systems. Environ Pollut 
2011;159:850–7. 

[377] Dimpe KM, Ngila JC, Nomngongo PN. Application of waste tyre-based activated 
carbon for the removal of heavy metals in wastewater. Cogent Eng 2017;4: 
1330912. 

[378] Makrigianni V, Giannakas A, Deligiannakis Y, et al. Adsorption of phenol and 
methylene blue from aqueous solutions by pyrolytic tire char: equilibrium and 
kinetic studies. J Environ Chem Eng 2015;3:574–82. 

mechanism of concrete pavements reinforced with recycled steel fibres recovered 
from post-consumer tyres. Eng Struct 2012;45:385–95. 

[401] Turatsinze A, Bonnet S, Granju JL. Mechanical characterisation of cement-based 
mortar incorporating rubber aggregates from recycled worn tyres. Build Environ 
2005;40:221–6. 

[402] Mahmood A, Khushnood RA, Zeeshan M. Pyrolytic carbonaceous reinforcements 
for enhanced electromagnetic and fracture response of cementitious composites. 
J Cleaner Prod 2020;248:119288. 

[403] Ryms M, Januszewicz K, Kazimierski P, et al. Post-pyrolytic carbon as a phase 

change materials (PCMs) carrier for application in building materials. Materials 
2020;13. 

[404] Ryms M, Januszewicz K, Haustein E, et al. Thermal properties of a cement 

composite containing phase change materials (PCMs) with post-pyrolytic char 
obtained from spent tyres as a carrier. Energy 2022;239:121936. 

[405] Chaala A, Roy C. Ait-Kadi A. Rheological properties of bitumen modified with 

pyrolytic carbon black. Fuel 1996;75:1575–83. 

[406] Darmstadt H, Chaala A, Roy C, et al. SIMS and ESCA characterization of bitumen 

reinforced with pyrolytic carbon black. Fuel 1996;75:125–32. 

[407] Feng Z-g, Rao W-y, Chen C, et al. Performance evaluation of bitumen modified 
with pyrolysis carbon black made from waste tyres. Constr Build Mater 2016;111: 
495–501. 

[408] Li C, Fan Z, Wu S, et al. Effect of carbon black nanoparticles from the pyrolysis of 
discarded tires on the performance of asphalt and its mixtures. Appl Sci 2018;8. 
[409] Wang H, Lu G, Feng S, et al. Characterization of bitumen modified with pyrolytic 

[379] Acosta R, Fierro V, de Yuso AM, et al. Tetracycline adsorption onto activated 

carbon black from scrap tires. Sustainability 2019:11. 

carbons produced by KOH activation of tyre pyrolysis char. Chemosphere 2016; 
149:168–76. 

[380] Zhang C, Liang XQ, Liu SX. Hydrogen production by catalytic dehydrogenation of 
methylcyclohexane over Pt catalysts supported on pyrolytic waste tire char. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:8902–7. 

[381] Ji RN, Yu K, Lou LL, et al. Chiral Mn(III) salen complexes immobilized directly on 
pyrolytic waste tire char for asymmetric epoxidation of unfunctionalized olefins. 
Inorg Chem Commun 2012;25:65–9. 

[382] Sanchez-Olmos LA, Medina-Valtierra J, Sathish-Kumar K, et al. Sulfonated char 

from waste tire rubber used as strong acid catalyst for biodiesel production. 
Environ Progress Sustain Energy 2017;36:619–26. 

[410] Kumar A, Choudhary R, Kumar A. Aging characteristics of asphalt binders 

modified with waste tire and plastic pyrolytic chars. PLoS One 2021;16: 
e0256030. 

[411] Srinivasan S, Valsadwala AS, Shamshath Begum S, et al. Experimental 

investigation on the influence of novel catalyst in co-pyrolysis of polymeric waste: 
Characterization of oil and preparation of char reinforced composites. J Cleaner 
Prod 2021;316:128225. 

[412] Mat Hussain N, Bonnia NN, Hirzin RSF, et al. Preparation of castor-based 
polyurethane composites filled with waste carbon tyres (WCT) as grouting 
material. J Teknol 2020;82(5). 

[413] K´aroly Z, Mohai I, Kl´ebert S, et al. Synthesis of SiC powder by RF plasma 

technique. Powder Technol 2011;214:300–5. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102236N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Dr. Ningbo Gao is professor in the School of Energy and Power 
Engineering  at  Xi’an  Jiaotong  University  China.  He  received 
his  Ph.D  at  Dalian  University  of  Technology  in  2009.  He 
worked as a visiting scholar at the University of Hull UK from 
2016 to 2017. He has published more than 120 academic pa-
pers in the area of solid waste thermal conversion with more 
than 3000 citations. He holds more than 30 patents. His current 
research areas are sewage sludge drying pyrolysis and gasifi-
cation oily sludge treatment and resource utilization agricul-
tural/industrial  biomass  thermochemical  conversion  and 
biomass/coal tar catalytic hydrogen production etc.  

Fengchao  Wang  is  studying  for  a  doctorate  in  Advanced 
Manufacturing at the School of Energy and Power Engineering 
of Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. She received her B.E. de-
gree in Environmental Engineering and M.E. degree in Applied 
Chemistry from Xi`an Shiyou University, China. Her research 
includes pyrolysis, gasification, combustion of waste materials 
using catalysts to produce clean and high-quality products. Her 
current research work is mainly to explore new technologies 
and  processes  for  the  treatment  and  resource  utilization  of 
waste tires, oil sludge, plastic and biomass. She has published 6 
academic  papers  in  wastes  treatment  and  holds  4  Chinese 
patents.  Her  published  paper  in  the  field  of  oil  sludge  com-

bustion won the third prize of excellent papers in the industry.  

Dr. Cui Quan is an associate Professor at the School of Energy 
and Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. She 
received  her  B.E.  and  Ph.D.  degrees  in  Environmental  Engi-
neering at Dalian University of Technology in 2007 and 2012, 
respectively. From 2012 to 2015, she worked as an assistant 
Professor at The School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian Uni-
versity of Technology, China. She worked as a visiting scholar 
at the University of Hull, UK from 2016 to 2017. Her current 
research  interests  include  solid  waste  thermochemical  con-
version  and  resource  utilization,  oil  upgrading  by  catalytic 
pyrolysis/steam  reforming,  carbon  materials  from  biomass/ 
coal and their application. She has published over 30 refereed 
research journal articles. She is a recipient of the award of the Royal Society K.C. Wong 
International Fellowship in 2020.  

Laura  Santamaria  received  her  B.Sc.  degree  from  the  Uni-
versity of Valladolid (UVA) in 2011. Afterwards, she got a Ph. 
D. in 2019 in Chemical Engineering (UPV/EHU). In 2018 she 
worked as a visiting scholar in the Department of "Decentral-
ized Energy Conversion (DEU)", of the Institute of Combustion 
and  Power  Plant  Technology  at  University  of  Stuttgart  (Ger-
many). Her research activity is focused on the development of 
heterogeneous catalysts and the production of valuable fuels 
and  products  from  wastes  (plastics,  biomass,  sewage  sludge 
etc.) by thermochemical conversion strategies such as pyroly-
sis,  gasification  and  pyrolysis-reforming.  She  has  published 
over 20 refereed research journal articles.  

Dr.  Gartzen  Lopez  is  an  Ikerbasque  Research  Fellow  at  the 
University  of  the  Basque  Country  UPV/EHU,  Spain.  Gartzen 
obtained  his  Bachelor  and  Ph.D.  degrees  in  Chemical  Engi-
neering from the University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU 
in 2003 and 2008, respectively. He has currently co-authored 
120  papers  in  JCR  indexed  journals  mainly  in  the  areas  of 
Chemical Engineering and Energy & Fuels. He has an h index of 
52  and  more  than  6300  citations  (Scopus).  His  research  is 
mainly focused on biomass and waste valorization to produce 
hydrogen, alternative fuels and chemicals by pyrolysis, gasifi-
cation and pyrolysisin line steam reforming processes.  

Professor Paul Williams is professor of Environmental Engi-
neering  at  the  University  of  Leeds,  UK.  He  has  a  research 
background  in both applied chemistry  and process  engineer-
ing. He has published more than 350 archived journal papers in 
the  area  of  environmental  engineering,  including  waste  and 
biomass pyrolysis, gasification and waste incineration. He has 
an ‘h’ index of 96 and >31,500 citations to his work (Google 
Scholar). His current research focus is on the development of 
thermal-catalytic processes for the production of higher value 
products  from  wastes,  including  waste  biomass,  plastics  and 
tires.  Targeted  end-products  include  hydrogen,  liquid  fuels, 
carbon nanotubes and activated carbons. He is Editor in Chief 

of Journal of the Energy Institute. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102237