Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs 

Micro/nano-encapsulated phase-change materials (ePCMs) for solar 
photothermal absorption and storage: Fundamentals, recent advances, and 
future directions 

Samah A. Albdour a, Zoubida Haddad b, Omar Z. Sharaf a, Anas Alazzam a,c, Eiyad Abu-Nada a,* 
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Khalifa University of Science and Technology, P.O. Box 127788, Abu Dhabi, UAE 
b Ecole Nationale Sup´erieur des Sciences de la Mer et de l’Am´enagement du Littoral (ENSSMAL), Campus Universitaire de Dely Ibrahim Bois des Cars D´ely, 16320 
Ibrahim, Algeria 
c System on Chip Lab, Khalifa University, P.O. Box 127788, Abu Dhabi, UAE   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Phase change material 
Micro/nano encapsulation 
Solar thermal 
Thermal energy storage 
Direct solar absorption 
Encapsulated PCM slurry 
Optical properties 
Photothermal conversion 
Heat capacity 

Building on their dual functionality for solar photothermal absorption and storage, slurries/dispersions of micro/ 
nano-encapsulated phase-change materials  (ePCMs) are capable of  revolutionizing the solar-thermal industry. 
Yet, to facilitate their transition from the research and development stage into market adoption and penetration, 
there is a dire need for a methodical understanding of the design criteria, fabrication techniques, application 
areas,  and  technical  challenges  of  these  novel  solar  concepts  in  light  of  state-of-the-art  advances.  This  work 
thoroughly addresses these needs with a focus on slurries/dispersions with solid-liquid PCM cores for latent heat 
storage and surface-engineered shells for solar radiation extinction. By dividing this study into four parts, we 
start with an overview of the material types, desired attributes, and key challenges of PCMs; the different types of 
PCM systems; and their potential applications in the solar energy industry. We then focus in the second part on 
ePCMs in indirect (surface-based) and direct (volume-based) solar-absorption systems in terms of their functional 
requirements,  encapsulation  methods,  stability  metrics  and  assessment,  compositional  and  structural  charac-
terization techniques, measurement of thermophysical properties, and key design parameters. The third part of 
this  work  is  dedicated  to  the  theoretical  foundation  necessary  to  model  and  simulate  solar  ePCM  systems, 
including continuum, discrete, and multi-scale modeling approaches for flow and heat transfer in ePCM slurries/ 
dispersions; thermophysical property correlations; melting theory in PCM capsules; radiation transfer and optical 
properties  evaluation;  and  energy  performance  analysis.  In  the  final  part,  recent  breakthroughs  in  multi- 
functional  shell  engineering,  molten-salt  encapsulation,  multi-scale  modeling,  contrasting  ePCMs  and  nano-
fluids, and ePCM-based optical filtration are highlighted. By striking a balance between fundamentals and ap-
plications, this work aims to serve as a comprehensive foundation for newcomers into this promising field of 
research as well as an updated critique for experts looking to identify knowledge gaps, technical bottlenecks, 
latest advances, and future directions.   

1 Introduction 

The use of phase-change materials (PCMs) for thermal energy storage 
has  been  recognized  as  a  viable  method  for  balancing  the  in-
compatibility of energy demand and supply. PCMs, in general, have a 
high energy storage density, quasi-isothermal charging and discharging 
processes, and a high fusion enthalpy [1]. However, few pristine PCMs 
have achieved commercial success due to leakage problems during the 
solid-liquid  phase  transition  and  incompatibility  with  surrounding 

materials, together with their low thermal conductivity. 

The  most  promising  way  to  solve  the  aforementioned  issues  is  to 
encapsulate the PCM in a suitable shell material. This technique offers 
the benefit of obtaining a larger surface area for better thermal prop-
erties of the PCM [2]. Capsules resulting from this technique are cate-
gorized primarily on three scales: macroscale (above 1 mm), microscale 
(1 μm-1 mm), and nanoscale (less than 1 μm). The large size of macro-
capsules results in a temperature difference between the PCM core and 
boundary  during  the  solidification  process.  The  edge  becomes  solid, 
whilst the center portion may remain liquid, obstructing effective heat 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: eiyad.abunada@ku.ac.ae (E. Abu-Nada).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101037 
Received 17 January 2022; Received in revised form 16 August 2022; Accepted 20 August 2022   

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101037Availableonline12September20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Nomenclature 

td 

dr 

lift 

Lift force [N] 

Drag force [N] 

Turbulent dispersion force [N] 

Lattice constant 
Area [m2] 

Electric field intensity 
Encapsulated phase-change material 
Evacuated-tube collector 
Force [N] 

Biot number [-] 
Specific heat at constant pressure [J/kg•K] 
Volumetric concentration 
Drag coefficient [-] 
Lift coefficient [-] 
Turbulent dispersion coefficient [-] 
Virtual mass force coefficient [-] 
Computational fluid dynamics 
Carbon nanofibers 
Concentrated solar power 
Conventional single-slope 
Concentrated photovoltaic/thermal system 
Differential scanning calorimetry 
Array spacing 
Shell thickness 
Particle diameter [μm] 

Electric field vector 
Direct-absorption solar collector 
Dissipative particle dynamics 
Divinylbenzene 

a 
A 
AcCNF  Acetylated cellulose nanofibrils 
Bi 
cp 
C 
Cdr 
Clift 
Ctd 
Cvm 
CFD 
CNFs 
CSP 
CSS 
CPV/T 
DSC 
d 
ds 
dpa 
→
D
DASC 
DPD 
DVB 
→
E
ePCM 
ETC 
F 
→
F
→
F
→
F
→
F
vm 
FDM 
FEM 
FGM 
Fo 
FVM 
G 
GA 
GNP 
GO 
Gr 
ħ 
h 
Hr 
Hs  (cid:0)
H 
→
H
HTF 
IASC 
Iη 
Im 
J 
k 
Kn 
KB 
ҡ 

Virtual-mass force [N] 
Finite difference method 
Finite element method 
Phonon gas model 
Fourier number [-] 
Finite volume method 
Solar irradiance [W/m2] 
Graphene aerogel 
Graphite nanoplatelet 
Graphene oxide 
Grashof number [-] 
(cid:0) 34J⋅s] 
Reduced Planck constant [1.054 × 10
Convective heat transfer coefficient [W/m2⋅K] 
Enthalpy of an endothermic reaction [J/mol] 
Latent heat of fusion [kJ/kg] 
Total enthalpy [kJ/kg] 

Magnetic field vector 
Heat transfer fluid 
Indirect-absorption solar collector 
Detected light intensities 
Imaginary part of a complex number 
Heat flux vector 
Thermal conductivity [W/m•K] 
Knudsen number [-] 
Boltzmann constant [1.38 × 10
Absorption index 
Wave vector 
Lattice Boltzmann method 
Liters per minute 
Myristic acid 
Monte Carlo 

k 
LBM 
LPM 
MA 
MC 

(cid:0) 23 J/K] 

l 

Molecular dynamics 
Mass fraction [-] 
Melamine formaldehyde 
Methyl laurate 

MD 
mf 
MF 
ML 
MWCNT  Multi-wall carbon nanotube 
Refractive index 
n 
˙m 
Mass flow rate [kg/s] 
Mass [kg] 
M 
nA 
Mole number of reactant material 
npa 
Number of solid particles in a cell 
Number of capsules per unit volume 
N 
Thermal conductivity number 
Nc 
Nv 
Viscosity number 
NE-PCM  Nano-enhanced phase-change material 
Near infrared 
NIR 
Nusselt number [-] 
Nu 
Oleic acid 
OA 
Pressure [Pa] 
P 
Po 
Electrical power output [W] 
Phase-change material 
PCM 
Polydopamine 
PDA 
Pentaerythritol tetraacrylate 
PETRA 
Polyethylene glycol 
PEG 
Poly(ethyl-2-cyanoacrylate) 
PECA 
Polymethyl methacrylate 
PMMA 
Prandtl number [-] 
Pr 
Polystyrene 
PS 
PScEA 
Poly(styrene-co-ethylacrylate) 
P(St-co-MAA) Poly(styrene-co-methacrylic-acid) 
PUF 
PUR 
PV 
→
Q
Q 
Qex,sc 
Qex,a 
Qex 
r 
rGO 
R 
R 
RTE 
ro 
rpa 
Rcr 
Ra 
Re 
Repa 
S 
̂s 
Sη 
Sr 
SA 
SAH 
SMA 
SS-PCM  Shape-stabilized phase-change material 
SPH 
Ste 
SWH 
SWPC 
t 
T 
TA 
TES 

Poly(urea-formaldehyde) 
Polyurethane 
Photovoltaic 
Local heat flux [W/m2] 
Single microcapsule heat transfer [J] 
Scattering efficiency 
Absorption efficiency 
Extinction efficiency 
Radial coordinate 
Reduced graphene oxide 
Spherical core radius 
Gas constant [kJ/kmol•K] 
Radiative transfer equation 
Pipe radius [m] 
Effective particle radius, [μm] 
Critical radius of solid nuclei, [μm] 
Rayleigh number [-] 
Real part of a complex number 
Reynolds number [-] 
Internal source [W/m3] 
Unit vector 
Source function of radiation intensity 
Scaling factor 
Stearic acid 
Solar air heater 
Styrene-maleic anhydride 

Smoothed particle hydrodynamics 
Stefan number [-] 
Solar water heater 
Slurry without phase change 
Time [s] 
Temperature [K] 
Styrene-maleic anhydride 
Thermal energy storage 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010372S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

TPE 
TSS 
u 
umax 
UF 
UV 
vg 
→
v
Pa 
vsound 
V 
̃V 
vTra 
vLon 
w 
x 
Y 

Two-phase Eulerian 
Tubular solar still 
Velocity in axial direction [m/s] 
Maximum velocity in axial direction [m/s] 
Urea formaldehyde 
Ultraviolet 
Phonon velocity 
Velocity of dispersed particle [m/s] 
Longitudinal sound speed 
Volume [m3] 
Volume per mode of vibration 
Transverse speed of sound 
Longitudinal speed of sound 
Shape factor of suspension particles 
Pipeline location 
Transport coefficient of interest 

Superscript 
˙

Rate of change with respect to time 

Subscripts 
a 
b 
char 
co 
conv 
cr 
in 
inl 
dr 
dis 
e 
ex 
eff 
f 
j 
i 
l 
L 
Lon 
out 
pa 
m 
mr 

Absorption 
Base liquid 
Charging process 
Core 
Convection 
Critical 
Internal 
Inlet 
Drag force 
Discharging process 
External 
Extinction 
Effective 
Final 
Summation index 
Initial 
Liquid 
Lift force 
longitudinal 
Outlet 
Particle 
Melting point 
Melting range 

r 
s 
sh 
sl 
td 
tot 
Tra 
vm 
vib 

Reaction 
Solid 
Shell 
Slurry 
Turbulent dispersion force 
Total 
Transverse 
Virtual mass force 
Vibration 

Greek symbols 
α 
γ 
γo 
δ 
ξ 
η 
ηPCM 
ηth 
ηelc 
ηtot 
λ 
λb 
λd 
λkn 
λph 
μ 
μ0 
ση,a 
ση,s 
ση,ex 
τ 
τrad 
τ→
τη 
ρ 
∅ 
∅η 
χη 
Ω 
ω 
ωη 

Volume fraction 
Liquid fraction 
Surface free energy per unit area 
Infinitesimal change 
Bulk viscosity [ Pa•.s] 
Wave number 
Encapsulation ratio 
Thermal efficiency 
Electrical efficiency 
Total efficiency 
Wavelength [m] 
Phonon-boundary mean free path 
Phonon-defect mean free path 
Molecular mean free path 
Phonon-phonon mean free path 
Shear viscosity [Pa•s] 
Magnetic permeability 
Absorption coefficient 
Scattering coefficient 
Extinction coefficient 
Mean time between two phonon collisions 
Transmittance 
Stress tensor 
Optical path length 
Density [kg/m3] 
Concentration 
Scattering phase angle 
Size parameter 
Solid angle 
Frequency 
Single scattering albedo  

transfer [3]. Therefore, encapsulation at the macro scale is not as ad-
vantageous as the micro/nanoscale. Suspending micro/nano-ePCMs into 
a  carrier  fluid  to  create  a  heat  transfer  fluid  (HTF)  is  considered  the 
simplest and cheapest way to increase energy efficiency. This type of 
HTF is referred to as a micro/nano-ePCM slurry/dispersion [4]. It is an 
innovative flow state in which the slurry/dispersion acts as a heat carrier 
while allowing the storage and release of large amounts of thermal en-
ergy with a minimum temperature rise [5]. 

The  efficiency  of  solar  photothermal  systems  can  be  enhanced  by 
using  micro/nano-ePCM  slurries/dispersions  as  working  fluids.  The 
direct-absorption  solar  collector  is  one  such  example  in  which  solar 
radiation  penetrates  through  the  HTF  to  be  directly  absorbed  by  the 
ePCM particles [6]. The efficiency here is directly correlated with the 
optical  properties  of  the  photon-capturing  shell  material,  i.e.,  its 
extinction coefficient. In other applications, such as the optical filtration 
of photovoltaic/thermal collectors [7], a micro/nano-ePCM slurry/dis-
persion  has  the  potential  to  selectively  absorb  one  or  more  bands  of 
sunlight while transmitting the remaining band(s) to the photovoltaic 
receiver,  avoiding the  high temperature penalty on photovoltaic cells 

[8]. 

Several  authors  have  reviewed  PCMs  and  micro/nano-ePCMs  for 
thermal energy storage and management systems, highlighting the as-
pects of core-shell material selection, preparation, characterization, and 
heat transfer enhancement. Table 1 summarizes a number of selected 
review studies on this topic. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, none 
of the existing reviews considered the dual role of micro/nano-ePCMs 
for  photothermal  absorption  and  storage.  Therefore,  this  work  pro-
vides a much-needed and critical review of the fundamentals and ap-
plications  of ePCM  slurries and  dispersions as  smart, multi-functional 
fluids in next-generation solar  photothermal conversion  processes. By 
surveying  and  comparing  the  most  recent  developments  in  the  field, 
technical  bottlenecks  and  knowledge  gaps  are  identified  and  future 
research directions are recommended to facilitate the market uptake of 
these novel solar concepts. By striking a balance between fundamentals 
and applications, this work promotes the untapped potential of ePCM 
slurries  and  dispersions  while  remaining  suitable  both  as  a  compre-
hensive  foundation  to  newcomers  as  well  as  an  updated  critique  to 
established experts. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010373S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 1 
A number of selected review articles on PCMs/ePCMs.  

Ref. 

Focus of study 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 
[15] 

[16] 

[2] 

[17] 

[4] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

Provides a comprehensive overview of current advancements in latent heat 
storage, thermal management, and TES applications. It covers PCM thermal 
performance improvement techniques in depth. 
Explores a list of shell materials with excellent thermal stability that could 
provide a feasible solution for high-temperature TES. However, the thermal 
performance of shell and PCM combinations is not considered. 
Provides a summary of encapsulation strategies for inorganic PCMs and an 
examination of the effect of synthesis parameters on the thermophysical 
properties of ePCM. 
Discusses the development and characterization of eutectic organic PCMs and 
their utilization in form-stable systems. 
Examines the performance of PCMs and ePCMs and their applications in 
thermal management. In addition, it investigates the effect of various solar 
collector and PCM settings on performance enhancement. 
Examines recent developments in the usage of PCMs in solar energy systems. 
Investigates the performance and thermal management applications of PCMs 
in solar thermal collectors and photovoltaic systems. 
Presents a complete assessment of recent developments and future 
possibilities related to nano-enhanced PCMs in enhancing the performance of 
PV/T systems. 
Investigates the effect of encapsulation parameters on the performance of TES 
systems and the solidification and melting properties of ePCMs. 
Examines the various micro/nano-ePCM categories and their involvement in 
solar thermal energy systems. This includes PCM thermal enhancement 
techniques, such as nanoparticles and skeletons. 
Examines the flow and heat transfer characteristics of micro-encapsulated 
phase-change slurries, as well as the mechanisms and strategies for enhancing 
heat transfer performance. 
Provides a comprehensive analysis of PCMs and micro/nano-ePCMs and their 
production techniques, considering both experimental and numerical 
investigations. 
Presents a thorough overview of the experimental, numerical, and theoretical 
studies of the heat transfer behavior and thermal conductivity augmentation 
of PCMs loaded with nanoparticles in thermal energy systems. 
Covers a review of scientific literature as well as a compilation of technical 
and commercial information regarding PCM emulsions and micro-ePCM 
slurries for usage as heat transfer fluids and thermal storage materials. 
Focuses on the characterization of micro-ePCM slurries and their building 
applications, particularly the influence of physical stability and effect on heat 
transfer performance.  

The  workflow  of  the  current  review  is  organized  into  five  major 
sections. In Section 2, we present an overview of the different types of 
PCM systems, their desired characteristics, and key challenges, as well as 
their potential applications in the solar energy industry. In Section 3, an 
elaborate  description  of  ePCMs  in  indirect  (surface-based)  and  direct 
(volume-based)  solar-absorption  systems  is  presented.  This  includes 
PCM  encapsulation  methods,  compositional  and  structural  character-
ization  techniques,  stability  requirements  and  stabilization  strategies, 
measurement of thermophysical properties, functional requirements for 
the core and shell, and key design parameters. Then, Section 4 is dedi-
cated  to  the  theoretical  foundation  necessary  to  model  and  simulate 
solar  ePCM  systems,  including  continuum,  discrete,  and  multi-scale 
modeling approaches for flow and heat transfer in ePCM slurries/dis-
persions.  This  is  in  addition  to  presenting  thermophysical  property 
correlations,  theoretical background  of  thermal  conductivity and  spe-
cific heat capacity in PCMs, evaluation of radiation transfer and optical 
properties,  and  energy  performance  analysis.  In  Section  5,  recent  ad-
vances in multi-functional shell engineering, implementing ePCMs and 
nanofluids  for  direct-absorption  solar  collectors,  ePCM-based  optical 
filtration,  molten-salt  encapsulation,  and  multi-scale  modeling  are 
highlighted. Finally, in Section 6, conclusions and recommendations are 
drawn as a roadmap for future research directions. 

2. An overview of phase-change materials (PCMs) and their role 
in solar energy systems 

2.1. Thermal energy storage technologies 

With the global focus on energy conservation and lowering green-
house gas emissions, renewable and sustainable energy has become a 
major  scientific  inquiry.  Yet,  intermittent  availability  and  supply- 
demand mismatch limit the potential of renewable energy sources and 
waste heat utilization. Thus, by combining thermal energy storage (TES) 
systems with energy generation technologies, the use of energy gener-
ated in times of high supply or low demand can be used in times of high 
demand or low supply [22]. Ultimately, TES systems should be able to 
meet  peak  demand,  non-peak  demand,  as  well  as  daily  and  seasonal 
needs, increasing the reliability and generation capacity of integrated 
energy systems [23]. 

The idea behind TES systems is to work reversibly while changing the 
physical  properties  of  a  material,  such  as  temperature  or  phase  [24]. 
These reversible processes include cooling, heating, melting, solidifica-
tion,  vaporization,  and  condensation.  The  storage  technologies  are 
classified  as  thermochemical,  sensible,  and  latent,  with  each  having 
their own set of characteristics. The maturity and energy storage density 
per unit volume of each technology are depicted in Fig. 1. 

Thermochemical TES systems are based on reversible endothermic/ 
exothermic  reactions  between  the  heat  source  and  the  chemical  re-
actants, with stored energy equal to the reaction enthalpy. As illustrated 
in Fig. 2(a), during the charging stage, heat is absorbed to dissociate the 
original reactant into two or more products (an endothermic reaction). 
The discharging stage involves the mixing of the products of the endo-
thermic reaction at specific temperatures and pressures to reform the 
reactants and generate heat (exothermic reaction). The generated heat is 
converted into electricity or used in other thermally-powered applica-
tions.  Thermochemical  TES  systems  outperform  sensible  and  latent 
storage in terms of energy density and volume requirements. They are; 
however,  toxic,  produce  corrosive  products,  and  require  extremely 
harsh  reaction  conditions  [25].  The  total  amount  of  thermal  energy 
stored  or  released  in  thermochemical  TES  is  calculated  using  Eq.  (1) 
[25], 

Qthermochemical = nAΔHr,

(1)  

where nA is the mole number of the original reactant material and ΔHr is 
the enthalpy of an endothermic reaction in J/mol. 

As shown in Fig. 2(b), the change in stored energy in sensible TES 
systems is detected as a linear relationship with the change in temper-
ature. The phase of the used storage material does not change over the 
operating temperature range, but it undergoes volume change. Sensible 
TES materials are divided into two types based on their phase state: solid 
and liquid heat storage materials. Rocks, sand, and concrete are exam-
ples of solid materials, whereas water, molten salt, and thermal oil are 
examples of liquid materials. Sensible TES systems are inexpensive (with 
the exception of liquid metals) and widely used. Their thermal resilience 
and  superior  thermal  conductivity  make  them  popular  for  high- 

Fig. 1. Comparison between the main classes of thermal energy storage tech-
nologies (sensible, latent, and thermochemical) in terms of technical maturity 
and volumetric energy storage density. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010374S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 2. The fundamental working mechanisms of a) thermochemical, b) sensible, and c) latent thermal energy storage technologies.  

temperature  applications  [25].  The  total  quantity  of  thermal  energy 
stored or released in a sensible TES system is calculated using Eq. (2) 
[25], 

∫Tf

Qsensible = M

cpdT,

Ti

(2)  

where M and cp represent the mass and specific heat at constant pressure 
of  the  storage  material,  respectively.  Tiand  Tfare  the  initial  and  final 
temperatures of the material, respectively. 

Latent heat storage (also  called phase-change heat storage) makes 
use of phase-change materials that have the unique ability to store and 
release  energy  in  response  to  changes  in  their  temperature  and/or 
pressure while maintaining a nearly constant temperature throughout 
phase  transitions.  Therefore,  latent  TES  incorporates  sensible  TES,  as 
illustrated  in  Fig.  2(c).  During  the  storage  stage  (charging),  heat  is 
accumulated  at  the  molecular  level  inside  the  material,  activating  its 
massive  storage  ability  and  changing  its  states.  However,  during  the 
release stage (discharging), the opposite occurs. In addition to reducing 
heat losses due to operating at a nearly constant temperature, latent TES 
has  a  higher  energy  storage  density  than  sensible  TES,  allowing  the 
storage system to be smaller. However, it has the disadvantages of the 
low thermal conductivity of the used PCM and the difficulty of designing 
and selecting a heat transfer medium [25]. The following formula is used 
to determine the total amount of thermal energy stored or released in 
latent TES storage [25]: 

◦
C. Materials with melting 
wax, have melting temperatures less than 100 
◦
C are considered medium melting- 
temperatures between 100 and 300 
◦
point materials, such as fatty acids. Above 300 
C, materials such as salt 
hydrates and metal alloys are in the range of high melting temperatures. 
The  research  and  development  of  PCMs  for  thermal  energy  storage 
began at the end of the twentieth century [29]. Following the energy 
crisis of the 1970s, research on PCMs sparked interest in a variety of 
promising applications, which can be generally classified into thermal 
regulation and TES. 

Thermal regulation applications aim to prevent temperature fluctu-
ations in the absence of the needed energy input for a specific demand. 
For instance, in terms of cooling and heating in buildings, PCMs with 
◦
melting temperatures in the range of 17(cid:0) 25 
C can meet the conditions 
of human comfort and high-quality living standards by providing ther-
mal  barriers  or  insulation.  PCMs  can  regulate  the  temperature  of  a 
building by modulating its optical properties such as transmission and 
absorption, rather than by means of the absorbed/generated latent heat 
during phase transition [30]. Other applications for thermal regulation 
are  electronics  [31],  photovoltaic  systems  [32],  textiles  [33],  and 
biomedical applications [34]. When it comes to heat storage, which is 
currently the bottleneck in many energy sectors, PCMs can improve the 
efficiency  of  both  concentrated  and  unconcentrated  solar  systems. 
Furthermore, waste heat from industrial operations can be reused [35]. 

2.2. Classifications, properties, and challenges of PCMs 

Qlatent = M

⎛

∫Tm

⎝

Ti

cp, s(T)dT + Hs (cid:0)

l +

cp, l(T)dT

∫Tf

⎞
]
⎠,

Tm

2.2.1. Classification of PCMs according to phase transition 

(3)  

Fig. 3 depicts the most common types of PCM transformations. Each 

transformation is described briefly in the sections that follow. 

where cp,sandcp,l are the material’s specific heat in solid and liquid states, 
respectively. The latent heat of fusion (J/kg) is denoted by Hs (cid:0)
l and the 
melting temperature is denoted byTm. It is worth mentioning that Eq. (3) 
emphasizes the importance of selecting a material with an appropriate 
mass, a high specific heat capacity, and a high heat of fusion to store 
larger amounts of thermal energy. 

Latent TES has attracted the attention of developers of storage sys-
tems due to its high energy storage per volume, which is approximately 
5(cid:0) 14 times that of sensible TES. To store the same amount of energy, 
studies have shown that rocks (as a sensible TES material) require more 
than seven, five, and eight times the storage volumes of paraffin wax 
#116,  medicinal  liquid  paraffin,  and  Na2SO4.10H2O  (as  latent  TES 
materials), respectively [26,27]. This is a result of the high heat capacity 
of PCMs, which is reflected in their smaller storage volume requirements 
[28]. 

PCMs can be organic, inorganic, or eutectic (details are presented in 
Section 2.2.2). They are available in a variety of melting temperatures 
and fusion enthalpies. PCMs can be classified according to their range of 
melting  temperatures.  Low  melting-point  materials,  such  as  paraffin 

2.2.1.1. Liquid-gas transitions. The combination of TES with liquid-gas 
PCMs began in the 1970s. White et al. [36] investigated the use of a 
transcritical CO2 heat pump to heat water to temperatures greater than 
◦
65 
C. The results showed 

◦
C while providing refrigeration at less than 2 

Fig. 3. Phase transformations in solid-liquid, liquid-gas, and solid-solid PCMs.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010375S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

a  linear  increase  in  the  heat  transfer  rate  of  the  gas  cooler  and  recu-
perator with increasing CO2 mass flowrate. Moreover, the heat capacity 
was increased by 20% while using CO2 without lowering the coefficient 
of performance. For application in solar-thermal systems, several types 
of refrigerants such as HFC, CFC, and HCFC were adopted as HTFs [37, 
38].  Solar-thermal  collectors  were  more  efficient  than  conventional 
water-based collectors in the studies mentioned previously. While the 
liquid-gas transformation has the highest latent heat of phase change, it 
is  difficult  to  use  due  to  the  presence  of  environmentally  hazardous 
substances. The enormous volume change during evaporation leads to 
complexity of system design and installation, particularly regarding size 
of the thermal storage containers and heat exchangers. This is in addi-
tion to the necessity of pressurized containers to store gas-phase species 
[39].  Therefore,  liquid(cid:0) gas PCMs  are considered  impractical and  not 
commercially viable [40]. 

2.2.1.2. Solid-solid  transitions. In  solid(cid:0) solid  transformations  (also 
referred  to  as  solid-state  transformations),  the  material  can  retain  its 
solid  bulk  properties  while  changing  from  one  crystalline  or  semi- 
crystalline phase to another. As a result, it avoids the leakage problem 
that is commonly observed in other types of PCM transformations. Solid- 
solid PCMs also exhibit a small volume change during transition, which 
increases  their  durability  during  thermal  cycling.  Because  of  these 
properties, the materials can be used in practical applications and mixed 
with  other  materials  without  needing  to  be  encapsulated.  Different 
solid-solid  PCMs  exhibit  a  variety  of  phase  transitions  depending  on 
their  chemistry  and  molecular  structure,  resulting  in  a  wide  range  of 
enthalpies,  phase  transition  temperatures,  and  thermal  conductivity 
values. Based on their molecular structure, solid-solid PCMs are classi-
fied as polymeric, organic, organometallic, or inorganic [40]. 

Interestingly, when solid-solid PCMs undergo phase transitions, their 
transparency  changes.  This  interesting  property  may  be  exploited  to 
create a low-cost thermochromic system. For example, Guldentops and 
van Dessel investigated the effect of using a thin layer of polymeric solid- 
solid  PCM  in  a  solar-passive  building  enclosure  [41].  The  polymeric 
material  was  used  as  a  coating  material  on  an  exterior  façade  that is 
highly reflective. At low outdoor temperatures during the winter, the 
polymeric  material  was  crystalline  and  opaque.  Consequently,  it 
reduced the heating load by absorbing solar radiation at the outer sur-
face. On the other hand, the polymeric material became amorphous and 
transparent  during  the  summer  season  at  high  outdoor  temperatures; 
thus,  it  reduced  the  cooling  load  by  allowing  the  reflective  layer  to 
reflect  solar  radiation.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  many  solid-liquid 
PCMs  undergo  transparency  changes;  however,  leakage  issues  of  the 
liquid phase restrain their direct use in exposed-surface applications. 

PCMs have a low thermal conductivity, which is one of their major 
drawbacks.  Solid-solid  PCMs  can  overcome  this  shortcoming  by 
absorbing  heat through  radiation. Radiation penetrates the  surface of 
the material and gradually converts to heat as it penetrates deeper into 
the  material.  Low  thermal  conductivity  may  be  advantageous  in  this 
case because it allows heat to be retained inside the material for a longer 
period  of  time  [40].  The  quantity  of  heat  emitted  during  the  phase 
change, on the other hand, is substantially lower than that generated 
during other types of transformations [33]. 

transitions. Solid(cid:0) liquid  PCMs  have  recently 
2.2.1.3. Solid-liquid 
sparked increased practical interest in latent TES systems due to their 
high  thermal  storage  capacity,  relatively  low  volume  change  during 
phase transition, and nearly constant phase-change temperature [42]. 
Fig.  4  presents  the  transformation  concept  of  solid-liquid  PCMs.  The 
course of the melting process begins as the temperature of the material 
increases as it absorbs heat until the transition temperature is reached. 
During this stage, the PCM  behaves as  a sensible TES material in the 
solid phase. However, once the phase transition temperature is reached, 
heat  is  exclusively  used  to  change  the  phase  of  the  material  without 

Fig.  4. Schematic  illustration  of  the  working  concept  of  solid-liquid  PCMs. 
While  charging,  the  PCM  stores  energy  as  it  transitions  from  solid  to  liquid, 
whereas  during  discharging,  the  PCM  releases  energy  as  it  transitions  from 
liquid to solid. 

changing  its  temperature—an  isothermal  process.  At  this  point,  the 
material  changes  its  ordered  crystalline  structure  to  become  a  disor-
dered  amorphous  structure.  Molecules  then  have  enough  energy  to 
break  the  supramolecular  bonds  while  randomly  moving  around, 
resulting in a randomly oriented liquid phase. Finally, the PCM returns 
to its role as a sensible TES material, but this time in liquid form. The 
entire  process  is  referred  to  as  charging,  where  the  material  stores 
thermal energy. 

In  general,  four  hierarchically  distinct  regions  occur  during  the 
melting process of a PCM: (1) pure conduction, (2) mixed conduction 
and  natural  convection,  (3)  dominant  natural  convection,  and  (4) 
shrinking solid [43]. When the source of heat is removed, the material 
gradually releases the stored latent and sensible heat via a process called 
discharging. The temperature of melted PCM first drops to the freezing 
point while remaining in liquid phase (sensible heat release) and then 
starts to solidify (latent heat release), causing molecules to rearrange to 
form  a  crystalline  lattice.  The  type  of  molecule,  rate  of  cooling,  and 
contaminants that act as nucleation agents all influence the shape and 
number of crystals [40]. If further heat is released, the material tem-
perature  further  drops  while  remaining  in  solid  phase  (sensible  heat 
release). 

The terms "charging" and "discharging" refer to the melting and so-
lidification  processes  of  PCM,  respectively.  This  is  because  heat  is 
effectively stored in and released from a PCM during melting and so-
lidification, respectively. Thus, in this scenario, the desired form of en-
ergy is heat. In some applications, however, such as air conditioning, the 
desired form of energy is actually cold. Thus, during solidification, cold 
energy  is  stored  and  released  from  the  PCM  during  melting.  In  this 
context,  the  terms  "charging"  and  "discharging"  refer  to  solidification 
and melting, respectively. Thus, for the sake of clarity and generaliza-
tion, the term "charging" refers to melting, which is directly proportional 
to the amount of heat gained or cold released by the PCM, and the term 
"discharging" refers to solidification, which is directly proportional to 
the amount of heat released or cold gained by the PCM. 

2.2.2. Classification of PCMs according to material 

A wide range of PCMs have been studied to develop efficient TES 
solutions.  PCMs  are  classified  as  organic,  inorganic,  or  eutectic 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010376S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

according  on  their  chemical  composition  [44],  as  shown  in  Fig.  5. 
Table  2 displays  the  melting  point  and  enthalpy  of  fusion  of  selected 
PCMs from the previously mentioned categories. 

Table 2 
Thermal properties of selected PCMs.  

Category of PCM 

Molecular 
formula 

2.2.2.4. Organic  PCMs. Organic  PCMs  are  generally  used  in  low- 
temperature  applications.  In  general,  these  materials  have  a  high 
latent heat of fusion, generate little vapor pressure during phase tran-
sitions, and self-nucleate with minimal supercooling. Furthermore, they 
survive repeated thermal cycling (cycles of charging and discharging) 
without  phase  separation,  i.e.,  the  material  melts  and  solidifies 
congruently. Organic PCMs have good compatibility with other mate-
rials,  a  suitable  weight,  no  toxicity,  and  are  environmentally  safe. 
However, widespread use has been hampered by several shortcomings, 
including  significant  volume  change  during  the  phase  transition,  low 
thermal  conductivity  (about  0.2  W/m•K)  [44],  and  worst  of  all,  the 
leakage problem (more on this problem in Section 2.2.4). Organic PCMs 
are further divided into two categories: paraffin and non-paraffin. 

Paraffin wax is regarded as a representative material of the paraffin 
group. It is a mixture of pure alkenes (CnH2n+2) and a synthetic chain 
consisting  of  n-alkanes  (CH3-(CH2)-CH3).  The  amount  of  latent  heat 
released is determined by the crystallization of the CH3  chain. As the 
amount of carbon increases, the melting point of paraffin wax also in-
creases. Typically, paraffin wax has the same properties as pure alkanes. 
However, the melting point is the average of all the melting points of 
existing alkanes. Commercial paraffin wax has been shown to be ther-
mally stable after as many as 1500 thermal cycles [60]. Unlike paraffin 
wax, non-paraffin PCMs have a broader range of properties. The most 
recognizable PCMs in this category are fatty acids, which typically have 
an enthalpy of fusion comparable to that of paraffin wax. Fatty acids also 
exhibit  reproducible  melting  and  freezing  behavior  without  super-
cooling [61]. 

2.2.2.5. Inorganic PCMs. As illustrated in Table 2, inorganic PCMs have 
a much higher enthalpy of fusion than organic ones. On the one hand, 
they  have  the  advantages  of  high  thermal  conductivity,  non- 
flammability,  low  cost,  and  most  importantly,  a  high  melting  point. 
On the other hand, they are subject to corrosiveness, phase segregation, 
significant  volume  changes  during  phase  transition,  a  high  degree  of 
supercooling, and thermal and chemical stability issues. Salt hydrates 
and metallic alloys are the two major categories of inorganic PCMs. 

Salt  hydrates  have  been  extensively  researched,  and  some  are 
already  commercially  available  [62].  They  have  the  general  formula 
MxNy.nH2O, where MxNy  is a metal carbonate, chloride, sulfate, phos-
phate, or nitrite, and n is the number of water molecules [61]. For any 
salt hydrate, ion-dipole bonds or H-H bonds exist. The former consists of 
an ion with a polar molecule. During phase transition, heat is absorbed 
when the salt hydrate loses some or all of its water molecules (dehy-
dration), as shown in Eq. (4), 

MxNy⋅nH2O→MxNy⋅mH2O + (n (cid:0) m)H2O.

(4) 

Organic 

Paraffin 

Non- 
Paraffin 

Inorganic 

Salts 

Salt 
hydrates 

Metals 
and alloys 

Eutectic 

Organic- 
organic 

Organic- 
inorganic 

Inorganic- 
inorganic 

CH3 (CH2)10 CH3 
CH3 (CH2)11 CH3 
CH3 (CH2)14 CH3 
CH3 (CH2)16 CH3 
CH3 (CH2)18 CH3 
CH₂O₂ 
C8H16O2 
CH3(CH2)10COOH 
CH3(CH2)13COOH 
CH3(CH2)16COOH 
AlCl3 
LiH 
LiF 
MgF2 
BaSO4 
Na2P2O7⋅10H2O 
Ba(OH)2⋅8H2O 
H12MgN2O12 
Mg(NO3)2⋅6H2O 
MgCl2⋅6H2O 
Cu 
Al 
Al(cid:0) Cu 
(66.92:33.08 wt%) 
Cu(cid:0) Zn(cid:0) P 
(69:17:14 wt%) 
Al(cid:0) Si (20:80 wt%) 
C12H24O2 / 
C10H20O2 (35:65 
wt%) 
C12H24O2 / 
C18H36O2 
(75.5:24.5 wt%) 
C12H24O2 / 
C14H30O (40:60 wt 
%) 
C10H20O2 / 
C16H34O (70:30 wt 
%) 
C133H267N2O55P / 
H(OCH2CH2)nOH 
(20:80 wt%) 
Mn(NO3).6H2O 
/MgCl2.6H2O 
CaCl2 / MgCl2 / 
6H2O (50:50 wt%) 
Ca(NO3)2⋅6H2O / 
Zn(NO3)2 (45:55 
wt%) 
LiNO3⋅3H2O / Zn 
(NO3)2.6H2O 
(45(cid:0) 52:48(cid:0) 55 wt 
%) 
C16H36BrN / 
Na₂(B₄O₅(OH)₄)⋅ 
8H₂O (40:2 wt%) 
LiOH / NaNO3 / 
NaOH (6:67:27 wt 
%) 
LiNO3 / KNO3 
(34:66 wt%) 
KNO3 / KOH 
(80:20 wt%) 
LiCl / LiNO3 (9:91 
wt%) 
NaNO3 / NaOH 
(86:14 wt%) 

Melting 
point 
◦
(
C) 

Enthalpy 
of fusion 
(kJ/kg) 

(cid:0) 10 
(cid:0) 5 
18-19 
28 
36-37 
7.8 
16.3 
49 
52.5 
69.4 
192 
699 
849 
1263 
1680 
70 
78 
89 
89.3 
117 
1083 
660 
548 

216 
160 
237 
242 
247 
247 
149 
178 
178 
199 
280 
2678 
1041 
938 
175 
184 
266 
140 
150 
169 
193.4 
397 
372 

720 

368 

585 
18-24 

460 
140.8 

Ref. 

[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[45] 
[28] 
[28] 
[46] 
[46] 
[46] 
[28] 
[28] 
[47] 
[47] 
[47] 
[28] 
[28] 
[28] 

[28] 

[28] 
[48] 

37.0 

182.7 

[49] 

21.3 

151.5 

[50] 

22.89 

144.92 

[51] 

54 

185 

[52] 

15-25 

125.9 

[53] 

25 

25 

95 

130 

[54] 

[54] 

17.2 

220 

[55] 

9 

187 

[56] 

230 

184 

[57] 

133 

214 

244 

250 

150 

83 

342 

160 

[58] 

[59] 

[47] 

[59]  

Fig.  5. Classification  of  PCMs  according  to  material  into  organic,  inorganic, 
and eutectic. 

Similarly, heat is liberated when the salt hydrate gains water mole-

cules (hydration), as shown in Eq. (5), 

MxNy⋅nH2O→MxNy + nH2O.

(5) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010377S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Another type of inorganic PCMs is metallic alloys. They have a high 
latent heat of fusion per unit volume, better thermal conductivities than 
most other PCMs, and a low vapor pressure during phase transition. Yet, 
they saw little development as PCMs due to their high weight. 

2.2.2.6. Eutectic PCMs. To attain a desired melting point, eutectic PCMs 
are  composed  of  two  or  more  organic-organic,  organic-inorganic,  or 
inorganic-inorganic  PCM  components.  Eutectic  PCMs  consistently  so-
lidify without segregation at temperatures typically lower than those of 
their constituting components [44]. Unfortunately, they generally suffer 
from  foul  odor,  low  thermal  conductivity,  high  cost,  and  insufficient 
available data on their thermophysical characteristics. 

2.2.3. Desired properties and aspects in PCMs 

Fig. 6 summarizes the desired physical, thermal, kinetic, economic, 
safety, and technical characteristics to be considered when selecting a 
PCM for TES. While some of these criteria are simple to manage, others 
are  regarded  as  serious  defects,  making  most  bulk  pure  PCM  systems 
unsuitable for direct use. As a result, while choosing a PCM for a certain 
application, consideration should be given to both short- and long-term 
behavior, as well as storage medium requirements. 

2.2.4. Key challenges facing PCMs 

This  section presents a compilation of the most critical challenges 

impeding PCM research and development efforts. 

Poor  thermal conductivity. The degree of success of latent heat storage 
technology can be determined by the speed and quality of the charging 
and discharging processes, which are correlated with the heat transfer 
process from the surface to the innermost part of the PCM. Generally, 
heat transfer can take place through conduction, convection, or radia-
tion. Thermal conduction has been confirmed as the primary mode of 
heat transfer in a material (solid, liquid, or gas) without bulk motion. 
The heat conduction process is a stochastic process through matter, and 
this stochasticity produces a temperature gradient. 

Conduction can be used to transfer heat during the early stages of 
melting and  solidification, while convection currents dominate in the 
mushy zone. The poor thermal conductivity of a PCM decreases the rate 
of heat storage and extraction during melting and solidification cycles, 
and thus, the PCM’s overall power. Therefore, it is a critical factor to 
consider while designing the latent heat storage system. The majority of 
the  data  on  PCM  thermal  conductivity  that  is  available  was  obtained 
experimentally.  However,  there  is  a  lack  of  clarity  in  the  theoretical 
understanding of heat conduction through solid and liquid PCMs (details 
are presented in Section 4.3). 

Supercooling. Theoretically, the melting and freezing temperatures of a 
PCM  should  be  the  same.  However,  most  PCMs  have  solidification 
temperatures  lower  than  their  melting  temperatures.  This  is  a  phe-
nomenon known as "supercooling". When a PCM starts to solidify, it is 
supposed to completely change its phase from liquid to solid by reducing 
its temperature slightly below the solidification temperature (freezing 
point), allowing the material to latently release thermal energy. Under 
supercooling, the PCM can cool down to well below the solidification 
temperature  while  still  remaining  in  a  liquid  state  (partial  or  no 
freezing), as shown in Fig. 7. In other words, the PCM does not reach the 
minimum temperature required for nucleation to start. Mathematically, 
the degree of supercooling (also known as phase-change hysteresis) is 
calculated  by  subtracting  the  freezing  temperature  from  the  melting 
temperature [40]. It is also possible to express supercooling as follows 
[63], 

Tsc =

(

)[
4
3

γo

]
,

Tm
(ρsHs(cid:0) lRcr)

(6)  

where γo  is the surface free energy per unit area, Hs  (cid:0)
lis enthalpy of 
fusion, ρsis the solid density, and Rcr is the critical radius of solid nuclei. 
Numerous variables can affect the supercooling of PCMs. The degree 
of supercooling is definitely increased if the bulk volume is divided into 
microscopic  particles  through  encapsulation  or  an  emulsion  process, 

Fig. 6. Classification of the desired characteristics in PCMs into physical, thermal, kinetic, technical, economic, and safety properties and aspects.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010378S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig.  7. Schematic  illustration  of  the  phenomenon  of  supercooling  (point  1 
represents the start of the melting process, point 2 represents the completion of 
the melting process and the initiation of the solidification process, and point 3 
denotes the solidification process with supercooling effect). 

because  each  capsule  will  have  an  insufficient  number  of  impurities 
[63].  Adachi  et  al.  [64]  reported  that  by  decreasing  the  volume  of 
erythritol  as  a  PCM  from  16  to  0.025  cm3,  a  60 
C  increase  in  the 
supercooling degree took place. 

◦

◦
C but 90% at 25

The  consequences  of  this  process  appear  clearly  in  terms  of  the 
thermal energy released during solidification that is converted to useful 
energy.  Generally,  supercooling  can  cause  two  problems  [65].  First, 
there is a chance that the new freezing temperature will not be within 
the temperature control range of the system. The system should function 
within a specified temperature range for temperature control applica-
◦
tions. If the risk of nucleation is 50% at 40
C, the system 
◦
should be engineered to operate at a 15
C lower temperature, increasing 
the system’s cost and inefficiency. Second, energy consumption will be 
increased to reach the solidification temperature. Additionally, there is a 
possibility  that  the  PCM  will  not  freeze  fully,  preventing  stored  heat 
from being completely released. This is more common when the HTF 
temperature is near the freezing point, as the random nature of super-
cooling  complicates  control  of  the  latent  TES  system.  Furthermore,  if 
nucleation  and  freezing  do  not  occur  during  the  next  thermal  cycle, 
energy  will  be  absorbed  solely  through  sensible  heating.  Therefore, 
temperatures can rise significantly above the allowable value. Thus, a 
critical failure is expected for the whole system. It is worth mentioning 
that  several studies  have  shown  that the  solidification temperature is 
affected by additives such as nucleation agents [61]. 

High volume change. According to the literature, most PCMs experience 
a volume increase during phase transition, which cannot be neglected 
and must be considered during the design of thermal storage containers 
and heat exchangers. For instance, experiments have shown that three 
distinct sets of transformations can be identified when paraffin wax is 
heated, each with a different rate of volume change. As shown in Fig. 8, 
in the first and third stages, the increase in temperature is accompanied 
by an increase in sensible energy with relative volume changes of 2 and 
3%,  respectively.  In  the  second  stage,  paraffin  destroys  its  original 
structure and changes from a compact structure to a less compact one 
[66]. It expands by approximately 11% of its original volume within the 
◦
transition  temperature  range  (50  (cid:0) 70
C)  [53],  which  is  in  good 
agreement with other values found in the literature [67, 68]. Moreover, 
many salts and salt composites (e.g., lithium fluoride) incur significant 
volume changes that often exceed 10% and can reach up to 45% of their 

Fig. 8. Relative volume change of paraffin wax before (1st  stage), during (2nd 
stage),  and  after  (3rd  stage)  phase  transition  as  a  function  of  temperature. 
◦
Within the transition temperature range (50(cid:0) 70
C), the PCM expands by nearly 
11% of its initial volume. 

original volume [46]. 

Phase  separation. Typically,  the  terms  "phase  separation"  and  "incon-
gruent phase melting" are used synonymously. Each time the PCM melts 
incongruently, new solid and liquid phases with distinct compositions 
precipitate  from  the  original  composition.  As  a  result  of  the  density 
differential,  some  of  the  solid  material  settles  to  the  bottom  of  the 
container. The phase-transition process becomes irreversible as a result 
of this process and further cycling diminishes the latent storage density. 
The new compositions may, in extreme cases, have different melting and 
solidification points than the original mixture. The material is unable to 
participate in subsequent melting and solidification cycles when these 
new compositions reach the charging and discharging temperatures, and 
the latent TES drops to zero [69]. As a result, storage capacity declines 
unless the temperature range is changed and the original composition is 
restored. 

PCM  leakage. PCM  leakage  in  liquid  state  is  frequently  encountered 
during the solid-liquid phase transition. As a result, bulk PCM systems 
are unreliable in actual applications. This problem limits the efficient 
use of the latent heat of fusion for two reasons. First, when the leakage 
occurs, it reduces the volume fraction of the participating PCM, which in 
turn reduces the latent heat of fusion. Second, the leaking PCM can cause 
contamination or damage to the surroundings. Leakage can be avoided 
or  decreased  by  encapsulating [70]  or  entrapping the  PCM  in  porous 
structures using a number of strategies [71]. Physical adsorption [72], 
chemical bonding [73], or ionic cross-linking [74] between the PCM and 
the supporting material are all examples of such strategies. However, it 
is reported that during mechanical mixing of encapsulated PCMs with 
concrete for building applications, PCMs can leak from the concrete as a 
result of some of the PCM capsules breaking [75]. 

The  moving-boundary  problem. Predicting  a  PCM’s  thermal  behavior 
during melting and solidification is deemed difficult due to the intrinsic 
nonlinearity of the moving interface that separates the solid and liquid 
phases during phase transition. As a result of this issue, predicting flow 
and heat transfer parameters in a reliable manner is extremely difficult. 
Thus, analytical solutions are only available for the 1D case with very 
simplified boundary conditions. The rate at which the moving interface 
displaces  itself  is  determined  by  the  amount  of  latent  heat  lost  or 
absorbed  at  the  boundary.  The  Stephan  condition  describes  this 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010379S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

procedure, which is expressed as follows [57]: 
)

)

(

)

(

(

Hs(cid:0) lρ

= ks

(cid:0) kl

,

(7)  

ds(t)
dt

δTs
δt

δTl
δt

lis the latent heat of fusion, ρ is density (without specifying 
where Hs  (cid:0)
the phase), the surface position is denoted by s(t), T is temperature, t is 
time, k is thermal conductivity, and the subscripts s and l refer to solid 
and liquid phases, respectively. 

The position and velocity of this boundary are unknown in advance. 
Numerical simulation of the PCM during phase transition is often carried 
out using computational packages (e.g., COMSOL Multiphysics, ANSYS- 
FLUENT,  Star-CCM+)  within  a  specific  temperature  range.  Making 
appropriate  assumptions  is  a  typical  strategy  to  simplify  the  moving- 
boundary  governing  equations.  Incompressible  flow,  constant  density 
or  a  linear  density-temperature  relationship  using  the  Boussinesq 
approximation,  a  negligible  density  difference  between  two  phases, 
and/or  negligible  internal  thermal  radiation  are  among  the  common 
assumptions  [76].  Because  Josef  Stefan  was  the  first  to  report  this 
problem, it is often referred to as the "Stefan problem" [77]. 

Flammability. From surveying the literature, and despite the absence of 
a proper fire assessment standard, PCM flammability was usually either 
not specified or claimed to be zero or low [70]. To the best of the au-
thors’ knowledge, paraffin wax and fatty acid as organic PCMs are the 
only investigated materials in building applications as a fire hazard [78]. 
Introducing flame retardant stabilizers such as silicon and magnesium 
hydroxide is a suggested solution to overcome this problem [79]. 

2.3. An overview of PCM systems 

2.3.1. Bulk PCM systems 

PCM  containers. In  bulk  PCM  systems,  the  most  important  aspects  to 
consider  after  selecting  a  PCM  are  the  size  and  geometry  of  the 
container. The design of a PCM container has a great influence on the 
level of heat exchange between the HTF and PCM, ultimately affecting 
the melting/solidification rate and storage capacity in bulk PCM systems 

[56].  As  shown  in  Fig.  9,  cylindrical,  rectangular/square  flat,  and 
spherical  are  the  container  configurations  used  in  bulk  PCM  storage 
systems [80]. The cylindrical geometry includes three key designs: pipe, 
cylindrical, and shell-and-tube, as shown in Fig. 9. The pipe design is 
distinguished  by  filling  the  shell  with  the  PCM  while  the  HTF  flows 
through a single-core pipe. In the cylindrical design, the PCM fills the 
inner  core  pipe  and  the  HTF  flows  through  the  outer  shell.  The 
shell-and-tube  model  is  divided  into  three  classes  based  on  the  flow 
orientation of the HTF: internal flow, parallel flow, and cross flow, as 
illustrated in Fig. 9. 

◦

Several researchers [81] compared the pipe and cylindrical designs 
based on the radius of the cylinder, inlet temperature, total volume of 
PCM, and mass flow rate of the HTF. Results showed that the pipe model 
had a shorter melting time, which was explained by the fact that the 
thicker  the  mass  of  the  PCM  (in  the  radial  direction),  the  longer  the 
required melting time. Moreover, since most of the heat provided by the 
center  in  the  pipe  model  is  used  to  heat  the  surrounding  PCM,  this 
container design has a lower rate of heat loss to the environment [80]. 
Agyenim  et  al.  [82]  compared  a  horizontal  shell-and-tube  heat 
exchanger with four tubes to a pipe design. The used PCM had a melting 
temperature  of  117.7 
C  and  belonged  to  the  medium-temperature 
range.  Temperature  gradients  in  the  two  systems’  axial,  radial,  and 
angular  directions  were  investigated  and  compared.  Convection  was 
shown to be the dominant mode of heat transfer in the shell-and-tube 
system,  whereas  conduction  was  found  to  be  the  dominant  mode  of 
heat transfer in the pipe model. As a result, the authors recommended 
using  a  shell-and-tube  configuration  for  the  charging  process  and 
highlighted  the  need  for  future  research  into  the  shell-and-tube 
approach  because  the  solid-liquid  interface  was  significantly  altered 
by forming multiple convective cells. Seddegh et al. [83] investigated 
the optimal diameter ratio between the shell and tube by balancing the 
amount  of  stored  energy  with  the  corresponding  melting  time.  Their 
findings revealed that the optimal ratio was around 5.4, which reduced 
melting time by 68%. 

Zhao  et  al.  [84]  used  a  digital  camera  to  investigate  the  melting 
process  of  n-octadecane  within  a  rectangular  container  at  seven  tilt 
◦
angles (0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, and 90
). The shortest melting time was 
recorded at 60o, showing that free convection had a strong potential to 

Fig. 9. Classification of the structure and design of commonly used PCM containers. This includes a) pipe, b) cylinder, c) shell-and-tube (subclassified based on the 
flow direction of the HTF with respect to the PCM into internal, parallel, and cross flow designs), d) rectangular/slab, and e) spherical containers. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103710S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

improve  the  heat  transfer  rate  of  the  PCM.  Other  researchers  [85] 
numerically  investigated  the  discharging  process  of  erythritol  in  a 
spherical container with 10, 20, 30, and 40 mm diameters with a solid 
PCM content of 98.5%. The wall was heated to 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 40 
K, all of which were lower than the phase-change temperature. The re-
sults revealed that the diameter of the container and the difference be-
tween wall temperature and phase-change temperature had a significant 
effect on the liquid fraction and solidification time. 

Melting  behavior  of  PCMs  inside  containers. Before  the  PCM  melting 
process  begins,  the  container  is  typically  filled  with  a  PCM  with  a 
melting temperature of Tm and a portion of the volume is a gas void. At 
an initial temperature of Ti < Tm, the PCM is assumed to be in the solid 
phase. The initial location and volume of the gas void are determined 
primarily by the gravitational field and the geometry of the container. 
The  container  must  then  be  heated  to  melt  the  PCM.  This  can  be 
accomplished via isothermal heating or by providing a constant heat- 
flux.  When  heating  is  initiated,  the  solid  phase  melts  adjacent  to  the 
hot boundary, expanding the volume of the liquid region. When the PCM 
reaches its melting point, an evolving solid-liquid interface forms and 
the  liquid-phase  zone  expands.  Convection  currents  form  within  the 
liquid phase, which are governed by the spatial extent of the liquid area 
occupied,  the  temperature  gradient  within  the  liquid  phase,  and  the 
orientation of the gravitational field [86]. 

The melting process of PCMs inside a spherical, rectangular, or cy-
lindrical shell is classified into two categories: constrained and uncon-
strained melting. Constrained melting (also known as fixed or inward 
melting) is unavoidable during experimental investigations due to the 
positioning of thermocouples inside the container. The thermocouples 
retain the solid phase, preventing it from sinking to the bottom or rising 
to the top as a result of the density difference between the liquid and 
solid phases. In effect, there is no direct contact of the solid PCM with the 
wall of the container. However, in the absence of thermocouples and a 
density  difference  between  the  liquid  and  solid  phases,  constrained 
melting will continue to occur [86]. In contrast, unconstrained melting 
(also known as unfixed or close-contact melting) occurs when there is no 
anchor inside the container. As a result, the solid phase can move up and 
down in response to the density difference, resulting in direct contact of 
the solid PCM with the wall of the container [87]. 

Two  heat  transfer  mechanisms,  heat  conduction  and  natural  con-
vection, drive the melting process in the constrained model. First, heat 
conduction between the heated container wall and the adjacent PCM is 
associated  with  a  high  heat  transfer  rate  and  significant  melting  rate 
during the early stage. Then, as time goes on, the area occupied by the 
melted liquid increases. Thus, natural convection dominates, lowering 
the heat transfer rate, decreasing the melting rate, and increasing the 
charging time. The strength of the buoyancy-driven convection flow is 
determined by the position of the heat source, the imposed boundary 
conditions, and the thermophysical properties of the PCM. In contrast, in 
the  unconstrained  model,  the  solid  PCM  continuously  touches  the 
enclosure wall, resulting in increased heat transfer and melting rates. 
Thus, for the same geometrical and operating conditions, unconstrained 
melting  demonstrates  a  faster  melting  rate  than  constrained  melting 
[86]. 

Tan [88] investigated constrained and unconstrained melting inside 
a sphere at different initial wall temperatures and sub-cooling degrees. 
Results  showed  that  in  unconstrained  melting,  heat  conduction  is 
dominant at the beginning, then after the PCM begins to melt, it sinks to 
the lower portion of the sphere. This movement creates pressure in the 
liquid PCM. As a result, the warm liquid PCM between the solid PCM and 
the inner walls is forced to rise and replace the cold liquid PCM. This 
phenomenon  boosts  natural  convection  in  the  top  half  of  the  sphere 
container. Melting continues to be faster in the bottom half than in the 
top half due to the larger influence of heat conduction at the inner wall. 
For constrained melting, heat conduction occurs only during the initial 

stages of melting, followed by natural convection. However, heat con-
duction  is  weaker  relative  to  unconstrained  melting.  The  difference 
between the two modes of melting is illustrated in Fig. 10. 

Sattari et al. [89] showed that, compared with the initial tempera-
ture of the PCM and size of the spherical container, the temperature of 
the  container  wall  was  the  factor  controlling  the  heat  transfer  and 
melting rates the most. Sparrow and Geiger [90] studied melting in a 
horizontal tube  and showed  that the melting mass in  the constrained 
mode  was  lower  than  the  unconstrained  one.  Additionally,  they 
demonstrated  that  unconstrained  melting  exhibits  2-D  behavior, 
whereas constrained melting exhibits 3-D behavior. Jianhua et al. [91] 
examined the melting of n-octadecane in a rectangular chamber heated 
from  below  by  three  separate  heat  sources.  The  temperature  of  the 
surface was measured with thermocouples, and the mobility of the solid 
and liquid phases was photographed. Constrained melting was observed 
in  the  solid  between  the  heaters,  while  unconstrained  melting  was 
simultaneously  observed  above  the  heaters.  Experimental  findings 
revealed  that  the  larger  the  aspect  ratio  of  the  container,  the  more 
rapidly  melting  proceeded  and  the  more  frequently  unconstrained 
melting occurred. Initial subcooling had an effect on the melting process 
during  the  very  early  stages  but  vanished  once  the  melting  process 
approached the unconstrained melting stage. 

Thermal  performance  of  bulk  PCM  systems. To  effectively  predict  the 
thermal  performance  of  a  PCM  system,  it  is  vital  to  have  a  thorough 
understanding  of  the  fundamental  heat  transfer  processes.  Numerous 
correlations have been developed based on experimental and numerical 
studies of the thermal characteristics of latent TES systems, including 
liquid volume fraction, melting time, equivalent thermal conductivity, 
temperature  profile,  and  melting  rate.  Dimensionless  numbers  have 
frequently been used in developed correlations to gain some universality 
from the findings of each study and to extend these findings to subse-
quent  studies  [80].  Table  3  covers  the  most  frequently  used  dimen-
sionless numbers in PCM research. Table 4 presents some of the reported 
correlations for the melting and solidification processes of PCMs based 
on these dimensionless numbers. It is worth mentioning that there is no 
available study that correlates the available data since different authors 
used different PCMs with different heat transfer features. Agyenim et al. 
[80]  used  the  same  PCM,  however,  they  implemented  dimensionless 
numbers within different ranges. Moreover, some researchers presented 
their correlations without explicitly defining their adopted dimensional 
numbers, making it impossible to further develop their research outputs. 

Commercially available PCM suppliers. Table 5 presents a list of selected 
commercial PCM manufacturers around the world. 

2.3.2. PCM systems with extended surfaces 

The incorporation of fins into PCM systems is an efficient method of 
boosting  the  heat  transfer  area  and  rate.  Owing  to  their  ease  of 
manufacturing and low cost, many studies have been conducted on the 
performance  of  fins  in  PCM  systems  [80].  The  fin  material  is  chosen 
based on its thermal conductivity, density, cost, and corrosion resistance 
[99].  High-conductivity  materials  are  often  used,  including  stainless 
steel, carbon steel, graphite foil, aluminum, and copper, with thermal 
conductivities of 20, 30, 150, 200, and 250 W/m•K, respectively [99]. 
A  wide  variety  of  fin  structures  are  used  in  PCM-based  heat  ex-
changers, including longitudinal, radial/circular, and pin fins. The lon-
gitudinal and radial/circular configurations of fins are most commonly 
used in high-temperature shell-and-tube devices [100]. Their configu-
rations are shown in Fig. 11. The main advantages of using annular fins 
are  their ease  of  design  and  manufacturing. However,  several  studies 
have  demonstrated  that  longitudinal  fins  outperform  annular  fins  in 
terms  of  performance  because  the  former  do  not  inhibit  natural  con-
vection during melting and thus aid in the solidification process. It is 
critical to keep in mind that the use of fins should not obstruct or restrict 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103711S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 10. A schematic showing the heat transfer modes in a) unconstrained and b) constrained melting. In constrained melting, the solid part of the material does not 
touch the container wall directly. In unconstrained melting, the solid part is in direct contact with the container wall. 

Table 3 
Common dimensionless numbers used in the analysis of phase-change problems.  

Equation 

Definition 

Dimensionless 
number 

Stefan number 

Nusselt number 

Ste =
Cp(Tf (cid:0) Ti)
ΔH 
Nu = hl
k 

Biot number 

Bi = hl
k 

Rayleigh number 

Ra = gβΔTl3
αv 

Grashof number 

Prandtl number 

Reynolds 
number 

Fourier number 

Gr = gβΔTl3
v3 
Pr = v
α 
Re = DV
μ 
α
(l2/t)

Fo =

Ref. 

[2] 

[92] 

[93] 

[92] 

[94] 

[92] 

[94] 

[95]  

Ratio of sensible heat to latent heat. 

Ratio of convective to conductive 
heat transfer across a boundary. It 
determines the actual heat transfer 
rate. 
Ratio of convective to conductive 
heat transfer inside the body. It 
determines uniformity of 
temperature in solid media. 
Determines the regime of natural 
convection. Below a critical value, 
heat transfer is mainly by 
conduction. 
Approximate ratio of buoyancy 
forces to viscous forces. 
Ratio of momentum diffusivity to 
thermal diffusivity. 
Ratio of the inertial forces to viscous 
forces. 
A measure of heat conducted 
through a body relative to heat 
stored within it. 

natural  convection  during  the  melting  process  [100].  Despite  this, 
employing fins in a shell-and-tube device will always influence the total 
amount of PCM that can be placed in the annular space, reducing the 
total storage capacity. Thus, as a compromise, the number of fins and 
their  dimensions  should  be  carefully  considered  so  as  to  balance  the 
enhancement in heat transfer with the amount of stored energy. 

A comparison has been made to compare the effects of longitudinal 
and  radial/circular  fins  when  implemented  in  a  horizontal  shell-and- 
tube PCM heat exchanger [101]. In the comparison, eight copper fins 
were used with a thickness of 0.001 m for each type. The length of the 
longitudinal fins was 0.95 m and the diameter of the circular fins was 
0.134 m. An amount of 20.2 kg of erythritol PCM was used irrespective 
of fin geometry. The comparison was held in terms of the melting time 
and  charged  energy  under  the  same  operation  conditions  for  a  fixed 

duration of eight h. Relative to annular fins, results showed that longi-
tudinal  fins  enhanced  conduction  and  convection  with  a  completed 
melting process. Moreover, the amount of charged energy was found to 
be lower with annular fins. 

Other  authors  employed  numerical  simulations  (based  on  the 
method of finite volume) to understand the effects of the number of fins, 
fin  height,  and  fin  thickness  on  a  vertically-finned  PCM  tube  [102]. 
Results showed that inserting annular fins into the PCM could reduce the 
total melting time by 65%. To maximize thermal performance, the op-
timum fin parameters were as follows: the number of fins was 31, the 
ratio of fin thickness to tube length was 0.0248, and the ratio of fin pitch 
to tube length was 0.0313. 

2.3.3. Cascade PCM systems 

The primary disadvantage of employing a single bulk PCM in a TES 
system is the length of time required for charging and discharging. To 
overcome  this  issue,  one  approach  is  to  use  latent  heat  storage  in 
conjunction with various PCMs with varying melting temperatures. To 
understand the motivation behind this method, let us consider the shell- 
and-tube  model  discussed  in  Section  2.3.1.1.  The  temperature  differ-
ential between the HTF and the phase-change temperature of the PCM 
affects  the  charging  and  discharging  processes.  During  the  charging 
process, the HTF enters the tube at a temperature significantly above the 
melting temperature of the PCM, causing the PCM to rapidly melt. The 
temperature differential between the PCM and HTF, on the other hand, 
decreases along the axial flow direction. 

The  temperature  difference  is  largest  near  the  entry  section  and 
lowest near the exit section. As a result, the amount of melted PCM near 
the entry section would be greater than in the exit area, resulting in a 
spatially non-uniform melting process throughout the tube. During the 
discharging  process,  the  HTF  enters  at  a  temperature  lower  than  the 
freezing point of the PCM, gaining heat from the PCM. The temperature 
of  the  HTF  rises  as  it  flows  along  the  axial  direction;  therefore,  the 
temperature difference between the HTF and PCM falls. Similar to the 
charging  process,  this  results  in  non-uniform  solidification.  This  het-
erogeneity  during  the  charging  and  discharging  processes  frequently 
results in a delay in the overall melting and solidification times [102]. 
According  to  studies,  replacing  a  single  bulk  PCM  with  multiple 
PCMs arranged in decreasing or increasing order (based on the type of 
storage,  hot  or  cold)  in  terms  of  their  phase-change  temperature  and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103712S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 4 
A  selected  number  of  derived  correlations  for  melting  and  solidification  pro-
cesses using dimensionless numbers.  

PCM 
geometry 

Derived correlation 

Rectangle 

V/Vi = 4.73Fi0.906Ste1.538Ra0.002 

Ref. 

[92] 

Explanation of 
the correlation 

Melting volume 
fraction 
Time-averaged 
Nusselt number 
for the entire 
melting process 

[96] 

Equivalent 
thermal 
conductivity 
Dimensionless 
melting rate (1-A 
(τ)) 

Nu =

0.0219Ra0.387Pr0.0191

(

)

H
δ

0.0621 

Where, 
8.56 × 106 ≤ Ra ≤ 4.78 × 107 
804 ≤ Pr ≤ 1055 
δistheaverageinterfacelocation 
1 (cid:0) d(τ)
keq(τ) = 0.22∅Ra(τ)1/4
D

[

]1/4 

A(τ)[1 (cid:0)

ln(A(τ))] = 1 (cid:0) 4

keq(τ)dτ 

∫τ

0

(cid:0) 5Ra (cid:0)

Where, 
9.62 × 106 ≤ Ra ≤ 7.97 × 107 
d(τ) is equivalent diameter of the unmelted solid 
∅ = 1 represents concentric cylinders and ∅ < 1 for the 
melting process inside a cylinder 
t* = 0.853 (cid:0) 3.73 × 10
0.04778(Ste/Tcon) 
Where, 
3500 ≤ Re ≤ 8500 
0.3 ≤ Ste ≤ 0.65 
0.3 ≤ Tcon ≤ 0.4 
(cid:0) 2kΔT
q =
l
0.0424ω)St0.764]

[1 + (0.1210 +

Melting time 

Average heat flux 

[1 + (0.25 +

tf =

l2
2α(1 + w)St

0.17ω0.7)St]
Q = qtf 

Duration of the 
melting process 

Total heat input 
per unit surface 
area 

[97] 

[98] 

Where, 
0 < St ≤ 4 
⎧
⎨

ω =

⎩

0, for insulated PCM slab
1, for PCM cylinder
2, for PCM sphere  

Horizontal 
cylinder 

Concentric 
cylinders 

Insulated 
slab, 
cylinder, 
or sphere 

Table 5 
Commercial PCM manufacturers around the world.  

Trademark name/ 
Manufacturer 

PCM 
temperaturerange (

◦

C) 

Website address(Accessed 
on Jun 20th, 2021) 

RUBITHERM 
Mitsubishi Chemical 
TEAP 
Doerken 
EPS Ltd 
Cristopia 
Climator 
SAVENRG 

(cid:0) 3 to 100 
9.5 to 118 
(cid:0) 50 to 78 
(cid:0) 22 to 28 
(cid:0) 114 to 164 
(cid:0) 33 to 27 
(cid:0) 18 to 70 
(cid:0) -20 to 100 

www.rubitherm.eu 
www.mfc.co.jp 
www.teappcm.com 
www.doerken.de 
www.epsltd.co.uk 
www.cristopia.com 
www.climator.com 
www.rgees.com/products. 
php  

HTF  flow  direction  enhances  PCM  melting  near  the  inlet  or  exit 
compared with a single PCM. Fig. 12 displays a typical cascaded PCM 
TES system for cold and hot storage applications. During charging of the 
hot  storage  system,  PCMs  are  placed  in  descending  order  of  melting 
temperature along the flow direction of the HTF. The order is reversed in 
the case of cold heat storage. However, it should be noted that replacing 
a single PCM that has a high latent heat of fusion with a number of PCMs 
with different properties can decrease the overall latent heat of fusion. 
According to some studies [103], the phase-change process with a 
parabolic temperature distribution profile is more homogeneous. Since 

Fig. 11. a) Longitudinal and b) radial/circular fins employed in shell-and-tube 
PCM-based heat exchangers. 

the PCM initiates and terminates its phase change simultaneously, the 
phase change rate is identical and constant throughout the phase-change 
process.  For  this  reason,  it  is  difficult  to  find  a  single  bulk  PCM  that 
produces  a  parabolic  or  even  linear  temperature  distribution  profile. 
Fortunately, cascaded PCMs can approximate a parabolic temperature 
profile. Moreover, compared with a single PCM, the melting time could 
be decreased by 60, 50, and 33% for spherical, cylindrical, and flat-plate 
PCMs, respectively. Li et al. [104] investigated three cascaded PCMs for 
a shell-and-tube heat storage unit in a high-temperature solar-thermal 
application.  The  chosen  materials  were  K2CO3(51%)(cid:0) Na2Co3(49%), 
Li2CO3(20%)(cid:0) K2CO3(20%)(cid:0) Na2CO3(60%), 
Na2CO3(33%)(cid:0) K2CO3(35%) for PCM1, PCM2, and PCM3 along the flow 
direction of the HTF with melting temperatures of 983, 823, and 670 K, 
respectively. Results revealed that the inlet temperature of the HTF (air) 
and the length/amount of loaded PCM had a significant impact on the 
reduction of melting time for each PCM. 

Li2CO3(32%)(cid:0)

and 

Li et al. [105] mathematically investigated the overall exergy effi-
ciency of two cascaded PCMs for concentrated solar power (CSP) plants 
based on finite-time thermodynamics. The effects of melting tempera-
tures and the number of heat transfer units for each PCM were investi-
gated. Exergy efficiency improved by 19.0-53.8% when two cascaded 
PCMs  were  used  instead  of  a  single  bulk  PCM.  The  authors  recom-
mended the PCM melting temperatures for application in CSP plants to 
be 1000-1150 K for the first PCM and 750-900 K for the second one. 

Michels and Pitz-Paal [106] investigated a cascaded TES system both 
experimentally  and  numerically  for  parabolic-trough  CSP  plants  with 
five  alkali  nitrate  salt  PCMs;  namely,  MgCl2/KCl/NaCl,  KOH,  KNO3, 
KNO3/KCl,  and  NaNO3  with  melting  temperatures  of  380,  360,  335, 
320,  and  306  K,  respectively.  Their  investigation  showed  that  the 
cascaded PCMs were more complex in a high-temperature range (more 
than  100 
C).  The  authors  also  emphasized  the  importance  of  over-
coming the problem of low thermal conductivity in PCMs to fully utilize 
this promising technology in CSP plants. 

◦

2.3.4. Emulsified PCM systems 

Generally, an emulsion is a mixture in which insoluble substances are 
dispersed in a continuous liquid phase with the help of surfactants. An 
emulsion in which  a PCM  is  dispersed in a  continuous phase to  form 
droplets is known as an emulsified PCM system. Because of their higher 
heat capacity than single-phase liquids and superior fluidity compared 
to bulk PCMs, emulsified PCMs exhibit dual functionality; namely, en-
ergy storage and heat transfer [20]. 

Based on the dispersed phase and carrier liquid, emulsified PCMs are 
classified into direct emulsion oil-in-water, inverse emulsion water-in- 
oil,  oil-in-oil,  and  multiple  emulsions  (W/O/W,  O/W/O,  W/O/O) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103713S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 12. A typical cascaded latent TES system for hot and cold storage. In hot storage, during the charging process, PCMs are placed in descending order of melting 
temperature along the flow direction of the HTF. For cold storage, the order is reversed. The desired form of energy output in hot storage is heat, whereas it is “cold” 
in cold storage. 

[107], as shown in Fig. 13. The last two types are the most complex in 
terms of preparation. Oil-in-water emulsions have lower densities and 
higher conductivities than water-in-oil ones, making them favorable for 
reducing pumping power. Another classification is based on droplet size 
[108], which can be controlled by the preparation method. According to 
this classification, emulsified PCM systems can be grouped into macro-
emulsions  with  droplet  diameters  of  over  1  μm,  miniemulsions  with 
diameters in the range of 100 (cid:0) 1000 nm, and microemulsions with di-
ameters  of  between  10  and  100  nm.  The  key  to  the  thermodynamic 
stability of an emulsion is maintaining very low interfacial tension at the 
oil-water  interface.  Microemulsion  droplets  that  spontaneously  form 
with  the  help  of  surfactants  and  mild  agitation  (the  energy  input  is 
negligible)  are  the  only  type  that  is  classified  as  thermodynamically 
stable [108]. This fact is explained by the main role of the surfactant/-
cosurfactant  in  lowering  the  energy  required  to  increase  the  surface 
area,  i.e.,  low  interfacial  tension  at  the  oil-water  interface.  After  the 
optimal amount of surfactant/cosurfactant is added, Gibbs free energy 
becomes negative, which is below the free energy of the separate phases 
(oil and water) [108]. 

Emulsion  components. Typically, an emulsified PCM system consists of 
paraffin  oil-in-water  and  a surfactant  [107]. The heat  capacity of  the 
emulsion  is  increased  by  increasing  the  concentration  of  paraffin  oil. 
However, this does not have any impact on emulsion diameter [109]. A 
surfactant is used to kinetically stabilize water and paraffin oil in the 
emulsion as they are naturally unstable due to their immiscibility. Sur-
factants are structured to have two portions: a hydrophilic part that is 
water attracting and a hydrophobic part that is water resisting. When a 
surfactant is applied to a paraffin oil/water emulsion, it accumulates at 
the paraffin oil/water interface, with the hydrophilic group facing water 
and the hydrophobic group facing paraffin oil. Thus, surfactants act as a 
protective  layer  between  the  droplet  and  the  surrounding  continuous 
phase, preventing the droplet from breaking and reducing the interfacial 
tension between oil and water. A low interfacial tension results in less 
energy being required to create an emulsion [110]. 

Emulsion  stability. Droplet  size,  dispersion,  supercooling,  and  phase 
separation  are  the  leading  indicators  of  the  degree  of  stability  in  an 
emulsified PCM system. In general, for emulsions, two types of stability 
should  be  considered:  kinetic  stability  and  mechanical-thermal  load 

Fig.  13. Classification  of  emulsions  into  oil-in-water  (O/W)  direct  emulsions,  water-in-oil  (W/O)  inverse  emulsions,  oil-in-oil  (O/O)  emulsions,  and  multiple 
emulsions (W/O/W, O/W/O, W/O/O). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103714S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

stability. The former is related to the ability of the emulsion to be stored 
for a long period of time. It is intrinsically linked to the chemical com-
pounds  employed  to  create  the  emulsion,  more  precisely  the  paraffin 
and surfactant types. Six types of instabilities appear under the category 
of  kinetic  stability;  namely,  creaming,  sedimentation,  flocculation, 
phase inversion, coalescence, and Ostwald ripening, as shown in Fig. 14 
[111]. 

The emulsion may become unstable through creaming or sedimen-
tation if the dispersed and continuous phases have a density difference 
and are stored for a long time without a suitable stabilization procedure. 
If the density of the dispersed phase is lower than that of the continuous 
phase,  droplets  travel  upward  and  split  from  the  continuous  phase, 
establishing a distinct layer on top of the continuous phase. Creaming is 
the term for this phenomenon. Sedimentation, on the other hand, occurs 
when  the  density  of  the  dispersed  phase  is  higher  than  that  of  the 
continuous  phase,  pushing  droplets  to  travel  downward  to  create  a 
stationary layer at the bottom of the continuous phase [112]. Floccu-
lation is the process of connecting droplets without rupturing the sur-
factant’s stable, protective barrier to generate huge clumps or flocs that 
rise or settle faster in the emulsion than individual droplets [113]. 

Phase inversion takes place when the original continuous phase in-
verts to become the dispersed phase, while the dispersed phase becomes 
the continuous phase [109]. Phase inversion can be induced by changing 
the  affinity  of  the  emulsifier  from  one  phase  to  the  other,  a  process 
known  as  transitional  phase  inversion.  It  can  also  be  triggered  by  a 
change  in  the  emulsion’s  water-to-oil  ratio,  which  results  in  a  phe-
nomenon  called  catastrophic  phase  inversion  [114].  Coalescence  is 
when two or more droplets completely merge together to form a single 
droplet. Emulsion coalescence is triggered by the thinning and disrup-
tion  of  the  liquid  film  between  the  droplets.  This  can  occur  when 
emulsion  droplets  form  a  cream  layer,  a  floc,  or  during  Brownian 
diffusion  [115].  Ostwald  ripening  is  caused  by  changes  in  solubility 
between  oil  droplets  of  various  sizes.  Smaller  droplets  have  a  higher 
solubility than bigger ones, and when molecules diffuse from small to 
large  droplets  over  time,  the  size  distribution  shifts  to  larger  values. 
Ostwald ripening and coalescence result in an increase in overall droplet 
size, a decrease in interfacial area, and an increase in droplet dispersion. 
An  emulsion  is  deemed  to  have  mechanical-thermal  load  stability 
when it is stable under repeated cycles of melting and solidification and 
during  circulation.  It  is  strongly  affected  by  the  surfactant  type  and 
concentration and emulsion viscosity [111]. 

2.3.5. Nano-enhanced PCM (NE-PCM) systems 

A key disadvantage of bulk PCM systems is their low thermal con-
ductivity,  with  values  reported  to  vary  between  0.2  and  0.7  W/m•K 
[116]. Low thermal conductivity mainly affects the charging and dis-
charging  speeds.  As  a  general  rule,  the  faster  the  charging  and  dis-
charging  processes,  the  more  effective  the  PCM  is  in  storing  and 
releasing  thermal  energy.  To  address  this  issue,  focus  is  drawn  to 
forming a thermally conductive network inside the PCM. Due to their 
high thermal conductivity, nanoparticles were proposed to be dispersed 
in PCMs [117]. In this approach, the nanoparticles (ranging in size from 
1 to 100 nm) are directly impregnated at the optimum weight percent 
and surfactant amount to ensure homogeneous distribution within the 
PCM, often by employing some mechanical techniques. 

Nano-additives could be metallic (e.g., Cu, Au, Ag, and Al), metal 
oxides  (e.g.,  CuO,  Al2O3,  and  TiO2),  or  carbon-based  (e.g.,  single-  or 
multi-wall  carbon  nanotube  (SWCNTs/MWCNTs),  graphene,  and 
graphite) [118, 119]. The advantage of having a large ratio of surface 
area to volume in nanoparticles provides new paths for conduction heat 
transfer  [119].  Since  surface  atoms  in  a  material  dominate  its  in-
teractions  with  the  surroundings,  the  large  area-to-volume  ratio  in 
nanoparticles allows them to exhibit unexpected optical, physical, and 
chemical properties [120]. Additionally, due to their small size, nano-
particles have less momentum, resulting in fewer erosion issues. 

At  room  temperature,  the  thermal  conductivity  of  some  nano-
particles, such as MWCNTs, can exceed 3000 W/m•K, and for single- 
layer  graphene,  it  can  range  between  4840  and  5300  W/m•K  [121]. 
However, and as illustrated in Fig. 15, several factors must be considered 
to  achieve  high  thermal  conductivity  in  a  nano-enhanced  PCM 
(NE-PCM) system. Overall, increasing the concentration of nanoparticles 
increases  thermal  conductivity  [117].  However,  there  is  an  optimum 
concentration  for  effective  heat  transfer  inside  the  PCM  [122]. When 
particle concentrations are high (above the optimum), the slip velocity 
between nanoparticles and fluid may not be zero. However, the migra-
tion of nanoparticles results in non-uniform concentrations and thermal 
property  distributions  throughout  the  flow  region,  which  is  an  unfa-
vorable situation [120]. As previously stated, the outstanding charac-
teristics  of  nanoparticles  are  derived  from  their  high  area-to-volume 
ratio.  The  enhancement  in  the  thermal  conductivity  of  a  fluid  when 
doped  with  nanoparticles  has  been  explained  by  Brownian  motion, 
defined as the chaotic movement of particles due to random collisions 
with liquid molecules [113]. A higher surface area increases the surface 
energy  of  nanoparticles.  Thus,  their  Brownian  motion  is  accelerated, 
inducing nanoscale convection [120]. 

Fig.  14. Schematic  representation  of  a stable  emulsion and the  different  forms of  emulsion instabilities,  including creaming,  sedimentation,  flocculation, phase 
inversion, coalescence, and Ostwald ripening. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103715S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

thermal conductivity and latent heat increased after adding the spongy 
graphene. Thermal conductivity rose from 0.26 to 0.59 W/m•K while 
latent heat rose from 256.1 to 262.2 J/g. These findings indicate that the 
molecular  structure  of  docosane  remained  unchanged  in  the  docosa-
ne/graphene  composite.  The  thermophysical  properties  and  thermal 
performance of a selected number of NE-PCMs reported in the literature 
are summarized in Table 6. 

2.3.6. Shape-stabilized (porous matrix-supported) PCM systems 

Impregnating a PCM into a porous medium is considered a promising 
solution  to  resolve  both  the  low  thermal  conductivity  and  leakage 
problems  in  pristine  PCMs.  This  process  results  in  what  is  known  as 
shape-stabilized PCM (SS-PCM) [142], also known in some literature as 
form-stable  or  porous  matrix-supported  PCM.  According  to  this  tech-
nique,  the  PCM  in  the  liquid  phase  is  impregnated  and  retained  by 
another material with a porous structure via the capillarity effect [11]. 
Based  on  the  pore  size,  porous  supports  are  characterized  as  macro-
porous  (pore  size  > 50  nm),  mesoporous  (pore  size  is  2-50  nm), 
microporous (pore size < 2 nm), and hierarchically porous (pore size 
varies from macro to micro) [143]. In comparison, when moving from a 
large pore size to a smaller one, the porosity increases and its structure 
changes from a disordered pore arrangement to an ordered one [143]. 
Macroporous materials have received little attention because of their 
less reliable immobilization of PCMs, which is attributed to their weak 
capillary force. In contrast, the smaller pores and greater surface area of 
materials at the meso and micro scales enable more intense interactions 
between  the  PCM  (guest)  and  support  structure  (host),  thereby  pre-
venting leakage [144]. Hierarchically porous materials with pore sizes 
ranging from macro to micro present a uniquely interesting case as the 
macropores  serve  as  a  cavity  to  retain  the  PCM,  mesopores  act  as  a 
transport network, and micropores induce capillary forces to immobilize 
the  PCM,  leading  to  extremely high  energy storage  capacities. Unfor-
tunately, relevant reports on this type of SS-PCM systems are still few 
[143]. 

Porous materials for SS-PCMs 

Metal  foam-based  SS-PCMs. Metal  foam  is  an  example  of  a  typical 
macroporous material (0.1(cid:0) 5 mm) with high open porosity (85(cid:0) 98%) 
and  specific  strength  [145].  The  high  thermal  conductivity  of  metal 
foams is their most intrinsic property, which is why many researchers 
have adopted them as a means to improve the PCM charging and dis-
charging processes. Various types of metal foams have been used with 
PCMs, including stainless steel foam (16.3 W/m•K) [146], nickel foam 
(91.4 W/m•K) [147], aluminum foam (237.0 W/m•K) [148,149], and 
copper foam (398 W/m•K) [147,150]. 

Overall,  the  higher  the  porosity  of  a  metal  foam,  the  higher  the 
effective  thermal  conductivity  of  the  SS-PCM  [151].  In  general,  the 
thermal  conductivity  of  a  continuous  skeleton  structure  with  inter-
connected  pores  is  greater  than  that  of  closed  pores.  For  the  same 
porosity, a larger pore size means fewer and more interconnected pores. 
Despite the advantages of high thermal conductivity, leakage occurs due 
to  the  large  size  of  metal  foam  pores  compared  to  the  size  of  the 
phase-change  cores  (which  is  usually  in  nanoscale),  especially  if  the 
PCM  loading  is  extensive  [145].  Furthermore,  it  was  found  that  the 
latent heat of metal foam-based SS-PCMs was reduced due to the lack of 
PCM  inside  porous  media  [151].  In  general,  metal  foams  with  high 
thermal  conductivity,  appropriate  pore  size,  and  high  porosity  may 
improve the thermal performance of the PCM. 

Porous carbon-based SS-PCMs. Porous carbon exhibits strong guest- 
host interactions, such as  van der Waals force, hydrogen bond, capil-
lary  force,  and/or  surface  tension,  due  to  its  high  surface  area  and 
possibility  of  surface  modifications  [145].  Porous  carbon  SS-PCMs 
include  expanded  graphite,  carbon  nanotubes,  graphene,  and  carbon 
aerogels, with a summary of their properties shown in Fig. 16. 

Porous  oxide-based  SS-PCMs. Numerous types of porous oxides are 

Fig. 15. The main factors affecting the thermal conductivity of nano-enhanced 
PCM systems. 

Nanoparticles  can  be  produced  as  spheres,  cubes,  or  cylinders.  A 
spatially  homogeneous  distribution  of  nanoparticles  is  an  essential 
aspect that is expected to affect the thermophysical properties of a NE- 
PCM  system  [123].  Due  to  their  high  surface  activity,  nanoparticle 
clustering can take place as a result of the strong van der Waals forces 
that attract nanoparticles to each other [124]. The diameter of a cluster 
of nanoparticles is larger than the diameter of primary particles. This 
may  lead  to  sedimentation  and  phase  separation  if  clusters  reach  the 
microscale  [124].  To  resolve  this  issue,  surfactants  are  often  used  to 
prevent nanoparticle clustering by creating a molecular barrier against 
interparticle  collisions  and  changing  the  surface  activity  [125].  How-
ever,  there  is  an  optimum  value  for  the  surfactant-to-nanoparticles 
loading  ratio  [125].  Polyvinyl  pyrrolidone  (PVP)  [125]  and  sodium 
dodecylbenzene  sulfonate  (SDBS)  [117]  are  examples  of  surfactants 
used to prepare NE-PCMs. 

Along with the use of surfactants, some techniques can be used to 
reduce clustering, including ultrasonication [126], high-pressure shear 
homogenization [127], ball milling [128], mechanical mixing (by stir-
ring  or  shaking)  [129],  or  magnetic  stirring  [130].  Ultrasonication  is 
most widely used in the nanofluid community [131]. Ultrasonic devices 
generate ultrasonic waves, which cause cavitation and agitation of the 
fluid.  Ultrasonication  processes  vary  according  to  the  device  type, 
power, and sonication time. 

at 

0.3  wt% 

paraffin  with 

Kumar et al. [118] highlight that the thermal properties of NE-PCMs 
depend on the weight concentration of nanoparticles and the primary 
melting behavior of the PCM. In an experimental campaign [132], the 
effect of three types of individual nanoparticles (TiO2, CuO, and GO) on 
the  performance  of  a  solar  still  was  studied.  Each  nanoparticle  was 
impregnated 
same 
in 
surfactant-to-nanoparticles ratio of 1:1. Results showed an increase in 
thermal  conductivity  by  25.0,  28.8,  and  101%  and  a  reduction  in 
melting temperature by 7.87, 7.08, and 9.44% for TiO2, CuO, and GO, 
respectively. Furthermore, a reduction in the solidification temperature 
by 6.77, 6.77, and 5.08% was achieved after adding TiO2, CuO, and GO 
nanoparticles compared with pristine paraffin. In addition, water pro-
ductivity increased by 23.0, 39.3, 43.2, and 18.0% using paraffin, TiO2, 
CuO, and  GO, respectively, compared with the productivity of a con-
ventional still. In another study, the effect of adding spongy graphene on 
the  thermal  performance  of  docosane  was  investigated  [133].  Both 

the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103716S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 6 
Thermophysical properties and thermal performance and stability of selected NE-PCMs.  

NE-PCM type 

NE-PCM thermal properties 
Thermal conductivity 

Latent heat 

Heat transfer behavior 

Thermal stability 

Ref. 

Dropped linearly with the 
increase of Cu concentration. 

Melting speed was accelerated. 

The weight loss 
speed was slower 
than pristine TD. 

[134] 

Tetradecanol (TD) enhanced 
with (0.662-58.9 wt%) of 
Cu nanowires 

Methyl ester enhanced with 
(0.05-0.5 wt%) of Cu- TiO2 
hybrid nanocomposite 

Paraffin enhanced with CuO 

(0.1-5 wt%) 

- Thermal conductivity was 9 times 
higher than pristine TD. 
- 13.4 wt% of Cu was a turning point 
in thermal conductivity 
enhancement. 
- When the load exceeded 13.4 wt%, 
thermal conductivity increased 
significantly. 
Enhanced from 0.228 to 0.347 W/ 
m•K in solid PCM phase and from 
0.212 to 0.323 W/m•K in liquid PCM 
phase. 
Enhanced by 63.5%. 

Dropped by 7.5% during 
freezing and 7.3% during 
melting. 

Melting and solidification times 
dropped by 70.9 and 77.9%, 
respectively. 

Stable over 1000 
thermal cycles and 
◦
up to 216

C. 

Enhanced by 7.81%. 

Not reported. 

Paraffin enhanced with (0.1- 

Enhanced by 46.7%. 

Enhanced by 8.2%. 

Not reported. 

5 wt%) of PANI 

Paraffin wax enhanced with 

(10 and 20.0 wt%) of 
Fe3O4 nanoparticles 

Water enhanced with (0.1 wt 
%) of CuO nanoparticles 

Enhanced by 48 and 67% for 10 and 
20 wt% of Fe₃O₄, respectively. 

Not reported. 

Enhanced by 3.3 and 8.8% for 
10 and 20 wt% of Fe₃O₄, 
respectively. 
Insignificantly changed. 

Pentaerythritol enhanced 

with (0.1, 0.5, and 1%) of 
Al2O3 nanoparticles 

Increased with the increase of Al2O3 
concentration as follows: 0.1282, 
0.1412, and 0.1609 W/m-K for 0.1, 
0.5, and 1%, respectively. 

Dropped with the increase the 
concentration of Al2O3 by an 
average of 5% of the original 
value. 

Organic ester enhanced with 
(0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 
wt%) of Ag nanoparticles 

Paraffin wax enhanced with 
(1, 2, 3, and 4 wt%) of 
CNFs 

Enhanced by 10 and 67% for 0.1 and 5 
wt% of Ag, respectively. 

Enhanced with the increase of carbon 
concentration. 

At 5 wt% of Ag, latent heat 
dropped by 7.88 and 8.91% 
during freezing and melting, 
respectively. 
Dropped with the increase of 
carbon concentration. 

Melting temperature was unchanged. 

- Solidification time dropped by 35%. 
- Accelerated charging was recorded 
during the first 25% of solidification 
time, in which 50% of the total mass 
solidified. 
- Time for energy storage/release 
dropped by 17.2, 20.5, and 23% for 
Al2O3 concentrations of 0.1, 0.5, and 
1 wt%, respectively. 
- Transition temperature was 
unchanged after adding 0.1% of 
Al2O3. 
Solidification and melting times 
dropped by 30.8 and 11.3%, 
respectively. 

- Solidification time dropped with the 
increase of carbon concentration. 
- Heat dissipation was higher than 
pure paraffin wax. 
- Output power increased with the 
increase of carbon concentration. 

[135] 

[136] 

[136] 

[137] 

Stable after 200 
thermal cycles. 
Stable after 200 
thermal cycles. 
Stable after 500 
thermal cycles. 

Not reported. 

[138] 

Stable up to 100 
thermal cycles. 

[139] 

FTIR results 
confirmed thermal 
and chemical 
stability. 
Not reported. 

[140] 

[141]  

suitable for use as supports in SS-PCMs due to their superior thermal 
stability,  chemical  compatibility,  high  surface  area,  and  even  better 
thermal conductivity than porous carbon. Porous clay mineral-based SS- 
PCMs  are  a  common  and  well-known  family  of  SS-PCMs,  including 
expanded perlite, fly ash, diatomite, sepiolite, attapulgite, and vermic-
ulite. Clay mineral-based SS-PCMs offer the advantages of thermal sta-
bility and reliability, high chemical compatibility, and a wide variety of 
interactions with PCMs [145]. Due to their tunable pore size and high 
surface area, mesoporous silica-based SS-PCMs are another promising 
type of porous oxide supports. The pore size is smaller than clay min-
erals, porous carbon, and metal foams. Interestingly, the confinement of 
PCMs with nano-porous silica showed that material properties no longer 
determine the melting point, which can be changed based on the hier-
archical  pore  structure  [145].  Epoxy  resin,  polystyrene-graft-poly 
(ethylene 
poly(styr-
ene–butadienestyrene)  are  examples  of  porous  polymers  used  in 
SS-PCMs [145]. 

(PS-g-PEG), 

copolymers 

glycol) 

and 

chosen based on the material of the core and the encapsulation method 
used  [152].  Compatibility  between  the  core  and  shell  materials  is  an 
important requirement for the successful encapsulation of PCMs. Pre-
treatment  of  the  core  material  is  used  in  some  cases  to  improve 
compatibility [153]. 

Benefits of encapsulation. The importance of encapsulation can be sum-
marized as follows [2, 153]:  

• Containing the PCM and isolating it from the surroundings.  
• Controlling the amount of PCM that participates in thermal cycles.  
• Increasing the rate of heat transfer.  
• Enhancing structural and mechanical stability.  
• Improving compatibility with the surrounding materials.  
• Enhancing processability (dispersibility and flowability).  
• Reducing the foul odor of some PCMs.  
• Safely handling toxic PCMs. 

2.3.7. Encapsulated PCM (ePCM) systems 

Encapsulation is a widely used technique for improving the handling 
of  PCMs,  particularly  those  undergoing  solid-liquid  transitions.  It  is 
generally  defined  as  the  process  of  enclosing  the  PCM  with  an  inert 
coating or shell material. As a result, the two main components are the 
core  and  shell.  The  core  is  the  intrinsic  component  that  contains  the 
active PCM. The extrinsic part is the shell, which can be made of organic 
polymers, metal oxide, hydroxide, or silica. The material of the shell is 

Classification  and  morphology  of  encapsulated  PCMs. The  resultant 
products of the PCM encapsulation process can be classified into three 
groups based on the core size to be coated: macro-encapsulated PCMs 
(above  1  mm),  micro-encapsulated  PCMs  (from  1  to  1000  μm),  and 
nano-encapsulated  PCMs  (from  1  to  1000  nm)  [154].  Because  of  the 
critical difference in the size of encapsulated PCMs, different encapsu-
lation techniques have been used, which have a significant impact on the 
shell shape and selected PCM. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103717S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 16. Key characteristics of the main types of porous carbon-based shape-stabilized PCMs. This includes expanded graphite, CNTs, graphene, and carbon aerogel.  

The encapsulation process at the macro-scale can be carried out by 
filling  a  pre-prepared  shell  with  PCM  in  the  liquid  phase.  However, 
encapsulation  at  the  micro-  and  nano-scales  is  more  complicated. 
Nonetheless, the micro/nano-encapsulation of PCMs is known to more 
effectively  improve  the  rate  of  heat  transfer  relative  to  macro- 
encapsulation.  To  draw  general  observations  regarding  ePCMs, 
Figs. 17 and 18 show the latent heats of melting and solidification of a 
variety of ePCMs in relation to their melting and solidification temper-
atures. It is noticeable that the melting and solidification temperatures 
and latent heats for the same ePCM are not identical, and there is no 
definite relationship or pattern that dictates which is higher. The ma-
◦
jority  of  the  ePCMs  have  melting  temperatures  lower  than  100
C.  A 
◦
small number of studies has been dedicated to medium (100-300
C) and 
◦
high (above 300
C) melting-temperature ePCMs. The reason behind this 
is that using conventional techniques of encapsulation is not suitable for 
such temperature ranges. For instance, since molten salts dissolve easily 
in water, traditional encapsulation methods like the sol-gel method are 
ineffective [155]. For micro/nano-encapsulated PCM techniques, they 
are  divided  into  three  broad  groups:  physical,  chemical,  and 
physical-chemical  (more  details  are  provided  in  Section  3).  In  the 
physical techniques, the shell is mechanically applied around the micro 
core  [156].  This  has  the  advantage  of  having  a  negligible  negative 
impact on the environment. However, physical techniques are limited to 
producing  particles  smaller  than  100  μm,  making  them  suitable  for 
micro-encapsulated PCMs. In contrast, chemical techniques can produce 
encapsulated PCM particles that are significantly smaller, making them 
ideal  for  nano-encapsulated  PCMs  [157].  It  is  reported  that  physical 
techniques result in a rougher surface and a significant drop in latent 
heat of fusion compared to chemical ones [2, 158]. A stable particle can 
be produced by a physicochemical technique that includes ionic gela-
tion, coacervation, and sol-gel [156]. 

Organic  PCMs  can  be  encapsulated  using  a  variety  of  techniques 
[152], while approaches for encapsulating inorganic PCM are confined 

to solvent extraction and evaporation. In this method, a large amount of 
non-volatile  organic  solvents  (e.g.,  toluene,  chloroform,  carbon  tetra-
chloride, and acetone) is employed. This means that micro-encapsulated 
inorganic PCMs are more expensive than organic ones [159]. Among the 
chemical  approaches  investigated,  in-situ  polymerization  was  deter-
mined to be the preferred way for encapsulating organic PCM due to its 
superior shell structure and reduced capsule size [160] (more details are 
provided in Section 3). 

Different types of particles can be created depending on the physi-
cochemical parameters of the core-shell and the encapsulation process 
utilized, as demonstrated in Fig. 19. Many factors affect the size distri-
bution of PCM capsules [157], which can be summarized as follows:  

• The mixing rotational speed during the emulsifying stage (smaller 

sizes are obtained at higher mixing speeds).  

• The  amount  of  surfactant  (smaller  sizes  are  obtained  for  higher 

surfactant amounts).  

• The ratio of core material to nucleating agent.  
• The shell material. 

Nomenclature  of  ePCMs. While dealing with ePCMs, it is important to 
keep in mind that not all ePCMs can achieve the original role of efficient 
latent  heat  storage.  Because  of  shell  existence,  molecular  motion  is 
confined and the phase change may not completely occur [161]. In this 
regard,  the  concept  of  encapsulation  ratio,  ηPCM,  is  introduced  to 
quantify the adequate performance of PCM inside a shell based on the 
enthalpy of fusion, as follows [162], 

ηPCM =

(ΔHs (cid:0)
(ΔHs (cid:0)

l)ePCM
l)PCM

.

(8) 

Theoretically, the melting and freezing points of a PCM are the same. 
However,  in  reality,  they  are  not.  Therefore,  the  encapsulation 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103718S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 17. Latent heat of melting and melting temperature of various types of ePCMs.  

efficiency, E, as a more comprehensive concept, is introduced and given 
by the following equation [163], 

E =

(ΔHs (cid:0)
(ΔHs (cid:0)

l)ePCM + (ΔHl (cid:0) s)ePCM
,
l)PCM + (ΔHl (cid:0) s)PCM

(9)  

l)ePCM and (ΔHs (cid:0)

where (ΔHs (cid:0)
l)PCM are the enthalpies of melting with 
and without encapsulation, respectively. (ΔHl (cid:0) s)ePCM and (ΔHl (cid:0) s)PCM 
are  the  enthalpies  of  solidification  with  and  without  encapsulation, 
respectively. A higher encapsulation efficiency is an indication of higher 
mechanical stability and leak-proof strength. 

The core-to-shell mass ratio is another important parameter deter-
mining the functional, structural, and mechanical stability of ePCMs. A 
lower core-to-shell ratio means the shell is thick, reducing the amount of 
contained  PCM.  Meanwhile,  a  higher  core-to-shell  ratio  increases  the 
chance of leakage to the surroundings and deteriorates the strength of 
PCM. It is reported that the optimum core-to-shell ratio to balance these 
effects is 3:1 [2]. Ghosh [153] established a formula for calculating the 
shell thickness based on the core-to-shell ratio, assuming that the density 
of the core and shell materials is identical, as follows: 

ds = (r (cid:0) rc) =

[(

ws
wc

)1/3

]

+ 1

(cid:0) 1

rc,

(10)  

where ds is shell thickness, rc and r are the core and whole capsule radii, 
respectively, and ws/wc is the ratio of shell weight to core weight. 

2.4. Applications of PCMs in thermal management systems 

Electronic products such as integrated-circuit boards, batteries, re-
sistors, transistors, and microprocessors have become an intrinsic part in 
human  lives.  This  significant  increase  in  consumer  electronics  means 
that their effective thermal management is pivotal to maintain perfor-
mance  consistency  and  product  lifetime.  Thereby,  researchers  are 
continuously  attempting  to  make  cooling  systems  more  effective  and 
compact. At present, the thermal management of electronic devices is 
one  of  the  most  important  aspects  in  their  development  and  design. 
According to previous research studies, overheating is one of the leading 
reasons  for  electronic  equipment  failure.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to 
regulate the operating temperature of electronic components to guar-
antee their efficiency and reliability [164]. 

For  the  thermal  management  of  many  electronic  devices,  passive 
cooling is a more practical choice compared to active cooling, although 
it suffers from a lower heat dissipation rate. Integrating heat sinks with 
PCM technology has received great attention to circumvent such trade- 
offs when using passive cooling systems. PCMs often suffer from poor 
thermal conductivity, which reduces the efficiency and performance of 
heat sinks. Therefore, fins are generally added to PCM heat sinks to boost 
their thermal conductivity and enhance heat transfer. Various fin con-
figurations have been developed for PCM heat sinks that operate under 
constant  and  variable  thermal  loads  [165].  It  was  revealed  that  the 
thermal performance of PCM heat sinks depends on the substrate and fin 
thickness, volume fraction of PCM, PCM type, fin height, number of fins, 
and  fin  shape.  However,  there  is  an  optimal  number  of  fins  beyond 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103719S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 18. Latent heat of solidification and solidification temperature of various types of ePCMs  

Fig.  19. Morphology  of  common  a)  macro-encapsulated  (spherical,  tubular,  cylindrical,  and  rectangular)  and  b)  micro/nano-encapsulated  (mononuclear,  poly-
nuclear, matrix, and multi-shell) PCMs 

which the base temperature declines, and this number is dependent on 
the  amount  of  PCM  and  heat  sink  size  [166].  The  melting  onset  was 
shown  to  be  delayed  by  increasing  the  number  of  fins.  However,  the 

PCM  completely  melts  over  a  short  period  of  time  [167].  The 
enthalpy-porosity approach was found to be the better model to simulate 
phase-change processes. Moreover, metallic PCMs have shown higher 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103720S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

performance than non-metallic ones [165]. 

Although the combination of heat sink, fins, and PCM enhances the 
thermal performance of the cooling system, it increases its weight. In 
addition, the insertion of fins reduces the PCM volume; hence, a lower 
amount of energy can be stored. To bypass these drawbacks, an alter-
native  method  was  proposed  to  improve  the  thermal  conductivity  of 
PCMs. It was found that the addition of highly conductive nanoparticles 
to the PCM makes the heat sink a more suitable choice for electronics 
cooling [168]. Convection currents are inhibited with the addition of 
nanoparticles due to the increase in viscosity which affects the thermal 
performance of the heat sink [169]. However, by carefully choosing the 
concentration  and  type of  nanoparticles, the  increase in thermal con-
ductivity  may  outweigh  the  increase  in  viscosity  [170].  In  fact,  the 
addition of nanoparticles can enhance the thermal performance of PCM 
heat  sinks  through  reducing  the  heating  time  by  almost  22%  [171]. 
Furthermore,  it  was  shown  that  at  low  power  loads,  the  addition  of 
nanoparticles has a positive impact at regulating the base temperature, 
but at higher power loads, the addition of nanoparticles has a negative 
impact [172]. The nanoparticle type may also have a significant impact 
on  the  cooling system.  Alumina nanofluids with  a volume  fraction of 
0.5% resulted in a 6% increase in the convection heat transfer coeffi-
cient, while CNT nanofluids with a volume fraction of 0.25% at a flow 
velocity  of  21  mL/s  produced  the  greatest  heat  transfer  boost  (about 
13%) [173]. 

Using  nanoparticles  can  improve  the  thermal  properties  of  PCMs, 
and  hence  can  be  used  for  different  cooling  systems.  However,  the 
optimal cooling technique not only offers a higher heat transfer rate, but 
should  also  provide  superior  heat  absorption  capacity  at  a  desired 
temperature  range.  Micro/nano-ePCM  slurries  and  dispersions,  which 
are produced by dispersing micro/nano-ePCMs into a pure fluid, possess 
larger heat capacities when the ePCMs experience a phase change and 
are favorable if the cooling system parameters are adequately tailored to 
utilize their latent heat of fusion. Therefore, micro/nano-ePCMs seem to 
provide a viable avenue for meeting these cooling requirements. Using 
nano-ePCMs  to  cool  lithium-ion  batteries  showed  that  increasing  the 
volume fraction of the ePCM up to 3% increased the heat transfer rate of 
lithium-ion batteries by 8.2(cid:0) 13.6% [174]. Choi et al. [175] adopted a 
micro-ePCM  slurry  for  the  cooling  of  telecommunication  equipment 
with high power and heat densities. According to their findings, when 
the mass flow rate increased, the heat transfer rate of the unit cooled 
with a micro-ePCM slurry rose. Moreover, the cooling performance of 
the  slurry-cooled  unit  was  superior  to  that  of  the  water-cooled  one. 
Using  a  micro-ePCM  slurry,  Sharma  et  al.  [176]  investigated 
hotspot-targeted integrated liquid cooling of multicore microprocessors 
to optimize energy efficiency and decrease chip temperature. Using a 
micro-ePCM slurry, they were able to control the surface temperature of 
the  equipment  chip  as  required.  Experimental  data  of  LED  thermal 
management  systems  reveal  that  an  increase  in  micro-ePCM  concen-
tration  does  not  necessarily  result  in  an  enhancement  in  cooling  per-
formance, while phase transition and thermophysical properties of the 
micro-ePCM play an important role [177]. 

As  another  efficient  and  promising  approach  for  improving  the 
thermal performance of cooling systems, the use of metal foams (such as 
graphite, carbon, copper, and aluminum) has attracted a great deal of 
interest and has been evaluated in a wide range of applications [178]. 
PCM-based metal foam cooling systems demonstrated superior perfor-
mance over pure PCM and nanoparticle-PCM systems with a significant 
decrease in melting time. It was observed that metal foam composites 
exhibit a thermal conductivity improvement of up to 218 times [179]. A 
comparison among finned surfaces, nanoparticles, and metal foams has 
revealed that the combination of metal foam and nanoparticles offers 
the best heat transfer performance, where the metal foam is the primary 
source  of  enhanced  heat  transfer  [180].  Since  the  metal  foam  is 
described  by  its  pore  density,  pore  size,  and  porosity,  it  is  crucial  to 
assess the impact of these factors in a PCM-based thermal management 
system. The literature has demonstrated that lower porosities lead to a 

higher heat transfer [181], while a higher porosity indicates less mass 
and volume and hence lower heat storage capacity [182]. Concerning 
pore density, investigations have shown minimal [183], small [184], or 
considerable  [185]  impacts  on  the  heat  transfer  rate.  However,  it  is 
almost agreed upon that porosity is more important than pore density in 
terms of the heat transfer performance of PCM-based metal foam com-
posites [182]. The use of micro-ePCM-saturated metal foams for passive 
thermal management has shown that micro-ePCMs were not appropriate 
for  thermal  management.  However,  integrating  micro-ePCMs  with 
metal  foams  at  high  pore  densities  provides  better  thermal  control 
[186]. 

2.5. Applications of PCMs in solar energy systems 

2.5.1. An overview of solar thermal energy 

The World Energy Council stated that the total energy produced by 
the  sun  every  day  is  3.8×1023  MW,  with  only  1.08×1014  KW  of  that 
reaching the surface of earth. Despite its relatively small magnitude, it 
has been reported that if only 0.1% of the solar energy intercepted by the 
earth could be converted to electricity with a 10% efficiency, it would 
supply approximately 3000 GW, or four times the world’s total energy 
demand [187]. Fig. 20 shows the types of solar-thermal collectors and 
their classification into non-concentrating and concentrating collectors. 
Generally,  a  solar  photothermal  collector  is  a  specialized  device  in 
which incident solar irradiation is absorbed and converted to thermal 
energy carried by a HTF. This heat can subsequently be extracted and 
utilized to heat buildings, heat domestic water, or generate electricity 
via power cycles [188,189]. 

Fig.  21  displays  the  energy  flow  through  a  conventional  solar- 
thermal collector, consisting of a glass cover, absorber plate, HTF, and 
insulated housing. When sunlight strikes the glass surface, it is  trans-
mitted  and  absorbed  by  the  absorber  plate,  which  has  a  selective 
absorber coating that maximizes absorption in the solar spectrum and 
minimizes  emission  in  the  thermal  spectrum.  The  function  of  the 
absorber plate in this case is to convert solar energy into thermal energy, 
which  is  then  transferred  to  the  HTF.  This  is  dominantly  realized 
through forced convection between the HTF and the inner surface of the 
absorber  plate.  The  surface  temperature  of  the  absorber  plate  will 
unavoidably increase over time, posing several problems:  

• Heat  loss into  the surroundings due to thermal radiation emission 
and natural air convection. Both are closely related to surface tem-
perature; therefore, thermal efficiency drastically drops with an in-
crease in absorber temperature [191].  

• Oxidation  and  peeling  of  the  coated  layer  deteriorates  the  optical 

properties of the absorber plate (stability issue) [6]. 

To  maximize  the  useful  energy  extracted  by  the  HTF  as  it  passes 
through  the  collector,  two  aspects  should  be  considered;  namely, 
maximizing  solar  radiation  absorption  and  reducing  heat  loss  to  the 
surroundings. Accordingly, the thermal efficiency of any solar-thermal 
collector is defined as the ratio of useful thermal energy gained by the 
HTF to the total solar radiation input, as follows [192]: 

ηth =

˙mcp(Tout (cid:0) Tinl)
,
GA

(11)  

where  ˙m represents  mass flow  rate, cp  is  specific heat  of the  working 
fluid,  Tout  and  Tinl  are  outlet  and  inlet  temperatures  of  the  HTF, 
respectively, G is solar irradiance, and A is the aperture area. 

Non-concentrating  collectors  and  concentrating  collectors  are  the 
main  two  main  categories  of  solar-thermal  collectors,  depending  on 
their  design  and  the  temperature  at  which  they  operate.  In  non- 
concentrating  collectors,  the  aperture  and  receiver  areas  are  equal. 
These collectors utilize both the beam and diffuse components of solar 
radiation, and thus, do not require a tracking system. They operate at 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103721S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 20. Types of solar-thermal collectors and their classification into non-concentrating and concentrating collectors (CR is solar concentration ratio) [190]. (Reused 
with permission from Elsevier). 

◦

C) and are consequently 
low-to-medium temperatures (around 60-100
commonly utilized for space heating and residential hot water supply 
[193]. The flat-plate collector (FPC) is the centerpiece of any solar en-
ergy collection system intended for operation at low or moderate tem-
peratures.  A  FPC  absorbs  solar  energy,  converts  it  into  heat,  and 
transfers that heat to a flow of liquids or gases. At temperatures above 
◦
80
C,  an  evacuated-tube  collector  (ETC)  allows  for  the  extraction  of 
more heat than a FPC since it combines the effects of a highly-selective 
surface coating with vacuum insulation of the absorber element [194]. 
Several improvement techniques, including turbulators and ferrofluids, 
have  been  employed in  non-concentrating collectors  to enhance their 
performance. Turbulators, which are composed of wire coils and twisted 
tape,  have  been  utilized  to  enhance  the  heat  transfer  rate  by  turning 
laminar flow into turbulent flow. Due to the reduced flow area, the flow 
velocity increases with a slight increase in pressure drop [195]. Ferro-
fluids are composed of magnetic nanoparticles (e.g., Fe, Fe3O4, etc.) and 
base  liquids.  This  combination  offers  both  fluidity  and  magnetism. 
Scholars are interested in ferrofluids due to the fact that, by modifying 
the direction and intensity of the magnetic field, these fluids can exhibit 
a  variety  of  unique  features.  Ferrofluids  can  be  manipulated  by  an 
external magnetic field, leading to better mixing within the fluid layers 
and improved thermal efficiency [196]. 

◦

For  concentrating  collectors,  the  interceptor  has  a  greater  surface 
area  than  the  absorber.  They  are  typically  used  in  high-temperature 
solar  power plants  (above 350
C) [193]. Concentrating  collectors are 
of  two  general  types:  line-focused  and  point-focused.  In  line-focused 
collectors,  the  incident  radiation  is  focused  to  a  linear  receiver  (e.g. 
parabolic trough and linear Fresnel reflector), whereas in point-focused 
collectors, the incident radiation is focused on a point (e.g., parabolic 
dish  and  central  receiver)  [197].  Among  them,  parabolic  trough 

Fig. 21. Energy flow in a conventional solar-thermal collector where heat is the 
desired output from the photothermal conversion process. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103722S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

collectors are most widely used, accounting for more than 95% of global 
concentrated solar collector installations [198]. 

As shown in Fig. 22, CSP plants are made up of three major com-
ponents; the solar field, TES system, and power block. In the solar field, 
solar radiation is concentrated to heat thermal oil to high temperatures 
while remaining in the liquid phase [199]. The hot oil is then utilized in 
oil/water heat exchangers to generate steam, which is used to drive a 
turbo-generator in the power block for electricity production. The hot oil 
is also used to supply heat to the TES system during the charging stage. 
TES systems in CSP plants are divided into two types: direct and indirect 
storage. In the direct approach, the working fluid serves as both a HTF in 
the solar field and a storage medium in the TES system, whereas in the 
indirect  approach,  the  HTF  is  different  than  the  storage  medium,  as 
shown in Fig. 23. Molten salt is most commonly used in commercial CSP 
plants  as  a  sensible  and  latent  high-density  storage  medium  that  can 
maintain high cycle efficiency [200]. One of the main difficulties facing 
CSP  plants  is  the  need  for  cost-effective  and  reliable  energy  storage 
media and HTFs for operation over prolonged periods of time at high 
temperatures [201]. 

A promising development in the field of CSP is direct steam gener-
ation (DSG) technology, in which steam is produced directly within the 
absorber  tubes  of  the  solar  field  by  boiling  and  superheating  water, 
resulting in a two-phase flow. The primary benefit of this technique is 
that the same fluid is used in both the solar field and the power cycle, 
thereby eliminating the expenses and dangers associated with employ-
ing  thermal  oils  that  degrade  in  the  solar  field.  Additionally,  the 
complexity,  cost,  and  thermal  losses  caused  by  the  massive  heat  ex-
changers between the solar field and the power block are eliminated, 
and  much  higher  process  temperatures  may  be  achieved,  hence, 
enhancing the heat-to-power conversion efficiency in the power block 
[203]. However, the most significant disadvantage of DSG is the need for 
expensive absorber tubes and interconnections as well as sophisticated 
control systems to safely manage the high temperatures and pressures 
that occur inside the two-phase water flow in the solar field [204]. 

Even  if  the  conversion  efficiency  of  the  aforementioned  collectors 
has generally increased over time, it must still be further improved to 
maximize  solar-to-thermal  performance.  For  that  purpose,  numerous 
coolants  have  been  designed  for  a  variety  of  operating  temperatures. 
Typically,  pure  liquid  coolants  have  insufficient  heat  transfer  perfor-
mance to absorb considerable amounts of heat. Nanofluids, which are 
homogeneous  mixtures  of  a  liquid  and  nanoparticles,  present  a 
tremendous possibility to boost the thermal efficiency of solar collectors 
[205]. Nanofluids can offer improved thermophysical properties, such 
as  thermal  conductivity  [206,207,208].  For  example,  Vijayakumaar 
et  al.  [209]  conducted  studies  to  examine  the  effect  of  CNT/water 
nanofluid  on  flat-plate  solar  collectors.  Using  a  nanofluid  containing 
0.5% CNTs increased the efficiency by 39% compared to water. Anin 
Vince and Natarajan [210] experimentally evaluated the performance of 

Fig. 22. The major components in  a CSP-TES power  plant. This  includes the 
solar  field,  TES  system,  and  power  block  [202].  (Reused  with  permission 
from Elsevier). 

a FPC employing GO nanofluids with forced circulation using a pump. 
To make the nanofluids, graphene was suspended in deionized water at 
the different mass concentrations of 0.005, 0.01, and 0.02. Compared to 
a collector employing water, the collector employing a nanofluid with a 
GO  loading  of  0.02  at  a  mass  flow  rate  of  0.0167  kg/s  exhibited  a 
maximum  thermal  efficiency  improvement  of  7.3%.  Also,  the  overall 
heat transfer coefficient went up by 8.03, 10.93, and 11.5% for nano-
fluids with 0.005, 0.01, and 0.02% GO, respectively. 

Iranmanesh et al. [211] conducted an experiment to assess the in-
fluence of a graphene nanoplatelets/water nanofluid on the heat transfer 
performance of an evacuated-tube solar water heater. At the varied flow 
rates of 0.5, 0.1, and 1.5 L/min, the thermal efficiency of the collector 
was measured. The collector efficiency reached a maximum of 90.7% 
when the greatest graphene nanoplatelet concentration of 0.1% and the 
highest  flow  rate  of  1.5  L/min  were  utilized.  Compared  to  distilled 
water, this indicated a thermal efficiency boost of 35.8%. Fayaz et al. 
[212] analyzed the influence of flow rate on the performance of a PV/T 
system employing a MWCNT nanofluid. The concentration of MWCNTs 
ranged from 0 to 1 wt%. Preliminary numerical results revealed that the 
thermal efficiency of the PV/T system increased with increasing nano-
fluid concentration up to 0.75 wt%, after which it began to deteriorate. 
Recent experiments; however, show that adding solid nanoparticles 
like copper and alumina to pure fluids does not result in significant in-
creases in thermal conductivity [213, 214]. It has also been found that 
the efficiency of the conventional solar collector drops at higher nano-
particle concentrations. This is because viscous forces increase, which 
decreases the heat transfer rate and increases the pumping power [215]. 
This is in addition to abrasion and sedimentation issues [216]. 

The mismatch of energy demand and solar energy supply in terms of 
time and place is the greatest disadvantage for both photothermal and 
photovoltaic solar conversion processes [217]. This is compounded by 
operational  transients in  CSP plants  during warm-up,  cool-down, and 
cloud-disturbance  periods  [218].  Several  advancements  in  the  use  of 
PCMs to mitigate these energy mismatch and prolonged transient issues 
have been made over the years, propelling solar energy to the forefront 
of the energy sector [171]. This is achieved by keeping the HTF or PV 
cell temperature approximately constant during phase transition, which 
helps in avoiding problems associated with excessive temperatures [61]. 

2.5.2. PCMs in solar stills 

Since conventional water desalination and purification technologies 
consume a lot of fossil fuels or electricity, a solar still is an alternative, 
sustainable technology capable of extracting freshwater from salty water 
using solar radiation in an environmentally friendly manner. Moreover, 
ultraviolet radiation adds a unique feature to solar stills by killing vi-
ruses, bacteria, and parasites. Therefore, this method is appealing for 
rural and remote regions where clean drinking water is scarce. A solar 
still offers fresh water at a low cost and uses simple designs. Neverthe-
less,  the  low  water  productivity  and  system  efficiency  are  its  main 
disadvantages. 

Manoj Kumar et al. [219] undertook an experimental campaign to 
study the effects of integrating a conventional single-slope (CSS) solar 
still with paraffin PCM doped with SiO2  nanoparticles. Their research 
was conducted in three parts: without PCM, with pure PCM, and with 
PCM enhanced with SiO2 nanoparticles (NE-PCM). Results showed that 
water productivity for the NE-PCM case was the highest, followed by the 
one with PCM only. Daily freshwater production was measured at 4100, 
6200, and 6850 ml for the cases without PCM, with pure PCM, and with 
NE-PCM,  respectively.  The daily  yield improvement  was  estimated  at 
51.2 and 67.1%, respectively, when using PCM and NE-PCM compared 
with the CSS solar still. Kabeel et al. [220] investigated the possibility of 
improving  potable  water  production  in  a  tubular  solar  still  (TSS)  by 
using a PCM doped with GO nanoparticles. Their investigation covered 
TSS, TSS with PCM, and TSS with NE-PCM. Their results revealed that 
the total cumulative freshwater yields in the TSS, TSS using PCM, and 
TSS using NE-PCM were 2.59, 3.35, and 5.62 kg, respectively. Results 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103723S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 23. Concentrated solar power plants with a) direct and b) indirect thermal energy storage.  

also showed that the daily efficiency of TSS using NE-PCM was improved 
by up to 116.5% with reference to the other cases. 

2.5.3. PCMs in photovoltaic (PV) and PV/thermal (PV/T) collectors 

The photoelectric solar collector is the most efficient technique for 
directly  turning  solar  energy  into  electricity.  Solar  cells  are  energy 
conversion devices that convert sunlight into electricity via the photo-
electric  effect.  Solar  cells  and  other  auxiliary  components  make  up  a 
photovoltaic  system.  However,  photovoltaic  cells  face  a  substantial 
challenge  in  that  their  electrical  production  is  highly  reliant  on  cell 
temperature.  For  instance,  increasing  the  temperature  of  crystalline 
◦
silicon cells by 1 
C reduces the solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency 
by 0.5% [221]. The temperature of photovoltaic cells can be regulated 
by removing accumulated heat. 

On the other hand, a new technology has evolved that combines both 
solar-thermal collectors and photovoltaic collectors into one, known as a 
hybrid  photovoltaic/thermal  collector.  In  these  hybrid  collectors,  a 
portion  of  solar  radiation  is  converted  to  electricity  by  photovoltaic 
cells, while another portion is converted to heat carried by a HTF [222]. 
The overall efficiency of a photovoltaic/thermal collector is calculated 
as the sum of its thermal and electrical efficiencies, as follows: 

ηtot = ηth + ηelc,

ηelc =

Po
,
GA

where Po is the electrical power output. 

(12)  

(13)  

PCMs can be utilized to regulate the temperature of PV cells and store 
thermal energy for solar heating systems. Ho et al. [223] numerically 
investigated a PV/T system based on PCMs in which a water-saturated 
micro-ePCM  layer  was  attached  on  the  backside  of  the  PV  panel 
floating over water. For a PCM container thickness of 5 cm and a melting 
point  of  30 
C  while 
electrical  efficiency  increased  by  2.1%.  Maatallah  et  al.  [224] 

C,  the  PV  cell  temperature  decreased  by  1.8 

◦

◦

experimentally studied the performance of a water-based PV/T collector 
using  paraffin  wax  RT-30  under  the  weather  conditions  of  Kottayam, 
India. Results revealed that the thermal, electrical, and total efficiencies 
increased  by  26.9,  17.3,  and  40.6%,  respectively,  compared  with  a 
conventional PV panel. 

Qiu  et  al.  [225]  carried  out  experimental  work  to  study  a  PV/T 
collector  employing  a  micro-ePCM  slurry  as  the  working  fluid.  They 
evaluated the performance of the PV/T collector under various param-
eters, including solar radiation intensity, slurry Reynolds number, and 
ePCM concentration. Due to the fact that the temperature of the PV/T 
collector was a direct factor affecting its performance, they revealed that 
it could be decreased by lowering the solar intensity and increasing the 
slurry concentration and Reynolds number. To achieve total efficiencies 
of 80.8-83.9%, the recommended optimum values for each parameter 
were as follows: solar intensity of 500(cid:0) 700 W/m2, slurry concentration 
of 10%, and Reynolds number of 3000. Hossain et al. [226] designed and 
developed  a  PCM-based  PV/T  system  to  assess  energy,  exergy,  and 
economic  performance  under  typical  Malaysian  weather  conditions. 
They  used  lauric  acid  in  aluminum  foil  packets  to  avoid  leakage  and 
placed them around the two sides of a serpentine flow channel. Their 
results  were  compared  to  those  of  a  reference  photovoltaic  module 
operating at volumetric flow rates of 0.5 to 4 liters per minute (LPM). At 
4 LPM, the highest electrical power output and maximum electrical ef-
ficiency were 160.29 W and 14.42%, respectively, which were 14 and 
4.72%  greater  than  the  reference  photovoltaic  panel.  The  authors 
highlighted that in the proposed PCM-based PV/T system, for every 100 
W/m2  increase in solar intensity, the power output increased by 13.12 
W, whereas the electrical efficiency dropped by 0.55%. The maximum 
exergy output was recorded at 134.10 W for 0.5 LPM. 

2.5.4. PCMs in concentrated solar power (CSP) 

Several  researchers  have  been  investigating  the  use  of  PCMs  as 
thermal storage media to improve the dispatchability and marketability 
of  CSP  plants  [227].  Three  designs  are  commonly  reported  in  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103724S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

literature [228]; namely, a packed-bed storage tank filled with ePCMs, a 
shell-and-tube heat exchanger in which the PCM is placed on the shell 
side, and a cascaded PCM storage system. Laing et al. [229] studied a 
prototype  storage  tank  with  different  PCMs  as  follows:  NaNO3, 
KNO3(cid:0) NaNO2(cid:0) NaNO3, and KNO3(cid:0) NaNO3, with melting temperatures 
◦
of 306, 222, and 142 
C, respectively. Steam was used as the HTF. In the 
tank,  seven  steel  tubes  with  graphite  or  aluminum  fins  were  impreg-
nated, depending on the melting temperature of the used PCM. Graphite 
◦
fins were used for temperatures up to 250
C, while aluminum fins were 
◦
used for temperatures above 250
C. After up to 172 thermal cycles, the 
prototype demonstrated excellent thermal stability with no degradation 
in the graphite/aluminum-finned tubes. 

Galione et al. [230] proposed filling a storage tank with solid ma-
terials (quartzite rocks and sand) and ePCMs, with molten salt acting as a 
working  fluid  to  form  a  multilayer  packed  bed.  The  proposed  design 
included PCM packed bed layers at both ends of the storage tank. The 
authors developed a numerical model and validated it against experi-
mental data. Simulations were then carried out for different configura-
tions, namely, solid material only, single PCM, multilayered solid-PCM, 
and cascaded PCM filler materials. Results revealed that the proposed 
multilayered solid-PCM design had a much higher efficiency compared 
with the conventional TES system. Moreover, compared to the cascaded 
PCM design, the new multilayered approach had the merit of using less 
ePCMs for almost the same amount of stored energy. 

Prieto and Cabeza [231] investigated a cascaded PCM TES system for 
a  parabolic-through  CSP  plant.  The  cascaded  PCM  configuration 
included four buckets. In each bucket, PCMs were arranged based on 
their melting temperatures and latent heats of fusion as follows: NaNO3 
in the first bucket, a mixture of LiCl(cid:0) 43%/KCl(cid:0) 24%/NaCl(cid:0) 33% in the 
second bucket, NaOH(cid:0) 80%/NaCl(cid:0) 20% in the third one, and a combi-
nation of MgCl2(cid:0) 60%/KCl(cid:0) 20.4%/NaCl(cid:0) 19.6% in the fourth one. The 
main  drawback  was  that  the  cascaded  PCM  and  commercial  indirect 
two-tank molten salt designs showed similar results in terms of cumu-
lative annual power generation. However, the authors emphasized the 
importance of performing a levelized cost analysis to validate the use of 
PCMs for TES in solar power plants. 

Similarly, Michels and Pitz Paal [106] conducted experimental and 
numerical studies on cascaded latent heat storage for parabolic-trough 
power  plants.  Their  findings  revealed  that  the  cascaded  TES  system 
provided  a  uniform  outlet  temperature  and  made  better  use  of  the 
possible phase change over time. Additionally, it was found that NaNO3 
was the most suitable PCM in terms of its heat of fusion and corrosion 
resistance. 

2.5.5. PCMs in building-integrated passive heating and cooling systems 

Globally, the building sector consumes a significant amount of en-
ergy for heating and cooling applications, accounting for roughly 40% of 
total energy consumption [232]. According to the International Energy 
Agency, if no energy efficiency improvements are made in the building 
sector, energy consumption could increase by 50% by 2050 [233]. As a 
result, the concept of smart energy systems emerged to take advantage 
of the synergy between reducing energy consumption in buildings and 
increasing the efficiency of district heating and cooling networks. 

A PCM is a common strategy to improve cooling and heating systems. 
It  has  been  shown  to  significantly  reduce  energy  consumption  in  the 
building  industry,  reduce  energy  costs  by  10-20%,  reduce  harmful 
emissions by 50%, and provide operational flexibility [234]. PCMs can 
be incorporated into a variety of building materials in a variety of ways, 
such  as  direct  incorporation,  immersion,  encapsulation,  and  SS-PCMs 
[235].  The  most  straightforward  and  economic  method  is  to  directly 
impregnate PCMs into gypsum, concrete, mortars, or cement paste to 
form a mixed-type PCM in the building wall (direct incorporation). The 
immersion  method  includes  submerging  construction  elements  (e.g., 
concrete and brick blocks) in liquid PCM and allowing the PCM to be 
absorbed through capillary force. In the case of direct incorporation and 
immersion, leakage might occur. Alternatively, the PCM can be encased 

prior to being integrated into structural elements. 

As previously discussed, PCM encapsulation can be at the macro or 
micro scales, where the PCM is encapsulated before incorporation with 
construction elements. The SS-PCM process involves melting the PCM at 
a high temperature, blending it with the supporting material, and then 
cooling it to below the transition temperature till the PCM fully solid-
ifies. Support materials for shape stabilization, including high-density 
polyethylene,  butadiene,  diatomite,  expanded  perlite,  and  styrene, 
have been widely employed in building-integrated passive heating and 
cooling systems [235]. 

Wang  et  al.  [236]  performed  a  parametric  study  using  PCMs  in 
concrete walls provided with a single glass window under Shanghai’s 
summer conditions to reduce the solar energy gain. They investigated 
the  variation  of  heating  load  reduction  with  different  PCM  melting 
temperatures, thicknesses, locations, and window dimensions. The re-
sults indicated that by incorporating PCMs into walls, the heat transfer 
rate and average inner surface temperature were significantly reduced 
during working hours. Additionally, liquid fraction analysis was used to 
determine  the  effective  fraction  of  total  PCM  that  should  be  used  to 
optimize the PCM layer design. RT42 with a 20-mm-thick layer resulted 
in nearly a 34.9% net reduction of heat flux. Similarly, Zhang et al. [237] 
conducted an experimental study at Xinjiang University from 2011 to 
2014 on a radiant floor heating system based on solar PCMs. The pro-
posed system could keep room temperatures up to 5-7 degrees Celsius 
higher. 

Barzin et al. [238] performed a series of experiments on the use of a 
PCM  underfloor heating system with  PCM wallboard in  two identical 
test huts at the Tamaki campus, University of Auckland. Total energy 
and electricity cost savings over five days amounted to 18.8 and 28.7%, 
respectively. The biggest energy savings obtained over this period were 
35%,  equating  to  a  44.4%  cost  savings.  Griffiths  and  Eames  [239] 
investigated  a  chilled  ceiling  system  with  an  aqueous  suspension  of 
C) over a period of 
micro-ePCMs (with a transition temperature of 18 
four months. The micro-ePCM was easily pumped through the cooling 
and heating circuits using commercially available pumps with reduced 
flow rates, thus reducing noise from the system. Results revealed that a 
suspension with a concentration of 40% ePCMs was good enough to be 
used as the HTF in the chilled ceiling system. 

◦

Liu et al. [240] studied the optical and thermal performances of a 
PCM-based  glazing  system  under  the  effects  of  solar  irradiance,  PCM 
melting temperature, and PCM layer thickness in terms of transmittance, 
temperature difference between the upper and bottom glazing surfaces, 
and indoor temperature. They used a commercial solar simulator with a 
solar intensity level that varied from 200 to 1200 W/m2. Results showed 
that  increasing  the  thickness  of  the  PCM  layer  in  the  glazing  system 
decreased heat losses. The optimum PCM thickness for the best optical 
performance  (transmittance)  was  found  to  be  16  mm.  The  effect  of 
increasing melting temperature on thermal and optical performance was 
deemed negligible. Moreover, when the PCM was in liquid phase, the 
thermal performance and transmittance of the glazing system filled with 
PCM were 50% higher than those supplied with air. PCMs are not only 
used to heat liquids and rooms. They can also be used to cool buildings. 
For instance, PCMs can be used as a cold storage medium in the heating, 
ventilation,  and  air  conditioning  (HVAC)  system  of  a  building.  Air 
conditioning systems, free cooling systems, absorption cooling systems, 
and heat exchangers are all examples of cooling applications that can use 
PCMs [234]. 

De Falco et al. [241] investigated an air conditioning system based 
on PCM. The cold TES system tank was integrated into a conventional 
chiller fan system, consisting of RT5HC PCM and distilled water. The 
co-axial  heat  exchanger  was  immersed  in  the  PCM  volume.  Such  a 
configuration  allowed  heat  exchange  through  direct  contact  between 
the PCM and chilled water (cold charging) and was warmed by the user 
during cold TES system discharging. This configuration was validated by 
a 5-KWh prototype tested in a real environment. Results showed that the 
5-kWh  storage  tank  could  be  ultimately  charged  in  54  min  if  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103725S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

maximum  cooling  power  of  the  chiller  was  5.7  kW.  Additionally,  by 
reducing the amount of water in the system and increasing the amount 
of PCM, stored energy was increased. If the PCM volume was 75% rather 
than 60%, the stored energy would have climbed to 6.2 KWh instead of 5 
KWh.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that the  75%  PCM  volume  fraction  was 
given  considering  the  minimum  amount  of  water  head  needed  to 
maintain PCM suction in the exchange circuit. 

When the temperature of the outside air at nighttime is lower than 
the room temperature, the cooled air can flow through the PCM storage 
unit to absorb heat from the liquid PCM. Therefore, at a specific tem-
perature, the PCM begins to solidify. This process comes to an end when 
the ambient temperature approaches that of the solid PCM. Later on, the 
solid PCM starts to melt after absorbing heat from the hot indoor air. 
Cold stored in the PCM is released and circulated when the room tem-
perature  increases  beyond  comfortable  levels.  This  whole  process  is 
known as "free cooling" [242]. 

Because  there  is  a  slight  temperature  difference  between  the  cold 
source and the human comfort temperature level, using a PCM as the 
storage medium is recommended to allow for high energy density during 
phase  change.  However,  the  major  obstacle  to  this  technology  is  the 
difficulty of ensuring complete solidification of the PCM if the temper-
ature does not sufficiently drop below the phase-transition temperature. 
This problem can be overcome by improving the thermal conductivity of 
the PCM [243]. De Gracia et al. [244] experimentally investigated the 
ventilated  façades  of  two  identical  houses  under  summer  conditions, 
where one of them was integrated with macro-ePCMs in its air cavity. 
Experimental  results  showed  that  free  cooling  during  nighttime  was 
likely to effectively reduce the cooling load of the building. In addition, 
thermal resistance of the outer layer of the façade had to be increased; 
otherwise, the cold storage system could not be efficiently used. 

With varying cold and hot seasons, using a single PCM is not the ideal 
strategy  to  allow  for  the  maximum  storage  capacity  in  very  extreme 
climatic conditions. As a result, combining two or more PCM types with 
different properties to form a system capable of operating over a more 
comprehensive  temperature  range  is  an  interesting  hybrid  solution. 
Kheradmand  et  al.  [245]  investigated  such  a  solution  by  using  three 
different PCMs to prepare plastering mortars for façade walls. The three 
PCMs  were  placed  inside  the  mortar  in  equal  masses.  As  a  binder, 
Portland cement was used. Additionally, industrial sand was utilized as 
an inert filler. Then, the mortar was mixed. Thermal performance was 
analyzed  based  on  realistic  daily  temperature  profiles.  The  proposed 
prototype  showed  that  when  compared  to  conventional  mortars  (i.e., 
without  PCM)  or  even  mortars  composed  entirely  of  a  single  type  of 
PCM, incorporating multiple PCMs into plastering mortars had the po-
tential  to  significantly  reduce  the  heating/cooling  loads  required  to 
maintain a comfortable interior temperature. 

2.6. Conclusions and future research directions 

In comparison to liquid-gas and solid-solid PCMs, solid-liquid PCMs 
are most frequently used in latent TES applications (e.g., energy storage 
in CSP plants, cooling of electronics, and thermal comfort in buildings) 
due  to  their  high  thermal  storage  capacity  and  low  volume  change 
during  phase  transition.  Solid-liquid  PCMs  particularly  offer  a  great 
untapped  potential  in  solar-thermal  applications  by  virtue  of  their 
ability to store heat during exposure to solar radiation and liberate it to 
be  used  during  hours  of  little  or  no  irradiance  while  maintaining  an 
almost  constant  temperature  throughout  the  phase-change  transition. 
Yet,  the  most  critical  challenges  hindering  the  commercial  uptake  of 
solid-liquid  PCMs  are  their  poor  thermal  conductivity  (which  de-
termines the rate and quality of the charging and discharging processes) 
and leakage problems during phase transition. A number of strategies 
aimed at mitigating these issues have been developed over the years, 
each with their own set of advantages and challenges. 

Using fins as extended surfaces to enhance the heat transfer area was 
one of the first approaches used to enhance the thermal conductivity of 

PCMs. This approach is advantageous due to the low cost and ease of 
manufacture of fins, as well as the flexibility of selecting materials with 
excellent thermal conductivity. However, their potential is limited by 
weight,  corrosion,  and  leakage  issues.  Cascaded  PCM  systems  are 
another approach to accelerate the charging and discharging processes 
by  replacing  a  single  PCM  with  multiple  PCMs  with  varying  melting 
temperatures.  Selecting  PCMs  with  proper  melting  temperatures  in  a 
cascade  system  is  the  key  to  overcoming  heterogeneity  during  the 
charging and discharging processes and, therefore, the overall delay in 
melting and solidification processes. However, replacing a single PCM 
that  has  a  high  latent  heat  of  fusion  with  a  number  of  PCMs  with 
different  properties  almost  always  decreases  the  overall  storage 
capacity. 

Emulsified PCM systems exhibit dual functionality because of their 
higher  heat  capacity  than  single-phase  liquids  and  superior  fluidity 
compared to bulk PCMs. However, microemulsion droplets that spon-
taneously form with the help of surfactants and mild agitation are the 
only type that is classified as thermodynamically stable. Moreover, long- 
term stability under cyclic loading is poorly investigated. Relative to all 
alternatives, the nano-enhanced PCM technique is considered the most 
investigated strategy to enhance the poor thermal conductivity of PCMs. 
This technique has shown some improvements in thermal conductivity; 
however, issues pertaining to leakage and stability remain largely un-
resolved.  Most  recently,  both  shape-stabilized  and  encapsulated  PCM 
systems  were  found  to  effectively  boost  heat  conductivity  through 
increasing  exposed  surface  area.  These  two  strategies  are  the  most 
promising with further investigations necessary to resolve mechanical 
stability, leakage, and supercooling issues. 

In  addition  to  these  mitigation  strategies  for  the  low-thermal- 
conductivity and leakage issues, it is recommended for future research 
in PCMs to be directed towards investigating PCM flammability (espe-
cially for building-integrated applications), understanding the moving 
boundary interface mechanism, and optimizing and testing the hierar-
chically porous configuration of shape-stabilized PCM systems (which 
has been shown to offer extremely high energy storage capacities). 

3. An introduction to micro/nano-ePCMs for solar photothermal 
conversion 

3.1. Encapsulation methods of PCMs 

Encapsulation is a widely employed technique in different industries, 
such  as  pharmaceuticals,  agriculture,  cosmetics,  food,  and  fragrances 
[246,247]. This technique has recently been used for PCMs to enhance 
their  thermal  and  physical  characteristics.  Nano-  or  micro-PCMs  are 
coated with a thin shell to protect and isolate the PCM from the envi-
ronment and prevent leakage during the melting process. They can be 
fabricated using a variety of methods, depending on the characteristics 
of the PCM to be encapsulated and the type of shell. These methods are 
categorized  as  physical,  chemical,  and  physical-chemical  methods, 
which  will  be  discussed  in  the  following  sections.  Fig.  24  shows  a 
detailed classification of various PCM encapsulation methods. Further-
more,  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  different  encapsulation 
methods are summarized in Table 7. 

3.1.1. Physical methods 

Using  physical  methods,  the  fabrication  of  PCM  capsules  includes 
only  physical  procedures,  namely  dehydration,  drying,  and  adhesion. 
ePCMs  are  made  using  a  variety  of  physical  methods,  such  as  spray- 
drying,  solvent  evaporation,  air  suspension  coating,  pan  coating, 
vibrational nozzle, and centrifugal extraction. A number of important 
observations  regarding  the  suitability  of  these  methods  for  encapsu-
lating PCMs are as follows: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103726S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 24. The main physical, chemical, and physical-chemical methods for the encapsulation of PCMs.  

• In the pan coating technique, the melting temperature of the PCM 
must be greater than the melting temperature of the shell. Therefore, 
this technique cannot be employed for PCM encapsulation [156].  
• The air suspension coating method was developed for the food and 
pharmaceutical  industries,  as  well  as  cosmetic  products,  but  was 
found to be unsuitable for encapsulating PCMs [248,249]. 

• The encapsulation of PCMs using centrifugal extraction and vibra-
tional nozzle techniques has not been reported in the literature.  
• Spray-drying and solvent extraction/evaporation techniques are the 

most prevalent physical methods for encapsulating PCMs. 

PCMs to the solution to produce an O/W emulsion, 3) formation of shells 
on droplets via solvent evaporation, and 4) capsule formation via drying 
and  filtration.  A  schematic  overview  and  detailed  description  of  the 
process of encapsulating PCMs using this method are reported in [252]. 
Several researchers used the solvent evaporation method to micro-
encapsulate organic [253] and inorganic [212] PCMs. This method leads 
to capsules with a size range of 0.5(cid:0) 10 µm, encapsulation efficiency of 
56(cid:0) 64%,  and  a  core  content  of  43(cid:0) 53%.  In  contrast,  studies  on  the 
fabrication of nano-ePCMs using this method have not been reported in 
the literature. 

Spray drying method. The spray-drying technique involves an emulsion 
where the PCM (the core material) is dispersed in a concentrated liquid 
to form the shell, until the desired capsule size is achieved. The droplets 
or particles obtained by pulverized emulsion are dried upon contact with 
a  hot  medium  where  fast  evaporation  of  the  water  or  solvent  occurs 
instantly, thus allowing the PCM to be trapped within an encapsulating 
material. This method is reported to be appropriate for encapsulating 
materials with heat sensitivity. Therefore, it is commonly employed in 
the pharmaceutical and food industries [250]. As shown in Fig. 25, this 
technique  consists  of  1)  spraying  the  emulsion  in  small  particles  or 
droplets using an atomizer, 2) placing the mixture in contact with the 
heated  gas  at  a  desired  temperature  for  solvent  evaporation,  and  3) 
using cyclones and/or filters to separate the solid particles transported 
by the gas stream [157,251]. 

The spray drying method was only used for organic micro-ePCMs, 
resulting  in  microcapsules  with  a  size  range  of  0.5(cid:0) 1000  µm,  an 
encapsulation  efficiency  of  71(cid:0) 87%,  and  a  core  content  of  29(cid:0) 80% 
[225–227]. 

Solvent extraction/evaporation method. PCMs can be encapsulated using 
a  solvent  extraction  evaporation  method  (also  known  as  a  phase- 
separation  method)  via  the  following  steps:  1)  preparation  of  a  poly-
mer  solution via shell dissolution  in a  volatile solvent, 2)  addition of 

3.1.2. Chemical methods 

In  general,  chemical  methods  are  based  on  condensation  or  poly-
merization processes of oligomers, prepolymers, and monomers as raw 
substances to produce shells at the O/W interface. The most common 
chemical methods for PCM encapsulation are emulsion polymerization, 
suspension  polymerization,  interfacial  polymerization,  and  in-situ 
polymerization. An overview of these polymerization methods is more 
thoroughly described below. 

Interfacial  polymerization. In  the  interfacial  polymerization  (or  poly-
condensation)  method, as illustrated  in Fig. 26,  lipophilic and  hydro-
philic monomers (A and B) are dissolved in a mixture of two immiscible 
phases (aqueous solution and oil), and then polymerization takes place 
at the oil-water interface. The following are the general steps in inter-
facial polymerization: 1) preparing an oil-in-water emulsion that con-
tains  hydrophobic  monomer  and  core  material,  2)  polymerization 
occurs by adding a hydrophilic monomer under suitable conditions, and 
3) micro- or nano-capsules are filtered, washed, and dried [254]. 

Several studies have been carried out to fabricate micro-ePCMs using 
the interfacial polymerization method [159,163,255–261,247,249–251, 
253,254]. It is revealed that this method is used for both organic and 
inorganic PCMs and results in microcapsules with a size range of 2-30 
µm,  encapsulation  efficiency  of  82-90.7%,  and  a  core  content  of 
46-74%.  On  the  other  hand,  limited  studies  have  reported  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103727S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Table 7 
Advantages and disadvantages of different encapsulation methods.  

Method 

Advantages 

Disadvantage(s) 

Physical 

Spray drying  

methods 

• Versatile.  
• Large-scale 
production.  
• Easily controlled 
and scaled-up.  

• Low cost.  

Solvent 
evaporation  
Interfacial 
polymerization  

• Low-cost process.  
• Easy to scale-up.  
• Versatile.  
• Controllable to 

Chemical 

methods 

• High temperature 

range.  

• Low encapsulation 

efficiency.  
• Presence of 

uncoated particles.  

• Agglomeration of 

particles.  
• Limitation in 

achieving a very 
small particle size. 

• Lab-scale 

production. 

• High wall 

permeability.  

• Difficulty in 
control. 

• Uniform size in 

only oiled systems.  

• Limited for liquid 

PCMs.  

• Multiphases of 

solution. 

produce 
homogeneous 
morphology.  
• Degradability.  
• Mechanical 
resistance.  
• Protective 

atmosphere is not 
required.  
• Low cost.  
• Uniform coating.  
• Low cost.  
• Fast production.  

Emulsion 
polymerization  

In-situ 
polymerization  

Suspension 
polymerization  

Physical- 

Chemical 
methods 

Coacervation 
method  

Sol-gel method  

• Nano/micro-scale 

• High cost and skill. 

production.  

• Uniform 

morphology and 
coating.  

• Good chemical 
and thermal 
stability.  
• Controllable.  
• Low cost.  
• Heat can be 

controlled during 
reaction.  
• Uniform 

morphology.  
• Low temperature 

range.  

• Efficient control of 
particle size.  
• Shell with high 

thermal 
conductivity.  

• High-cost 

equipment.  

• Not all monomers 
are water soluble. 

• Agglomeration of 

particles.  
• Difficulty in 
control.  

• Limited to scale up. 

• Used only for 

inorganic shell.  

nanoencapsulation of PCMs using this method. Shi et al. [262] produced 
nano-ePCMs with PMMA as a shell and paraffin as a PCM. The obtained 
ePCMs were spherical with a mean diameter of 200(cid:0) 400 nm and a core 
content of 52.95%. Nikpourian et al. [263] prepared nano-ePCMs with 
paraffin  wax  as  the  PCM  and  polyurethane  (PUR)  as  the  shell.  The 
produced nano-ePCMs had a spherical shape with a mean diameter of 
25(cid:0) 185 nm and a core content of almost 80%. 

Emulsion/ Mini-emulsion polymerization. The method of emulsion poly-
merization, as shown in Fig. 27, includes the formation of droplets or 
particles through the emulsion of a lipophilic substance in another hy-
drophilic substance, which is known as direct emulsion. On the other 
hand,  the  formation  of  an  emulsion  of  a  hydrophilic  substance  in  a 
lipophilic substance is called an indirect or inverse emulsion. In both 
direct and indirect emulsions, the addition of a surfactant or an emul-
sifier  which  modifies  the  interfacial  activity  is  required  to  make  the 
system  stable  [11].  The  encapsulated  PCM  is  dissolved  in  another 

Fig. 25. A schematic illustration of the spray drying method (physical method) 
for encapsulating PCMs. 

substance,  and  a  monomer  or  polymer  is  added  to  form  the  shell. 
Polymerization occurs via three possible ways after the system has been 
emulsified [247]: 1) propagation of monomers by adding a free radical 
into  the  emulsifier  micelle,  2)  as  the  chain  length  of  the  free  radical 
exceeds the solubility limit of the medium, it precipitates and forms a 
particle  nucleus,  or  3)  propagation  can  ensue  after  adding  monomer 
droplets containing the PCM, which is produced by proliferation of free 
radicals in the medium. The method of miniemulsion polymerization is 
similar  to  that  of  emulsion  polymerization,  with  the  exception  that 
smaller droplets can be produced due to the effect of high shear forces. 
The  emulsion  polymerization  technique  is  widely  employed  for 
producing PCM microcapsules [159, 243–251,264,265]. The published 
data indicated that this method is used for both organic and inorganic 
PCMs  and  results  in  microcapsules  with  a  size  range  of  0.14-2  µm, 
encapsulation  efficiency  of  83%,  and  a  core  content  of  28-81%.  The 
fabrication of nano-ePCMs is also possible mostly via the mini-emulsion 
polymerization  method.  For  example,  Baek  et  al.  [266]  fabricated 
nano-ePCMs with octadecane as the PCM and PS as the shell. Fang et al. 
[267] prepared nano-ePCMs for a cold TES system using PS as the shell 
and n-tetradecane as the core material. Their results indicated that all 
the nano-ePCMs were coated and  had a spherical  morphology with a 
mean diameter of 132 nm. In another study [268], the PCM was replaced 
by  n-octadecane  instead  of  n-tetradecane.  The  nano-ePCMs  showed  a 
spherical  shape  with  mean  diameter  ranging  from  100  to  123  nm. 
Fuensanta et al. [269] produced nano-ePCMs by using paraffin as the 
core  and  styrene  butyl  acrylate  copolymer  as  the  shell.  The  capsules 
showed a spherical shape with an encapsulation efficiency of 80 wt% 
and a particle size range of 52(cid:0) 112 nm. Wang et al. [270] successfully 
nano-encapsulated EASA with PMMA. The morphology characteristics 
indicated that the size of the nano-ePCMs was 46 nm while the encap-
sulation ratio was 68.8%. Graham et al. [271] synthesized nano-ePCMs 
with  poly(ethyl-2-cyanoacrylate)  (PECA)  as  the  shell  and  Mg 
(NO3)2⋅6H2O as the PCM. The nano-ePCMs possessed a spherical shape 
with a mean diameter of 100-200 nm. 

In-situ polymerization. In this method, the ePCMs are formed in the same 
way as in the direct emulsion technique, where the formation of capsules 
is  generated  in  micelles  formed  in  a  system  of  two  immiscible  sub-
stances. The fundamental difference is that the shell is formed with the 
addition of a pre-polymer, where the polymerization occurs only in the 
continuous phase. To accomplish this, no reactants are used in the core 
substance. The following steps outline the process: 1) a PCM emulsion is 
formed in water, 2) PCMs are encapsulated by adding pre-polymers to 
the agitated emulsion, and 3) the PCM capsules are washed and dried. 
One of the limitations associated with this process for inorganic PCMs is 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103728S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 26. A schematic illustration of the interfacial polymerization method (chemical method) for encapsulating PCMs.  

Fig. 27. A schematic illustration of the emulsion/miniemuslion polymerization method (chemical method) for encapsulating PCMs.  

that other reactive components and monomers must be water-soluble, 
particularly for salt-based PCMs [272]. Fig. 28 depicts the in-situ poly-
merization technique used for PCM encapsulation. 

The in-situ polymerization method has attracted the interest of many 
researchers [249,164]. The produced capsules had a size of 0.1(cid:0) 0.5 µm, 
encapsulation efficiency of 80(cid:0) 82.2%, and a core content of 8(cid:0) 60%. 
Similarly,  several  studies  have  been  performed  on  the  fabrication  of 
nano-ePCMs using this method. For example, Hu et al. [273,274] syn-
thesized  nano-ePCMs  by  using  carboxymethyl  cellulose-melamine 
formaldehyde  as  a  shell  and  paraffin  as  the  core.  The  obtained  cap-
sules  were  spherical  with  a  50-nm  mean  diameter.  Fang  et  al.  [268] 
produced  nano-ePCMs  using  n-tetradecane  as 
the  PCM  and 
urea-formaldehyde  (UF)  as  the  shell.  They  observed  that  the 
nano-ePCMs had a diameter of 100 nm with a mass content of 60%. Niu 
et 
n-octadecane  with 
melamine-formaldehyde  (MF).  Karthikeyan  et  al.  [276]  prepared 
nano-ePCMs  using  UF  as  a  shell  and  PEG  as  a  PCM.  The  obtained 
nano-ePCMs  showed  a  spherical  morphology  with  a  141-nm  mean 
diameter. 

[275]  micro/nano-encapsulated 

al. 

mechanical stirring and surfactants. The second step involves initiation 
of  polymerization  at  the  desired  thermal  condition  until  completion 
[277]. The size of the obtained capsules is affected by the concentration 
of surfactants and the monomer phase, stirring rate, and viscosity of the 
droplets and suspension medium [278,279]. The suspension polymeri-
zation method is illustrated in Fig. 29. 

Various researchers have prepared micro-ePCMs using the suspen-
sion polymerization method [280,271]. The reported data revealed that 
this method is only used for organic PCMs and leads to microcapsules 
with  a  size  range  of  0.72(cid:0) 237  µm,  an  encapsulation  efficiency  of 
78(cid:0) 100%,  and  a  core  content  of  20(cid:0) 75.3%.  In  contrast,  no  research 
studies have been reported on the preparation of nano-ePCMs using the 
suspension polymerization method. 

3.1.3. Physical-Chemical methods 

The physical-chemical  technique is  a  mixture  of  the  chemical and 
physical  methods  that  have  been  described  earlier.  The  most  widely 
utilized and representative physical-chemical methods for microencap-
sulation are the coacervation (or phase separation) and sol-gel methods, 
as described below. 

Suspension  polymerization. The fabrication of ePCMs using the suspen-
sion polymerization method usually follows two main steps. The first is 
the preparation of a suspension containing monomers, PCMs, and ini-
tiators  as  droplets  in  an  aqueous  continuous  liquid  phase  using 

Coacervation method. The coacervation process can be divided into two 
variants—complex and simple coacervation. The microcapsule produc-
tion technique is the same in both cases [281], with the difference lying 

Fig. 28. A schematic illustration of the in-situ polymerization method (chemical method) for encapsulating PCMs.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103729S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 29. A schematic illustration of the suspension polymerization method (chemical method) for encapsulating PCMs.  

in the way the phase separation is accomplished. Complex coacervation 
takes place through the interaction of two polymers that are oppositely 
charged  [282],  while  in  simple  coacervation,  a  coacervating  (or  des-
olvating) agent is introduced for phase separation. The interaction be-
tween  a  low  molecular  material  and  a  dissolved  polymer  results  in  a 
simple  coacervation  process.  Complex  coacervation  produces  micro-
capsules with higher stability and more homogeneous morphologies and 
sizes.  In  this  method  [283],  there  are  three  different  steps:  1)  the 
emulsion is prepared through the addition of PCM to an aqueous poly-
mer solution, 2) the shell material is then deposited onto the PCM by 
introducing another aqueous polymer solution, followed by the addition 
of  salt,  modifying  the  temperature,  adjusting  the  pH,  or  diluting  the 
medium, and 3) the microcapsules are then stabilized using desolvation, 
crosslinking,  or  thermal  treatment.  An  overview  of  the  coacervation 
method is illustrated in Fig. 30. 

A number of studies have been performed on the microencapsulation 
of PCMs using the coacervation method [284,158]. This method is used 
only for inorganic PCMs and results in a capsules size of 2(cid:0) 1200 µm, an 
encapsulation efficiency of 80(cid:0) 95%, and a core content of 26(cid:0) 67%. In 
contrast, no studies have been performed on the nano-encapsulation of 
PCMs based on this method. 

Sol-gel method. The term “sol-gel” corresponds to the abbreviation "so-
lution-gel".  The  "sol"  is  a  colloidal  suspension  of  oligomers  with  a 
diameter  of  only  a  few  nanometers.  Subsequently,  this  "sol"  can  be 
evolved, through chemical reactions, into a network with infinite vis-
cosity, called a “gel”. This network is linked by covalent and hydrogen 
bonds  and  van  der  Waals  forces  [285].  The  sol-gel  method  is  an 
economical technique for synthesizing PCM capsules. The following are 
the main steps in the preparation of ePCMs using this method: 1) the 
reactive substances (including precursor, solvent, PCMs, and emulsifier) 
are suspended in a continuous solution to obtain a colloidal suspensions 
via a hydrolysis mechanism, 2) a three-dimensional oxide network (gel) 
is formed via condensation polymerization, and 3) sintering, curing, and 
drying processes are used to create the ePCMs [285]. The sol-gel process 
is depicted in Fig. 31. 

Many  studies  have  been  reported  on  the  micro-encapsulation  of 
PCMS  using  this  method  [161,286–290,306–310].  The  reported  data 
has shown that this method is used for both organic and inorganic PCMs 
and  led  to  capsule  sizes  of  2(cid:0) 30  µm,  an  encapsulation  efficiency  of 
82(cid:0) 90.7%, and a core content of 46(cid:0) 74%. However, very few studies 
have  been  conducted  at  the  nanoscale.  Latibari  et  al.  [291]  prepared 

nano-ePCMs containing silica as a shell and PA as a PCM. The obtained 
capsules were spherical with sizes of 722.5, 466.4, and 183.7 nm at the 
pH values of 12, 11.5, and 11, respectively. The encapsulation ratio and 
efficiency  at  a  pH  of  11  were  83.25%  and  82.53%,  respectively.  In 
another study, Latibari et al. [292] synthesized nano-ePCMs with titania 
as a shell material and SA as the PCM. Their results revealed that the 
nano-capsules had spherical profiles with mean diameters in the range 
of 317.6 to 946.4 nm and an encapsulation ratio in the range of 30.36 to 
64.76%. Yuan et al. [293] prepared nano-ePCMs with silica as a shell 
and SA as the PCM. The nano-ePCMs were found to be well dispersed 
and  spherical,  with  a  mean  diameter  of  approximately  350  nm. 
Recently, Lee and Jo [294] nano-encapsulated a PCM mixture of 40 wt% 
KNO3  and  60  wt%  NaNO3  by  silica  shells.  It  was  found  that  the 
nano-ePCM diameter was almost 420 nm. 

3.2. Compositional, morphological, and structural characterization 
techniques of ePCMs 

Various techniques have been used to identify the morphology, size, 
core@shell structure, stability, and thermophysical properties of ePCMs. 
The most widely used characterization techniques can be classified into: 
1) microscopy techniques (SEM, TEM, and AFM), 2) X-ray techniques 
(XRD,  EDX,  XPS,  SAXS,  and  WAXS,  3)  non-X-ray  spectroscopic  tech-
niques  (FTIR,  Raman  spectroscopy,  and  UV-Vis-NIR),  and  4)  thermal 
techniques  (DSC  and  TGA).  In  the  following  sections,  a  detailed 
description of each characterization technique is provided. Moreover, 
some of the results obtained by using these techniques are presented. 
Fig. 32 shows a detailed classification of various ePCM characterization 
techniques. 

3.2.1. Electron microscopy techniques 

Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM). Scanning  electron  microscopy 
(SEM) is based on the scanning of a high-energy electron beam (e.g., 20 
keV) over the surface of the material. Three signals are produced when 
the  electron  beam  is  focused  on  the  surface  of  the  sample;  namely, 
backscattered  electrons  (electrons  that  are  reflected  by  the  sample), 
secondary electrons (electrons that are emitted from the sample), and X- 
rays.  Details  on  the  morphology  and  elemental  composition  of  the 
sample are revealed from these signals [295]. The produced image has a 
resolution of almost 5 nm and a high magnification of 100,000. SEM is 
used  to  visualize  and  characterize  particle  size  distribution,  surface 

Fig. 30. A schematic illustration of the coacervation method (physical-chemical method) for encapsulating PCMs.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103730S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 31. A schematic illustration of the sol-gel method (physical-chemical method) for encapsulating PCMs.  

as PCM  and SiO2/BN as a shell. It was observed that all nano-ePCMs 
possessed  a  core@shell  structure,  indicating  that  the  PCM  was  well 
encapsulated  by  the  shell.  The  shell  thickness,  diameter,  and 
core-to-shell ratio of nano-ePCMs were also measured using TEM. 

Atomic  force  microscopy  (AFM). Atomic  force  microscopy  (AFM)  is  a 
surface analysis technique employed for analyzing nanomaterials. AFM 
measures various forces (including magnetic forces), adhesion strength, 
and  mechanical  properties.  It  provides  information  on  the  physical 
properties of the sample, including morphology, size, surface roughness, 
and texture. Statistical information, including area, particle distribution, 
and size, can also be determined. A wide variety of particle sizes can be 
characterized (1 nm-8 µm) using AFM. Different surface measurements 
are provided with 3D topography so that it is possible to measure the 
nano/microparticle height. Furthermore, AFM is simple to operate and 
very cost-effective. However, there are some limitations, such as sample 
breakage  during  detection  and  limited  magnification  [298].  For 
example, Huang et al. [299] measured the roughness of ePCMs made of 
MF as the shell and n-octadecane as the core using AFM. The measured 
root-mean-square roughness and the average roughness were 21.09 and 
17.12 nm, respectively. 

3.2.2. X-ray techniques 

X-ray diffraction (XRD). X-ray diffraction (XRD) is used to measure the 
average spacing between layers or rows of atoms, find the crystalline 
structure, measure the size, determine the orientation of a single crystal, 
and evaluate whether the material is crystalline or amorphous [300]. 
XRD is similar to the diffraction of neutrons or electrons. However, the 
only difference is in the mechanism of scattering. In addition to some 
size limitations (measuring small crystalline structures is inaccurate), a 
disadvantage of this technique is that the sample must be homogeneous, 
single-phased, and very small. Lin et al. [301] reported the XRD analysis 
of micro-ePCMs with MA as the PCM and ethyl cellulose as the shell. It 
was demonstrated that the shell possessed a good crystalline structure 
and that the PCM maintained a complete and stable crystal state. Wang 
et  al.  [302]  analyzed  the  structure  of  nano-encapsulated  palmic  acid 
with silica using XRD analysis. The XRD patterns of silica powder indi-
cated  that  the  silica  was  amorphous,  while  the  XRD  patterns  of  the 
nano-ePCMs revealed the coexistence of amorphous silica and crystal-
lized PCM in the nano-capsules. 

Energy-dispersive  X-ray  spectroscopy  (EDX). Energy  dispersive  X-ray 
spectroscopy  (EDX,  EDS,  EDXS  or  XEDS),  also  known  as  energy- 
dispersive  X-ray  microanalysis  (EDXMA)  or  energy-dispersive  X-ray 
analysis (EDXA), is an analytical technique which uses X-rays generated 
by the solid sample during electron beam bombardment to quantify and 
identify  the  chemical  composition  of  the  sample  at  the  micro  or 

Fig.  32. Compositional,  morphological,  and  structural  characterization  tech-
niques for encapsulated PCMs. 

morphology, agglomeration of particles, particle shape, single-particle 
analysis, and surface functionalization. The main drawback of SEM is 
that the process takes place under a high vacuum. Consequently, wet 
samples cannot be analyzed or characterized via SEM. Several studies 
have been reported on the morphology, crystallography, and chemical 
composition of different types of ePCMs using the SEM technique. For 
example, recently, Zhu et al. [296] presented SEM images of SnBi58/-
TiO2 micro-ePCMs, where it was shown that the capsules had a spherical 
shape with a size of 30 ± 15 μm without surface defects. 

Transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM). Transmission  electron  micro-
scopy (TEM) is the most widely used technique for characterization of 
ePCMs.  TEM  uses  a  beam  of  electrons  (100(cid:0) 1000  keV),  which  is 
described by the wave-particle duality concept. A TEM device consists of 
an electromagnetic lens, an electron emission source, and an electron 
detector. The electron beam is produced, accelerated, and then focused 
by the lenses on the sample. The beam alters and imprints the image of 
the sample as it travels through it. The image is then magnified by lenses 
and  detected  [295]. TEM  allows  magnification  and  chemical  identifi-
cation of very thin samples down to atomic dimensions. The limitations 
of the TEM technique are that it is very time-consuming, expensive, and 
requires a high level of skill. Various research studies have been con-
ducted on analyzing the microstructure of ePCMs using TEM. Lan et al. 
[297] showed the TEM results of nano-ePCMs containing n-octadecane 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103731S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

nanoscale [303]. EDX systems are usually used in conjunction with an 
electron microscope, such as an SEM or TEM. The main disadvantages of 
this method are: 1)  it can be destructive in many cases, 2) peaks are 
obtained with poor energy resolution, 3) surface senility, and 4) quan-
titative examination of heterogeneous materials often yields inaccurate 
results. Chai et al. [290] used an EDX spectrometer coupled with SEM to 
determine  the  chemical  composition  of  micro-ePCMs  containing 
n-eicosane as the core and titania as the shell. The EDX pattern revealed 
the existence of two peaks corresponding to O and Ti elements, which 
indicates the formation of a titania shell. Moreover, the calculated mole 
ratio of O/Ti indicated an O2(cid:0) TiO2  shell with a higher number of hy-
droxyl groups. Karthikeyan et al. [276] performed an elemental analysis 
of nano-ePCMs made of PEG as the PCM and urea UF as the shell. EDX 
results  demonstrated  that  the  PCM  consisted  of  C  and  O  atoms.  The 
encapsulation of the PCM with UF was confirmed by the presence of N 
atoms. The chemical composition of the PCM was 55 wt% C, 38 wt% O, 
and 55 wt% C, while that of the nano-ePCM was 27 wt% O, 38 wt% C, 
and 35 wt% N. 

X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  (XPS). X-ray  photoelectron  spectros-
copy (XPS), also known as electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis 
(ESCA),  is  a  technique  for  determining  the  elemental  composition  of 
mesoporous samples based on the electronic state of the elements pre-
sent in a powder sample. During the measurement, high-energy X-rays 
impinge on the sample, causing the generation of photoelectrons via the 
ejection of core electrons from the sample. Then, the kinetic energy of 
the photoelectrons is collected and measured by the spectrometer so that 
the binding energy can be calculated. From the binding energy, we can 
evaluate the oxidation state of elements and which element the electron 
came  from  [304].  The  main  drawbacks  of  this  method  are  the  size 
limitation and the high vacuum environment. XPS spectra of n-eicosa-
ne@TiO2  micro-ePCMs  were  presented  by  Chai  et  al.  [290].  They 
observed two signals corresponding to Ti2p3/2 and Ti2p1/2 at 458.7 and 
464.5 eV, respectively, indicating the presence of Ti in a trivalent state. 
Moreover,  the  absorption  characteristics  revealed  the  presence  of  the 
shell  in  the  micro-ePCM.  The  obtained  results  of  the  XPS  analysis 
showed that the core-shell structure was successfully produced. 

Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) 
is an analytical technique for measuring the scattered X-ray intensities 

with  respect  to  the  incident  beam  direction.  Measurements  are  per-
formed at very small angles between 0.1 and 5 degrees. SAXS is a pri-
mary  structural  characterization  technique  of  nanocomposites  and 
nanomaterials. The sample can be solid, powder, gel, or liquid, and it 
can be amorphous, crystalline, or semi-crystalline. From evaluation of 
the  measured  diffusion  profiles,  information  about  the  structure  and 
properties of the material can be obtained, such as the particle shape, 
size, and distribution, aggregation behavior, and liquid crystal phases. 
One  of  the  main  limitations  of  this  method  is  the  high  cost  and 
complexity of instrumentation [305]. It should be noted that very few 
studies have examined ePCMs using SAXS. In one such study, Li et al. 
[306]  used  SAXS  measurements  to  confirm  the  absence  of  leakage 
during heating/cooling cycles. 

Wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAX). Wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) 
and SAXS are complementary techniques. WAXS has an atomic resolu-
tion of 1-0.1 nm, while SAXS has a nanoscale resolution of 1-100 nm. As 
a  result,  SAXS  is  often  employed  to  investigate  the  larger  scale  bulk 
microstructure inside a sample, whereas WAXS is more akin to XRD and 
can  observe  atomic  features  [305].  SAXS  and  WAXS  can  be  done 
concurrently and easily interchanged. This simply involves moving the 
sample and detector farther apart or closer to each other, as illustrated in 
Fig. 33. It should be mentioned that studies on the characterization of 
ePCMs using this technique are rarely reported. For example, He et al. 
[307] confirmed the crystallinity of micro-ePCMs containing n-octade-
cane as core and silica as shell. They indicated that the silica wall was 
amorphous using a WAXS analysis. 

3.2.3. Non-X-ray spectroscopic techniques 

Fourier-transformed  infrared  spectroscopy  (FTIR). Fourier-transformed 
infrared  spectroscopy  (FTIR)  is  used  to  identify  inorganic  or  organic 
samples. It measures the IR absorption of the sample as a function of 
wavelength.  The absorption  bands  in  the  IR  spectra  describe  the  mo-
lecular structures and components of the sample. When IR radiation is 
absorbed by the sample, molecules are excited into a higher vibrational 
state. The energy difference between the excited and at-rest vibrational 
states is a function of the wavelength of the absorbed IR. The absorbed 
wavelengths are characteristic of the molecular structure [308]. FTIR 
spectra  are  generally  presented  as  plots  of  the  percentage  of  light 

Fig. 33. Schematic illustration of WAXS and SAXS techniques. Both techniques can be performed simultaneously or interchangeably by adjusting the sample-to- 
detector distance. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103732S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

absorbance  or  transmittance  at  each  wavenumber.  One  of  the  main 
limitations of this method is that it can only be used for samples that 
completely  absorb  IR.  Zhang  et  al.  [309]  investigated  the  chemical 
stability and composition of nano-ePCMs using FTIR, where the core and 
shell were respectively confirmed to be composed of n-octadecane and 
pentafluorostyrene. 

3.2.3.44. Raman spectroscopy. Similar to FTIR, Raman spectroscopy is a 
molecular spectroscopy technique that relies on the interaction of light 
with  matter  to  determine  the  composition  and  characteristics  of  the 
sample under study. While IR spectroscopy is based on the absorption of 
light, the information obtained by Raman spectroscopy results from the 
process of light scattering. Raman spectroscopy provides information on 
intramolecular  and  intermolecular  vibrations.  FTIR  and  Raman  spec-
troscopies  define  the  characteristic  spectrum  of  the  vibrations  of  a 
molecule  (chemical  fingerprint)  to  identify  a  substance.  However, 
Raman  spectroscopy  provides  additional  information  on  lower  fre-
quency modes and on the vibration characteristics of crystal lattices and 
molecular  structures.  The  main  drawbacks  of  this  method  are:  1)  it 
cannot  be  employed  for  alloys  or  metals  and  2)  the  material  can  be 
destroyed if it is heated by intense laser radiation [310]. It should be 
emphasized  that  studies  on  the  characterization  of  ePCMs  using  this 
technique  are  rarely  reported.  Yuan  et  al.  [311]  employed  Raman 
spectroscopy to identify the grapheme oxide (GO) on the silica shell of 
micro-ePCMs containing paraffin as PCM and silica/GO as the shell. The 
Raman spectrum of paraffin@silica/GO micro-ePCMs showed two peaks 
of  graphene,  while  no  peaks  were  observed  for  paraffin@silica,  indi-
cating  that  the  grapheme  was  successfully  impregnated  in  the  silica 
shell. 

Ultra-violet-visible- near infrared spectroscopy (UV(cid:0) Vis(cid:0) NIR). Ultra-vio-
let–visible–near  infrared (UV–Vis–NIR) spectroscopy examines a  wide 
range of wavelengths. The wavelengths measured in the UV–Vis region 
range from around 200 to 800 nm. When a molecule absorbs visible or 
UV radiation, it causes transitions between its electronic energy levels. 
This  technique  is  suitable  for  determining  the  electrical  and  optical 
properties of a wide range of materials, including powders, films, liq-
uids, and solids. Wavelengths of 800-2500 nm are used in the NIR region 
of the spectrum. The measured transitions in this region are related to 
electronic transitions as well as vibrational motions. This technique can 
only be used for samples of high absorbance. Huang et al. [312] used 
UV–Vis–NIR  spectroscopy  to  determine  the  optical  properties  of 
micro-ePCMs,  fabricated  with  n-eicosane  as  a  core  and  two  different 
shells (PMMA and PMMA/BPs). It was shown that micro-ePCMs with 
and without modified BPs exhibited high and low light absorption ca-
pacities, respectively. 

3.2.4. Thermal techniques 

Differential  scanning  calorimeter  (DSC). DSC  is  a  thermo-analytical 
technique that measures the heat flow to or from a material as a func-
tion of time while the material is subjected to controlled temperature. It 
is a very effective method to examine such material properties such as 
melting,  glass  transition  temperature,  specific  heat  capacity,  purity, 
thermal  stability,  variations  in  material  oxidation,  crystallinity,  and 
composition.  DSC  analysis  is  used  to  evaluate  a  variety  of  materials, 
including organic materials, polymers, composites, plastics, metals, and 
coatings.  The  main  limitations  of  this  technique  are  as  follows:  1) 
quantitative  analysis  of  individual  processes  is  impossible,  2)  result 
interpretation  is  frequently  difficult,  3)  it  is  sensitive  to  any  sample 
changes,  and  4)  optimizing  both  resolution  and  sensitivity  during 
measurement is not possible [313]. Methaapanon et al. [314] used DSC 
analysis to study the latent heat of fusion, crystallization, and melting 
point of microencapsulated methyl palmitate and n-octadecane with a 
silica shell. They found that the melting temperature of the micro-ePCMs 

was slightly higher than that of the PCM. 

Thermogravimetric  analysis  (TGA). Thermogravimetric  analysis  (TGA), 
or  simply  thermogravimetry,  is  another  type  of  thermal  analysis 
commonly employed to evaluate change in the chemical and physical 
properties of ePCMs. TGA measurements are conducted as a function of 
time by considering both temperature and mass loss constant, or as a 
function of temperature at a fixed heating rate. Through TGA analysis, 
chemical (such as dehydration or decomposition) and physical (such as 
vaporization,  phase  transition,  or  desorption)  phenomena  can  be 
examined. Moreover, the thermal stability of PCMs can be measured. 
The  limitations  of  this  method  are  that  1)  it  is  only  relevant  to  solid 
particles and 2) temperature measurements are not very accurate. Ma 
et  al.  [315]  used  TGA  to  show  that  micro-encapsulated  paraffin  and 
butyl stearate with PUR/PU degraded in three different steps at a rela-
tively low temperatures, indicating that these micro-ePCMs possessed 
high thermal stability. 

3.3. Stability of ePCM slurries/dispersions 

Slurries  and  dispersions  of  ePCMs,  also  called  latent  functionally 
thermal  fluids  (LFTFs),  are  generally  prepared  by  suspending  ePCM 
particles  of  different  sizes,  shapes,  and  core@shell  types  in  a  carrier 
fluid. It is important to note that the terms "dispersion" and "slurry" both 
refer to the two-phase solid-liquid system formed by suspending solid 
particles in the carrying fluid. However, in the case of a dispersion, the 
particles are so small that they do not settle in the absence of flow, which 
is attributed to their Brownian motion (e.g., many nano-ePCMs). On the 
other  hand,  in  a  slurry,  the  particle  size  is  typically  larger,  such  that 
particles  will  sediment  and  settle  in  the  absence  of  flow  (e.g.,  most 
micro-ePCMs). Suspension is a more general term that can incorporate 
both nano- and micro-ePCMs. 

Slurries and dispersions offer the following benefits: 1) storing and 
releasing large amounts of thermal energy with minimal  temperature 
changes, 2) having a large heat capacity during the phase-change pro-
cess, 3) having higher heat transfer rates at constant temperatures, and 
4) having good stability under higher shear forces and during heating/ 
cooling  cycles.  In  the  following,  we  will  present  the  most  important 
requirements  for  ePCMs  to  reach  the  state  of  thermal,  chemical,  and 
physical stability. Also, the adopted stabilization strategies and stability 
evaluation techniques related to ePCM slurries/dispersions are reported. 

3.3.1. Stability requirements for an ePCM 

The main challenge of ePCMs is their stability while being used in 
their intended application. Therefore, enhancing the stability of ePCMs 
and  understanding  their  physical,  chemical,  and  thermal  behavior  is 
highly desired before commercialization and long-term use. The most 
common techniques for measuring the stability of ePCMs are AFM, TGA, 
DSC, SEM, and FTIR. This section therefore reviews the research studies 
devoted to the stability of ePCMs. 

Physical stability. The physical (or mechanical) stability of ePCMs is an 
important  factor  that  determines  their  failure  or  success  in  practical 
deployments.  ePCMs  should  be  strong  enough  to  resist  shear  stress 
during fluid flow; otherwise, they may undergo serious damage. Despite 
this  fact,  limited  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  measurement  of  the 
mechanical  stability  of  ePCMs.  Su  et  al.  [316]  investigated  the  me-
chanical  properties  of  MF  encapsulating  n-dodecanol  by  observing 
change in the ePCM morphology after pressure application. As show in 
Fig.  34,  the  micro-ePCMs  were  compressed  between  two  horizontal 
plates made of glass. It was found that when the core-to-shell ratio was 
3:1,  there  existed  an  optimum  yield  point  beyond  which  the 
micro-ePCMs  exhibited  plastic behavior. This  result was  attributed  to 
the shell material reaction and cross-link density. As a result, the me-
chanical behavior of micro-ePCMs was affected by the yield point value. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103733S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

material had no effect on the force required to break the micro-ePCMs. 
Moreover, the effective Young’s modulus for the core-to-shell mass ratio 
of  1:3  was  greater  than  that  of  1:1.  Therefore,  micro-ePCMs  with  PS 
possessed  a  higher  stiffness.  In  a  number  of  other  studies,  different 
micro-ePCMs were fabricated with different shell materials, involving 
UF and MF with various PCMs [304–306]. The results indicated that for 
a given shell thickness and micro-ePCM size, micro-ePCMs with a MF 
shell were stronger compared to ePCMs with UF shells. However, they 
both ruptured with a larger deformation. The authors concluded that the 
deformability  and  strength  of  micro-ePCMs  were  dependent  on  their 
synthesis process and formulation. Hu et al. [320] found that the size of 
micro-ePCMs had a considerable impact on the mechanical strength of 
large 
microencapsulated  dicyclopentadiene  with  MF,  and  that 
micro-ePCMs are weaker. It was concluded that the mechanical strength 
can  be  controlled  through  change  in  the  reaction  time  for  producing 
micro-ePCMs with various shell thicknesses. 

Yin et al. [321] produced micro-ePCMs with dodecanol as the PCM 
and  polymer/silica  as  a  hybrid  shell.  Their  results  showed  that  the 
addition  of  silica  in  the  shell  or  divinylbenzene  (DVB)  to  the  PCM 
increased the mechanical strength of the shell. However, the addition of 
high DVB content led to breakage of micro-ePCMs. Fig. 36 (a) and (b) 
depict  a  typical  core@shell  structure  and  a  broken  micro-ePCM, 
respectively.  Qiu  et  al.  [322]  fabricated  micro-ePCMs  containing 
n-octadecane as a PCM and PETRA-modified poly(lauryl methacrylate) 
as a shell. It was found that the modified shell increased the mechanical 
strength  of  the  micro-ePCMs.  However,  ePCMs  with  a  higher  PETRA 
mass  fractions  showed  lower  capsule  strength.  According  to  some 
research studies [323,310], the mechanical strength of the shell material 
is closely related to the PCM content of the polymer shell. 

3.3.1.49. Chemical stability. Chemical stability can be described as the 
ability of the ePCMs to resist any change due to chemical reactions be-
tween the ePCM and its surrounding environment or between the core 
and shell after prolonged periods of time and/or under several repeated 
heating/cooling cycles. The chemical stability of ePCMs can be affected 
by  several  factors,  including  pH  value,  use  of  surfactants,  synthesis 
process,  and  core-to-shell  ratio.  The  most  common  techniques  for 
measuring chemical stability of ePCMs are FTIR and SEM. 

Anti-osmosis is a very effective technique to determine the release 
rate  of  micro-ePCMs,  and  thus,  their  chemical  stability.  Zhang  et  al. 
[163] performed anti-osmosis measurements using a spectrophotometer 
to evaluate the durability of micro-ePCMs (i.e., the ability of the shell 
material to protect the PCM from leakage) produced with n-octadecane 
as  the  PCM  and  PU  as  the  shell.  The  micro-ePCMs  were  synthesized 
using different aliphatic amines. The results showed that micro-ePCMs 
obtained from the reaction of tolylene 2,4-diisocyanate with ethylene 
diamine had the highest release rate, which resulted in leakage of the 
PCM,  and  hence,  poor  durability.  On  the  other  hand,  micro-ePCMs 
synthesized  with  Jeffamine  demonstrated  the  best  anti-osmosis  prop-
erty. Moreover, it was found that the core-to-shell ratio had a substantial 
effect  on  the  release  rate  as  micro-ePCMs  with  a  lower  core  weight 
content showed a lower release rate. A similar study was conducted by 
Zhang et al. [161] where the micro-ePCMs were obtained at the different 
pH values of 2.26, 2.45, and 2.89 while the shell was made of silica. The 
findings showed that the fastest release rate was obtained at a pH value 
of  2.89,  indicating  that  the  release  rate  was  influenced  by  the  shell 
thickness,  and  that  micro-ePCMs  with  compact  and  thick  shells  can 
exhibit good anti-osmosis properties. Su et al. [324] also performed an 
anti-osmosis test of micro-ePCMs with n-octadecane as the PCM, PUR as 
the  shell,  and  different  weight  contents  of  styrene-maleic  anhydride 
(SMA) as a surfactant. It was shown that the SMA content significantly 
affected the release properties of the micro-ePCMs, as shown in Fig. 37. 
Another  method  to  assess  the  chemical  stability  of  ePCMs  is  to 
observe if they can remain stable when immersed in continuous phases 
with different chemical compositions. Wei et al. [159] investigated the 

Fig.  34. Schematic  illustration  of  the  mechanical  stability  measurement  of 
micro-encapsulated  PCMs via  the  compression  of  capsules  between  two  hori-
zontal plates made of glass. 

Moreover,  the  mechanical  stability  of  double-shell  micro-ePCMs  was 
shown to be higher than that of single-shell micro-ePCMs. In another 
study,  Su  et  al.  [317]  compared  the  mechanical  properties  of 
methanol-modified  MF  shells  with  unmodified  MF  shells,  both  con-
taining  paraffin.  They  revealed  that  the  mechanical  properties  of  the 
shell  made  of  methanol-modified  MF  presented  a  higher  yield-point 
value compared to the unmodified MF shell, indicating that methanol 
modification can improve the deformation resistance of MF shells. 
Borreguero  et  al.  [264]  performed  a  mechanical  test 
for 
micro-ePCMs containing paraffin as a PCM and polyethylene-ethylene 
vinyl acetate as a shell, with and without carbon nanofibers (CNFs) in 
the  core.  Their  results  showed  that  micro-ePCMs  with  CNFs  could 
withstand more pressure force compared to micro-ePCMs without CNFs, 
as illustrated in Fig. 35. In fact, it was shown that when 2 wt% CNFs 
were added to the core, the force required to generate the same micro-
capsule  deformation  was  almost  183%  higher.  The  addition  of  CNFs 
increased  the  stiffness  of  the  micro-ePCMs,  and  consequently  the 
Young’s modulus of the micro-ePCMs was increased. Giro-Paloma et al. 
[318] studied the effect of PCM core type (paraffin or palmic acid) on the 
mechanical  properties  of  micro-ePCMs  encapsulated  with  PScEA. 
Micro-ePCMs with paraffin showed the same mechanical properties at a 
temperature range between 25 and 50 
C. However, the micro-ePCMs 
with palmic acid presented different mechanical behaviors between 25 
C.  Specifically,  the Young’s module was  the  same, while the 
and  70 
◦
C was found to be ten times 
force to deform the micro-ePCMs at 70 
◦
lower compared to the case at 25
C. Giro-Paloma et al. [319] examined 
the  mechanical properties  of  ePCMs containing  tetracosane as  a PCM 
and PS or PMMA as a shell at different core-to-shell ratios (1:1 and 1:3). 
It was found that with a ratio of 1:3, the PS shell was a better option 
when  the  PCM  was  in  its  liquid  state  since  the  evaluated  effective 
Young’s  modulus  was  reduced  by  almost  350%.  However,  the  shell 

◦

◦

Fig.  35. Applied  force  versus  deformation  of  micro-encapsulated  PCMs 
(paraffin  as  core  and  LDPE-EVA  as  shell)  with  and  without  CNFs  in  the  core 
[264]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103734S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 36. SEM images of micro-encapsulated PCMs (dodecanol as core and polymer/silica as shell) with a) as-prepared core@shell structure and b) broken capsule 
due to the addition of high DVB content in the core [321]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

conducted  a  chemical  stability  test  on  stearic  acid  (SA)@titania  and 
palmic  acid@silica  microcapsules.  They  revealed  that  despite  a  large 
number of repeated heating/cooling cycles, the chemical structure of the 
micro-ePCMs was not affected. Wang et al. [270] observed that 1000 
heating/cooling  cycles  had  no  effect  on  the  chemical  structure  of 
nano-ePCMs  containing  SA  as  PCM  and  PMMA  as  shell,  and  that  no 
chemical  degradation  occurred.  Therefore,  the  nano-ePCMs  were 
deemed chemically stable. 

◦

3.3.1.50. Thermal stability. Thermal stability is another important fac-
tor  to  ensure  the  long-term  efficiency  of  ePCMs  before  use  in  solar- 
thermal  systems.  Thermal  stability  of  ePCMs  can  be  defined  as  the 
ability of ePCMs to retain their phase-change properties and the same 
decomposition temperature after several heating/cooling cycles at high 
or  low  temperatures,  depending  on  the  heat/cold  TES  application. 
Several studies have been performed on the thermal stability of ePCMs 
at the nano and microscale mainly using TGA, FTIR, and DSC analyses. 
Tahan  Latibari  et  al.  [292]  evaluated  the  thermal  degradation  of 
nano-ePCMs based on SA as PCM and titania as shell. It was observed 
◦
that the pure PCM exhibited one degradation step at 150(cid:0) 250 
C, while 
the nano-ePCMs showed two thermal degradation steps at 160(cid:0) 320 
C 
◦
and 320(cid:0) 450 
C. In addition, nano-ePCMs exhibited a maximum release 
rate at higher temperatures than the pure PCM. This result indicated that 
the titania shell improved thermal stability and prevented leakage of the 
melted PCM. Fuensanta et al. [269] investigated the thermal stability of 
paraffin nano-encapsulated with PMMA by measuring the melting and 
freezing latent heats after 220 melting/freezing cycles. It was shown that 
the latent heats of freezing and fusion were respectively is in the range of 
15.5(cid:0) 22.5 J/g and 19.1(cid:0) 24.4 J/g. These values remained unchanged 
after 220 cycles, and the nano-ePCMs were deemed to have high thermal 
stability. Moreover, thermal stability was confirmed by measuring the 
temperature  degradation  of  both  nano-ePCMs  and  pure  PCM.  It  was 
observed that the thermal degradation temperature of nano-ePCMs was 
higher than that of the pure PCM. Zhang et al. [326] studied the effects 
of the stirring rate and styrene-maleic anhydride and cyclohexane con-
tents  on  the  thermal  stability  of  micro/nano-capsules  containing 
n-octadecane as PCM and MF as shell. They observed that as the stirring 
rate and styrene-maleic anhydride content increased, the ePCMs were 
produced with a more uniform shell thickness. A higher thermal stability 
was realized when the capsules were synthesized with a stirring rate of 
9000 rpm and a styrene-maleic anhydride content of 2.3 wt%. However, 
the increase in cyclohexane content had no effect on thermal stability. 
Fang et al. [327] determined the thermal stability of nano-ePCMs pre-
pared with UF as a shell and n-tetradecane as a PCM by measuring the 
PCM weight release rate under the effect of different concentrations of 
NaCl. It was revealed that during the heating process, nano-ePCMs with 
1(cid:0) 3%  NaCl  presented  lower  release  rates.  However,  greater  release 
rates could be observed with NaCl concentrations of 8 and 10%. This 

Fig. 37. Release rates of micro-encapsulated PCMs prepared at 1, 2, 3, and 4% 
of SMA [324]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

chemical stability of micro-ePCMs prepared with polyamide as the shell 
and paraffin as the core material using various solvents. Their results 
showed that the micro-capsules kept their properties and shapes after 
immersion for one hour in a NaOH solution, a H2SO4 solution, ethanol, 
ether, acetone, dimethyl sulfoxide, and dimethylformamide. However, 
the micro-ePCMs were destroyed when immersed in a ZnCl2  solution. 
The superior chemical stability was attributed to the aromatic-molecular 
and cross-link structure of the ePCMs. Another common method to test 
chemical stability is to observe the chemical structure of ePCMs after 
repeated  heating/cooling  cycles  through  FTIR  analysis.  Sarı  et  al. 
[246–248]  prepared  nano/micro-ePCMs  with  different  PCMs  (n-octa-
decane,  n-heptadecane,  n-eicosane,  n-nonadecane,  and  n-tetracosane) 
and  different  shells  (PS  and  PMMA).  The  nano/micro-ePCMs  were 
subjected to 5000 thermal cycles with no effect on the chemical struc-
ture of the nano/micro-ePCMs. Fuensanta et al. [269] investigated the 
chemical composition of micro-ePCMs based on paraffin as a PCM and 
styrene-butyl acrylate as a shell. It was found that the FTIR absorption 
characteristics were unchanged after 220 heating/cooling cycles, which 
indicated  that  the  micro-ePCMs  exhibited  good  chemical  stability. 
Through FTIR analysis, Graham et al. [271] determined the chemical 
stability of nano-ePCMs containing salt hydrate as the PCM and PECA 
shells. It was observed that the spectrum was almost identical after 100 
melting/freezing  cycles,  indicating  high  chemical  stability  during  the 
release/storage  of  latent  heat.  Konuklu  et  al.  [325]  evaluated  the 
chemical stability of CA coated with different shell materials using FTIR 
analysis. They showed that the chemical structure of the PCM before and 
after  encapsulation  remained  stable.  Tahan  Latibari  et  al.  [291,292] 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103735S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

◦

◦

result indicated that NaCl was responsible for stabilizing the reaction 
rate of the UF shell. Hu et al. [328] micro-encapsulated methyl laurate 
(ML) with a PUR shell at various core-to-shell mass ratios. It was found 
that the PUR shell can protect the PCM from volatilization and leakage 
and can provide the PCM with high thermal stability. Moreover, it was 
observed that higher core-to-shell mass ratios resulted in a faster mass 
loss  rate  and  lower  thermal  stability,  indicating  that  the  core-to-shell 
ratio  was  a  key  parameter  governing  the  thermal  stability  of 
micro-ePCMs,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  38.  Lee  et  al.  [294]  examined  the 
thermal stability of binary nitrate molten salt (NaNO3:KNO3 in a 60:40 
mass  ratio)  nano-encapsulated  with  a  silica  shells  during  50  hea-
ting/cooling cycles over a temperature range of 27(cid:0) 700 
C. The silica 
shell was found to preserve the PCM even far beyond the decomposition 
temperature of the PCM, which was advantageous for practical appli-
cations  up  to  610 
C.  Wu  et  al.  [329]  prepared  micro-ePCMs  for  a 
high-temperature TES system. In their work, they encapsulated Na2SO4 
with  silica  shells  at  different  silica  mass  ratios.  It  was  observed  that 
under the heating process from room temperature to 1000
C, the PCM 
showed  a  mass  loss  of  roughly  0.4%.  However,  the  PCM  mass  loss 
increased to 4% when the silica mass content increased to 26.8%. It was 
concluded that a silica mass content of less than 5.4% kept the PCM mass 
loss stable at 1%, ensuring high thermal stability at high temperatures. 
Li et al. [330] micro-encapsulated NaNO3  with perhydropolysilazane. 
The thermal stability of the capsules was measured under 80 repeated 
thermal cycles at higher temperatures. It was found that between 250 
◦
and 350
C, the latent heat of the nano-ePCMs was reduced by 3.6%, the 
◦
melting temperature was reduced by 1
C, and the supercooling degree 
remained almost constant. Yet, in the temperature range of 350-550
C, 
◦
the latent heat decreased by 4% at 500
C with a sharp decrease of about 
◦
20%  at 550
C. The authors  concluded that the encapsulation of PCM 
increased their thermal stability by two folds up to 500 ℃, indicating 
their high potential for TES systems at high temperatures. Ji et al. [331] 
fabricated micro-ePCMs of solar salt with GO-modified silica shells. It 
was observed that, compared to the pure PCM, the temperature at which 
◦
the PCM started to decompose in the nano-ePCMs increased by 28.1 
C, 
◦
while the maximum decomposition temperature increased by 17.5 
C. 
This  indicated  that  silica  shells  can  successfully  improve  the  thermal 
stability of PCMs. 

◦

◦

3.3.2. Stabilization strategies of ePCM slurries/dispersions 

The  use  of  ePCM  slurries/dispersions  in  a  wide  range  of  thermal 
applications  appears  to  be  beneficial,  with  the  key  drawbacks  so  far 
being their high cost of production, particularly at the nanoscale, and 

the  aforementioned  instability  issues.  The  stability  of  ePCM  slurries/ 
dispersions  is  crucial  for  any  thermal  or  solar  application,  and  poor 
stability can decrease the heat capacity storage and heat transfer rate. In 
addition, the technical viability will be reduced due to the stratification 
of  the  slurry/dispersion  [20].  The  stability  of  the  slurry/dispersion  is 
affected by a number of factors, including the use of surfactants, syn-
thesis process of the ePCMs, temperature, pH value, ePCM size/shape, 
core-to-shell ratio, PCM content, shell type, and density difference be-
tween the capsules and the carrying fluid. The main stabilization stra-
tegies for ePCM slurries/dispersions are highlighted in the remainder of 
this section. 

The density difference between ePCM particles and the carrying fluid 
induces  separation  and  instability  due  to  gravity,  resulting  in  either 
sedimentation or creaming of particles. The most effective strategy to 
prevent sedimentation/creaming is by reducing the density difference 
between capsules and the carrying fluid, which could also reduce the 
viscosity of the slurry/dispersion as a whole, and hence, decrease the 
pumping power. Qiu et al.  [332] examined the impact  of the density 
difference between micro-ePCM particles and their carrying fluid, sur-
factant  type  and  concentration,  and  pH  value  on  the  stability  of 
micro-ePCM slurries at 10 wt%. It was revealed that the density differ-
ence between was the most important parameter affecting stability. A 
combination  of  the  appropriate  surfactant  (in  terms  of  type  and  con-
centration) and pH value with a zero-density difference was found to 
significantly  enhance  the  physical  stability  of  micro-ePCM  slurries, 
allowing them to be used in TES systems. Wang et al. [333] formulated a 
binary mixture as the carrying fluid to match the density of micro-ePCMs 
containing resin as the shell and n-hexacosane as the PCM core. Water 
was chosen as one component of the binary mixture since it is one of the 
most  common  HTFs.  The  micro-ePCMs  had  a  density  of  900  kg/m3, 
which  was lower  than that of  water. Therefore,  propanol as a  lighter 
fluid  was  chosen  as  the  second  mixture  component.  The  authors 
observed some sedimentation and creaming in the micro-ePCM slurry 
when the fluid density was 900 and 950 kg/m3, respectively. However, 
after several tests, it was found that the highest physical stability was 
achieved with a carrying fluid density of 941 kg/m3. Wang et al. [334] 
studied the stability of micro-ePCM slurries characterized by paraffin as 
PCM, MEL as shell, and water/ethanol as the carrying fluid. The slurry 
was prepared using a combination of sonication and magnetic stirring, 
and to achieve higher stability, an optimal ethanol/water mixing ratio 
was determined. The micro-ePCM slurry showed stability for more than 
a  month  without  obvious  sedimentation  or  delamination  with  a 
water/ethanol mixing ratio of 1:2. Recently, Fu et al. [335] performed 

Fig. 38. a) DTG and b) TGA curves of a pure PCM (ML) and nano-encapsulated PCMs (ML as core and PUR as shell) with core-to-shell mass ratios of 1:1, 1:2, 1:3, and 
1:4 [328]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103736S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

several measurements on micro-ePCM slurries based on paraffin as PCM 
and polymer shells by adjusting the pH value and adding a small amount 
of sodium dialkylsulfateas as a surfactant so as to not affect the ther-
mophysical properties of water. Moreover, density of the carrying fluid 
was fixed at 941 kg/m3 to keep the density difference between the fluid 
and  capsules  close  to  zero.  These  stabilization  strategies  resulted  in 
excellent thermal and physical stabilities of the micro-ePCM slurry. 

In general, the mixing and pumping processes associated with ePCM 
slurries induce shear forces, which may cause breakage of the shell and 
leakage  of  the  PCM  (when  in  liquid  state)  to  the  surrounding  fluid. 
Damaged/leaking ePCMs may also occur due to thermal cycling. Drissi 
et al. [336] reported that damaged ePCMs can negatively affect their 
thermal  properties.  The  drop  in  specific  heat  capacity  of  damaged 
ePCMs  was  reported  to  be  about 28%  compared  to  the  non-damaged 
ePCMs.  Although  several  studies  examined  the  stability  of  ePCMs,  as 
discussed  in  Section  3.3.1,  very  limited  studies  focused  on  leakage/-
damage prevention strategies. Zhang et al. [337] prepared a novel type 
of micro-ePCMs with no mass loss and high encapsulation capacity using 
an in-situ polymerization technique. MF and paraffin were used as shell 
and PCM, respectively. GO was placed at the core/shell interface to act 
as a second protective layer that prevents the leakage of paraffin. It was 
found  that  the  micro-ePCMs  had  better  leakage  prevention  with  an 
encapsulation  ratio  of  almost  94%,  which  was  a  significant  improve-
ment.  Shi  et  al.  [338]  produced  leak-proof  micro-ePCMs  based  on 
acetylated  cellulose  nanofibrils  (AcCNF)  as  a  shell  and  paraffin  as  a 
PCM. The AcCNF acted as a supporting material which prevented the 
leakage of paraffin during phase-change transitions. The ePCMs showed 
reduced supercooling (efficiency of 53% with PCM content of 83%) and 
high melting heat. Compared to CNF, higher improvements in thermal 
performance  and  encapsulation  efficiency  were  obtained  with  the 
AcCNF shell due to its compatibility with paraffin. It is worth noting that 
leakage  measurements  are  generally  made  by  measuring  the  weight 
change of ePCMs placed in a heated oven on top of filter papers or by 
visual  observation  under  repeated  heating/cooling  cycles  [339].  Del-
gado et al. [20] suggested reducing the ePCM size and/or increasing the 
shell thickness to prevent damage to the ePCMs. 

3.3.3. Stability evaluation techniques of ePCM slurries/dispersions 

The stability of ePCM slurries/dispersions can affect their thermal, 
optical, and rheological properties, with a direct effect on their appli-
cation  and  utility.  One  can  notice  from  the  literature  that  very  few 
studies have reported on the stability evaluation of ePCM slurries/dis-
persions. The stability of ePCM slurries/dispersions is evaluated using 
several  techniques,  such  as  the  centrifugation  method,  zeta-potential 
measurement, thermal/phase-change properties measurement, and the 
turbidity method. 

3.3.3.51. Centrifugation method. Centrifugation is the easiest and most 
commonly used method to assess the stability of ePCM slurries/disper-
sions. This method is based on sediment formation at the bottom of the 
slurry/dispersion due to gravity. Stability is determined by the time it 
takes for precipitation to occur. This method has been employed by a 
number of researchers to assess the stability of various ePCM slurries. 
Karaipekli et al. [340] fabricated nano-ePCMs with n-nonadecane as the 
PCM and poly(styrene-co-methacrylic-acid) (P(st-co-MAA)) as the shell. 
Centrifugation  measurements  under  1500  and  3000  rpm  and  for  1  h 
showed  the  absence  of  sedimentation  at  1500  rpm,  while  negligible 
sedimentation  was  observed  at  3000  rpm.  Fu  et  al.  [341]  produced 
micro-ePCMs with tetradecane as the PCM and silica with/without PS as 
the  shell.  Their  results  indicated  that  slurries  at  3000  rpm  generated 
some sediment, while little sediment was observed at 1000 rpm. The R 
values (the weight ratio of the solid product acquired by centrifugation 
and the one obtained by demulsification) were found to be negligible, 
indicating that both slurries possessed excellent physical stability. Fang 
et al. [267] prepared nano-ePCMs, using n-tetradecane as the PCM and 

PS as the shell, and observed no sedimentation after centrifugation at 
1500 rpm. However, the precipitate weight increased as the centrifuge 
speed was increased. The R values were found to be almost negligible, 
indicating high mechanical stability. 

3.3.3.52. Zeta-potential analysis. Zeta potential, also known as electro-
kinetic potential, is another method used to assess the stability of ePCMs 
slurries/dispersions.  The  zeta  potential  is  the  electrical  potential  dif-
ference, measured in millivolts, between the hydrodynamic surface of 
shear (the slipping plane) and the bulk fluid. It is known that for purely 
or  dominantly  electrostatically-stabilized  colloidal  suspensions,  a  low 
zeta potential is a sign of low electrostatic stability, while a high zeta 
potential indicates high electrostatic stability. In general, for dominantly 
charge-protected  dispersions,  zeta  potential  values  greater  than  ± 30 
and  ± 60  mV  indicate  good  and  excellent  charge-induced  stabilities, 
respectively. According to Karaipekli et al. [340], the zeta potential of 
their prepared nano-ePCMs slurries at pH of 7 was (cid:0) 56.8 mV. Joseph 
et al. [342] prepared ePCMs using n-octadecane as the PCM and PS as 
the shell. They measured the zeta potential of the dispersion at different 
concentrations, and observed that for a concentration of 0.7 vol%, the 
maximum  zeta-potential  value  was  70  mV.  The  zeta-potential  values 
were found to decrease as the concentration increased. 

3.3.3.53. Thermal/phase-change 
properties  measurement. Tracking 
changes in thermal/phase-change properties over time is another tech-
nique  to  assess  the  stability  of  ePCM  slurries/dispersions.  In  general, 
sedimentation may result in thermal conductivity reduction over time or 
a  change  in  the  phase-change  latent  heat  and  melting  temperature 
during heating/cooling cycles. Liu et al. [343] measured the stability of 
their micro-ePCMs slurry using a DSC analysis and thermal conductivity 
apparatus. They found that the thermal conductivity, melting temper-
ature, and phase-change latent heat of the micro-ePCMs remained un-
changed under several thermal cycles, indicating good physical stability. 
Cingarapu et al. [344] produced nano-ePCMs with tin as the PCM and 
silica as the shell. They assessed the stability of the slurry through an 
evaluation of the thermal conductivity at 1(cid:0) 5 vol%. The values were 
recorded  every  15  min  for  a  period  of  15  h.  They  concluded  that  all 
slurries were stable since no change was observed in thermal conduc-
tivity with time. 

3.3.3.54. Turbidity  method. The  turbidity  method  is  another  effective 
technique to judge the stability of ePCM slurries/dispersion. In general, 
a change in turbidity is a sign of instability in the ePCM slurry. When 
light  travels  through  a  well-dispersed  slurry/dispersion,  the  radiation 
intensity is decreased exponentially along the direction of propagation 
due  to  absorption  and  scattering  by  the  suspended  particles.  Since 
turbidity is proportional to light extinction (i.e., absorption plus scat-
tering), when light travels through ePCM slurries/dispersions, turbidity 
can be quantified by comparing transmitted and incident radiations. Lin 
et  al.  [345]  and  Zheng  et  al.  [346]  measured  the  stability  of  ePCM 
slurries with different dispersants (PEG and SA) at different concentra-
tions (up to 40% vol) using the turbidity method. They observed that 
ePCM slurries without dispersants exhibited a higher stability than those 
with dispersants. Similarly, using the turbidity method, Qiu et al. [332] 
was able to capture the effects of surfactants, pH value, and the density 
difference between capsule and fluid on the stability of ePCM slurries. 

3.4. Measurement of thermophysical properties of ePCM slurries 

The overall effectiveness of ePCM slurries in solar-thermal applica-
tions  depends  on  their  thermal,  rheological,  and  optical  properties. 
Therefore, an in-depth understanding of these properties is important 
for optimal implementation in industrial applications. A summary of the 
thermal  conductivity  and  specific  heat  capacity  of  ePCM  slurries  is 
presented in Table 8, while a summary of their rheological properties is 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103737Table 8 
Reported data on the thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of ePCM slurries and dispersions.  

Core@shell 

Temperature 
◦
(

C) 

ePCM 
size 

Carrying 
fluid 

Concentration 

Synthesis method 

Measurementapparatus  Main results 

N-tetradecane@PS 

5(cid:0) 25 

144.5 nm  Water 

0-15 wt% 

In-situ miniemulsion 
polymerization 

- Hot disk method 
- DSC 

N-hexacosane@resin 

N-nonadecane@P(St- 

co-MAA) 

20(cid:0) 70 

25(cid:0) 34 

N-tetradecane@PS/ 

5(cid:0) 20 

silica 
N-tetradecane@PS 

Paraffin@MF 

25(cid:0) 50 

Sn@silica 

Not reported 

Paraffin@polymer 
Paraffin@PMMA 

n-octadecane@PS 
Paraffin@polymer 

Paraffin@PMMA 

N-eicosane@UF 

N-nonadecane@PUR 

Paraffin@titania-GO 
Paraffin@titania 

20 

30 
24(cid:0) 36 

10(cid:0) 40 

25(cid:0) 50 

25(cid:0) 35 

30(cid:0) 80 

10(cid:0) 40 
μm 
212 nm 

Propanol/ 
water 
Water 

40 wt% 

Not reported 

Hot disk method 

0(cid:0) 2 wt% 

Mini-emulsion 
polymerization 

- KD2 Pro analyzer 
- DSC 

80(cid:0) 120 
nm 

Water 

0(cid:0) 5 wt% 

Miniemulsion poly- 
merization 

- Hot disk method 
- DSC 

5.392 μm  Water/ 
ethanol 
Therminol 

50(cid:0) 100 
nm 

Water 

10(cid:0) 100 
μm 
209 nm 
Water 
1(cid:0) 20 μm  Water 

Water/PG 

Not 
reported 
5(cid:0) 15 μm  Water 

55(cid:0) 175 
nm 
2(cid:0) 5 μm 

Water 
EG 
Water 

0(cid:0) 40 wt% 

Not reported 

Hot disk method 

0(cid:0) 5 vol% 

35 wt% 

1.5 vol% 
30% 

Modified 
polyole wet-chemical 
reduction 
Commercial 

KD2 Pro analyzer 

Hot disk method 

Miniemulsion polymerization 
Commercial 

KD2 Pro analyzer 
Laser Flash method 

0(cid:0) 43.0 wt% 

Commercial 

KD2 Pro analyzer 

10 wt% 

Not reported 

KD2 Pro analyzer 

0(cid:0) 3.36 wt% 

Interfacial polymerization 

Transient hot wire 

3 wt% 

In-situ hydrolysis and 
polycondensation 

- Hot disk method 
- DSC 

Paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/ 

10(cid:0) 80 

688 nm 

Water 

4 wt% 

In-situ deposition 

CNTs 

Acid@MWCNTs 

25(cid:0) 85 

50(cid:0) 60 
nm 

Water 

0(cid:0) 15 wt% 

Vacuum absorption 

Paraffin@MF/ 
graphitec 

20(cid:0) 145 

Not 
reported 

[BMIM]BF4 

0(cid:0) 20 wt% 

In-situ polymerization 

- Hot disk method 
- DSC 

- Hot disk method 
- DSC 

- Hot disk method 
- DSC 

Paraffin@SiO2/GO 

30(cid:0) 80 

20 μm 

Water 

10 wt% 

Interfacial 
hydrolysis–condensation 

- Hot disk method 
- DSC 

Paraffin@SnO2/CNTs 

30(cid:0) 80 

1(cid:0) 5 μm 

Water 

5 wt% 

In-situ precipitation 

Hot disk method 

Paraffin@PMMA 

15(cid:0) 22 

1(cid:0) 5 μm 

Water 

3 wt% 

Commercial 

T-history method 

◦

◦

C. 

C. However, a clear increase was observed at 25 

- Thermal conductivity was not affected by the addition of nano-ePCMs 
at 5 
- Specific heat capacity increased rapidly during the phase change, 
while it was constant when the PCM was in its solid or liquid state. 
Thermal conductivity dropped with concentration. However, it 
increased first and then reduced with temperature. 
- Thermal conductivity increased with concentration and temperature. 
- Specific heat capacity increased significantly during the phase 
change, while it was constant when the PCM was in its solid or liquid 
state. 
- Thermal conductivity increased with temperature and decreased with 
mass fraction. 
- Addition of nano-ePCMs improved specific heat capacity. 
Thermal conductivity dropped with concentration and was mainly 
affected by the physical state of the PCM. 
Thermal conductivity of slurries increased linearly with weight 
fraction following the Maxwell model. 

Thermal conductivity dropped with micro-ePCM concentration, while 
it was improved with temperature. 
No enhancement was observed in thermal conductivity. 
Thermal conductivity dropped with micro-ePCM concentration, while 
it slightly increased with temperature. 
Maximum enhancement was observed at the melting temperature, 
particularly at higher concentrations. 
Thermal conductivity dropped with concentration and was mainly 
affected by the physical state of the PCM. 
Thermal conductivity of slurries with EG were higher than that with 
water. 
- Thermal conductivity of both slurries increased with temperature and 
concentration. 
- Specific heat capacity increased sharply during the phase-change 
transition. 
- Thermal conductivity increased slightly with addition of micro- 
ePCMs. 
- Specific heat capacity depended mainly on the physical state of the 
PCM. 
- A sharp increase in thermal conductivity was observed during the 
phase-change transition. However, after the phase-change transition, 
thermal conductivity was slightly reduced. 
- Specific heat capacity depended mainly on the physical state of the 
PCM. 
- Thermal conductivity increased significantly with concentration and 
temperature. 
- Specific heat capacity of paraffin@MF/graphite and paraffin@MF 
slurries exhibited a maximum value during the phase transition. 
- Thermal conductivity increased with concentration and temperature. 
- Specific heat capacity of both slurries exhibited a sharp increase 
during the phase-change transition. 
- Thermal conductivity increased with concentration and temperature. 
- Specific heat capacity of both slurries exhibited sharp increase during 
the phase-change transition. 
Addition of micro-ePCMs caused an increase in the specific heat 
capacity during the phase change, while a decrease (increase) was 
observed for slurries with liquid (solid) PCM. 

S
.
A

.

A
l
b
d
o
u
r

e
t

a
l
.

Ref. 

[267] 

[333] 

[340] 

[341] 

[343] 

[344] 

[347] 

[342] 
[348] 

[349] 

[350] 

[351] 

[352] 

[353] 

[354] 

[355] 

[311] 

[356] 

[357]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103738 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

provided in Table 9. 

3.4.1. Thermal properties 

.
f
e
R

]
8
5
3
[

]
1
4
3
[

3.4.1.55. Thermal  conductivity. HTFs  with  higher  thermal  conductiv-
ities are strongly desired to develop thermal systems with higher heat 
transfer  rates.  The  suspension  of  micro/nano-ePCMs  into  HTFs  may 
result in higher thermal conductivity values. Therefore, several attempts 
have  been  made  in  this  research  area  to  give  a  clear  picture  of  the 
thermal  conductivity  of  ePCM  slurries.  In  the  thermal  conductivity 
measurements of ePCM slurries/dispersions, researchers mainly focused 
on two different shell materials, namely, polymeric and carbon-modified 
shells. 

◦

◦

◦

3.4.1.56.0. Polymeric shells. Fang et al. [267] measured the thermal 
conductivity of nano-ePCM slurries prepared with n-tetradecane as PCM 
and PS as shell. They observed that the thermal conductivity was not 
affected by the addition of nano-ePCMs at 5 
C. However, a clear in-
C with a maximum improvement of about 
crease was observed at 25 
16%.  Wang  et  al.  [333]  investigated  the  thermal  conductivity  of 
micro-ePCM slurries at different temperatures and weight fractions. It 
was  shown  that  thermal  conductivity  dropped  as  the  weight  fraction 
increased.  However,  thermal  conductivity  first  increased  and  then 
dropped with temperature. In addition, the thermal conductivity values 
were  found  to  match  well  with  the  Maxwell-Garnett  model  at  17 
C. 
Karaipekli  et  al.  [340]  found  that  the  thermal  conductivity  of 
nano-ePCM  slurries  increased  with  weight  fraction  and  temperature, 
even though the thermal conductivity was lower than that of the car-
rying  fluid.  This  result  was  attributed  to  the  interactions  between 
surface-functionalized nano-ePCMs as well as their Brownian motion. Fu 
◦
et al. [341] showed that, within 5 to 20 
C, the thermal conductivity of 
nano-ePCM  slurries  with  and  without  silica  on  the  PS  shell increased 
with temperature and decreased with weight fraction. A higher thermal 
conductivity  was  obtained  by  using  silica/PS  shells  compared  to  PS 
shells. The thermal conductivity of slurries with silica-modified shells 
was 8.4% higher than slurries without silica. Liu et al. [343] observed 
that the thermal conductivity of micro-ePCM slurries was enhanced with 
temperature before and after the phase-change temperature occurred. 
However,  there  was  an  abrupt  reduction  during  phase  change,  indi-
cating that thermal conductivity of the solid PCM was higher than that of 
the liquid PCM. In addition, it was found that the thermal conductivity 
of the slurry dropped with weight fraction, which was attributed to the 
low thermal conductivity of the shell material. Cingarapu et al. [344] 
measured the thermal conductivity of nano-ePCM slurries based on sil-
ica as a shell and tin as a PCM. They observed that thermal conductivity 
increased linearly with weight fraction following the Maxwell model. An 
enhancement  of  3%  was  observed  for  each  1%  increase  in  the 
nano-ePCM  concentration.  Zhang  and  Zhao  [347]  investigated  the 
thermal conductivity of two different types of micro-ePCM slurries at 20 
◦
C. It was observed that thermal conductivity of the slurries dropped as 
the weight fraction increased. They attributed this to the thermal con-
ductivity of water being higher than that of the PCM cores. Joseph and 
Sajith [342] measured the thermal conductivity of nano-ePCM disper-
sions at different fractions. No enhancement in thermal conductivity was 
observed, which was attributed to the poor thermal conductivity of the 
shell material. Delgado et al. [348] demonstrated that the addition of 
micro-ePCMs to the carrying fluid actually caused a reduction in thermal 
conductivity. For instance, a reduction of 39% was observed at a weight 
◦
fraction of 30% and a temperature of 30 
C. They attributed this to the 
fact  that  the  thermal  conductivity  of  water  was  higher  than  that  of 
paraffin. Dutkowski and Kruzel [349] presented detailed results on the 
thermal conductivity of micro-ePCM slurries containing paraffin as PCM 
and  PMMA  as  shell.  It  was  found  that  an  increase  in  weight  fraction 
induced  an increase  in thermal conductivity  during the  phase-change 
transition.  A  maximum  enhancement  was  observed  at  the  melting 
temperature  of  27 
C,  particularly  for  higher  particle  concentrations. 

◦

.
s
e
i
r
r
u
l
s

M
C
P
e

f
o

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

l
a
c
i
g
o
l
o
e
h
r

e
h
t

n
o

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
R

9

e
l
b
a
T

.
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

n
a
i
n
o
t
w
e
N
-
n
o
n

a

d
e
t
i
b
i
h
x
e

y
r
r
u
l
s

e
h
T
-

.
r
e
t
a
w

f
o

t
a
h
t

]
3
5
3
[

t
a
h
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
w
o
l

s
a
w
y
r
r
u
l
s

s
T
N
C
/
O
2
u
C
-
u
C
@
n
fi
f
a
r
a
p

f
o

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

e
h
T

.

O
2
u
C
-
u
C
@
n
fi
f
a
r
a
p

f
o

d
o
h
t
e
m
k
s
i
d

t
o
H

r
e
t
e
m
o
c
s
i
v

.
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

n
a
i
n
o
t
w
e
N
-
n
o
n

a

d
e
t
i
b
i
h
x
e

y
r
r
u
l
s

e
h
T
-

.

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

d
n
a

e
z
i
s

]
2
4
3
[

e
l
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

d
n
a

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

h
t
i

w
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

-

r
e
t
e
m
o
e
h
R

.

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

h
t
i

w
s
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
e
m
y
l
o
p

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

t

%
w
5
3

.

t

%
w
0
4

t
a

e
u
l
a
v
m
u
m
i
x
a
m
a

d
e
h
c
a
e
r

t
i

l
i
t
n
u

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

r
e
t
e
m
o
c
s
i
v

t
i

e
l
i
h
w

,
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

h
t
i

w
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

s
e
i
r
r
u
l
s

h
t
o
b

f
o

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

r
e
t
e
m
o
c
s
i
v

d
l
e
fi
k
o
o
r
B

n
o
i
s
l
u
m
e
i
n
i
m
u
t
i
s
-
n
I

t

%
w
5

g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

h
t
i

w
y
l
w
o
l
s

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

s
e
i
r
r
u
l
s

e
h
t

f
o

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

1
-
J
D
N

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
e
m
y
l
o
p

u
t
i
s
-
n
I

t

%
w
0
4

]
9
4
3
[

n
a
h
t

r
e
h
g
i
h
s
e
m

i
t
8
1
d
n
a

,

6

,

5

t

s
a
w
%
w
0
3
d
n
a

,

0
2

,

4
1
t
a

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

-

r
e
t
e
m
o
e
h
R

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

t

%
w
0
3

(cid:0)

0

r
e
t
a
W

m
µ

0
2

(cid:0)

1

s
t
l
u
s
e
r
n
i
a
M

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

s
u
t
a
r
a
p
p
a

d
o
h
t
e
m

s
i
s
e
h
t
n
y
S

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

g
n
i
y
r
r
a
C

(cid:0)

0

(cid:0)

0

(cid:0)

0

d
i
u
fl

r
e
t
a
W

M
C
P
e

e
z
i
s

m
µ

0
1

r
e
t
a
W

0
2
1

(cid:0)

0
8

m
n

r
e
t
a
W

m
µ

0
2

(cid:0)

1

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

)
C

◦

(

5
2

(cid:0)

5

5
2

(cid:0)

5

0
4

(cid:0)

5

7
2

a
c
i
l
i
s
-
S
P
@
e
n
a
c
e
d
a
r
t
e
t
N

S
P
@
e
n
a
c
e
d
a
r
t
e
t
N

M
M
P
@
n
fi
f
a
r
a
P

c
i
l
y
r
c
a
@
n
fi
f
a
r
a
P

A
M
M
P
@
e
n
a
c
e
d
a
r
t
e
T

l
l
e
h
s
@
e
r
o
C

p
@
n
fi
f
a
r
a
P

r
e
m
y
l
o

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
e
d

u
t
i
s
-
n
I

t

%
w
4

r
e
t
a
W

m
n

8
8
6

0
8

(cid:0)

0
1

s
T
N
C
/
O
2
u
C
-
u
C
@
n
fi
f
a
r
a
P

]
9
5
3
[

r
o
f

y
l
r
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
p

,
s
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

r
e
h
g
i
h

t
a

r
e
h
g
i
h

s
a
w
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

-

e
t
t
e
u
o
C

l
a
c
i
r
d
n
i
l
y
C

.

%
0
3

n
a
h
t

r
e
t
a
e
r
g

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

r
e
t
e
m
o
c
s
i
v

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
e
m
y
l
o
p

u
t
i
s
-
n
I

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
c
a
o
c

x
e
l
p
m
o
C

%
0
3

(cid:0)

0

r
e
t
a
W

0
0
0
1

(cid:0)

5

m
µ

5
2

F
M
@
e
n
a
c
e
d
o
d
-
n

F
M
@
e
n
a
c
e
d
a
r
t
e
t
-
n

.
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

n
a
i
n
o
t
w
e
N
-
n
o
n

a

d
e
t
i
b
i
h
x
e

y
r
r
u
l
s

e
h
T
-

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

.
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

n
a
i
n
o
t
w
e
N
d
e
t
i
b
i
h
x
e

t
n
a
t
c
a
f
r
u
s

h
t
i

w
y
r
r
u
l
s

e
h
T
-

]
0
6
3
[

r
e
w
o
l

d
n
a

s
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

r
e
h
g
i
h

t
a

r
e
w
o
l

s
a
w
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

-

r
e
t
e
m
o
c
s
i
v

d
l
e
fi
k
o
o
r
B

d
o
h
t
e
m
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
c
a
o
C

t

%
w
7
7
1

.

(cid:0)

0

r
e
t
a
W

m
µ
0
6
2

(cid:0)

2

1
1

(cid:0)

2

e
n
i
t
a
l
e
g
@
e
n
a
c
e
d
a
r
t
e
t
-
n

.
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

n
a
i
n
o
t
w
e
N
-
n
o
n

a

d
e
t
i
b
i
h
x
e

y
r
r
u
l
s

e
h
T
-

.
r
e
t
a
w

f
o

t
a
h
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
t
a
e
r
g

s
e
m

i
t

4
1
-
8

t
s
o
m
l
a

]
1
6
3
[

.

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

e
h
t

s
a

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

-

r
e
t
e
m
o
e
h
R

l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
C

t

%
w
4
4

(cid:0)

0

r
e
t
a
W

m
µ

5

(cid:0)

1

.
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

n
a
i
n
o
t
w
e
N
-
n
o
n

a

d
e
t
i
b
i
h
x
e

y
r
r
u
l
s

e
h
T
-

]
2
6
3
[

s
a
w
d
n
a

,

n
o
i
t
i
s
n
a
r
t

e
g
n
a
h
c
-
e
s
a
h
p

e
h
t

y
b

d
e
t
c
e
f
f
a

t
o
n

s
a
w
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

-

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
e
m
y
l
o
p

l
a
i
c
a
f
r
e
t
n
I

t

%
w
6
1

r
e
t
a
W

m
µ

4
3
3

.

0
5

(cid:0)

0
1

0
7

(cid:0)

7
1

-

U
P
@
0
6
M
T
m
r
e
h
t
a
d
o
r
C

P
N
G
%
1
0

.

A
M
M
P
@
n
fi
f
a
r
a
P

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103739 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Moreover, it was observed that the thermal conductivity of slurries with 
solid PCMs was lower than that of slurries with liquid PCMs. They also 
observed that when the PCM was in the form of a solid or liquid, the 
thermal conductivity of the slurry could be evaluated from Maxwell’s 
model with good accuracy. The thermal conductivity of the micro-ePCM 
slurries  at  various  weight  fractions  and  temperatures  is  presented  in 
Fig. 39. 

Ho et al. [350] reported that the thermal conductivity of micro-ePCM 
slurries was significantly affected by the physical state of the PCM, and 
that for temperatures below the melting temperature, thermal conduc-
tivity increased with temperature. However, in vicinity of the melting 
temperature,  the  ascending  trend  became  considerably  more  pro-
nounced due to the effect of the latent heat of fusion, while during the 
phase-change process, thermal conductivity significantly decreased, and 
when  the  PCM  completely  melted,  thermal  conductivity  began  to 
gradually increase. Barlak et al. [351] studied the effect of the type of 
carrying fluid on the thermal conductivity of nano-ePCM slurries pre-
pared  with  PUR  as  the  shell  and  n-nonadecane  as  the  PCM.  As  base 
fluids, water and EG were used. It was revealed that the thermal con-
ductivity  of  nano-ePCM  dispersions  with  EG  or  water  increased  and 
decreased, respectively, with increasing the weight fraction. The ther-
mal conductivity of dispersions with water was found to be lower than 
that with EG. They reported a maximum enhancement of almost 35% 
and 15% with EG and water dispersions, respectively. 

3.4.1.57.0. Carbon-modified shells. While several studies have been 
performed on the thermal conductivity of ePCM slurries using polymeric 
shells, limited studies have been devoted to those with carbon-modified 
shells.  Ma  et  al.  [352]  measured  the  thermal  conductivity  of 
micro-ePCM slurries with and without GO integrated in the shell ma-
terial.  It  was  observed  that the  thermal  conductivity of  both  types  of 
slurries increased with temperature and weight fraction. Compared to 
water,  the  thermal  conductivity  of  slurries  with  and  without  GO  was 

◦

increased by 4.5 and 3.1%, respectively. This result was attributed to the 
higher thermal conductivity of the titania/GO composite compared to 
that of only titania. Xu et al. [353] measured the thermal conductivity of 
the  carrying  fluid,  a  paraffin@Cu-Cu2O  slurry,  and  a  paraffin@Cu--
Cu2O/CNTs slurry. They revealed that the thermal conductivity of the 
pure  fluid  slightly  increased  with  the  addition  of  micro-ePCMs.  A 
maximum  increase  of  about  2.8%  was  observed  for  paraffin@Cu--
Cu2O/CNTs  at  4  wt%.  Chen  et  al.  [354]  examined  the  thermal  con-
ductivity  of  nano-ePCM  slurries  with  MWCNTs  as  shells  at  particle 
fractions of 5, 10, and 15 wt%. Their results showed that the thermal 
conductivity  of  the  slurries  increased  with  temperature  and  particle 
fraction, with a sharp increase in thermal conductivity observed during 
◦
the phase-change transition between 55 and 75
C. When the fraction of 
capsules was 15 wt%, thermal conductivity increased by almost 54% at 
60 
C,  which  was  attributed  to  the  intense  natural  convective  flow. 
However,  after  the  phase-change  transition,  the  thermal  conductivity 
was slightly reduced. At different concentrations and over a wide tem-
perature range, Liu et al. [355] determined the thermal conductivity of 
micro-ePCM slurries containing paraffin as the PCM, MF/graphite as the 
shell, and an ionic liquid as the carrying fluid. It was observed that the 
thermal conductivity of the paraffin@MF/graphite slurry enhanced by 9 
and 13% at 10 and 20 wt%, respectively. The result indicated that the 
thermal  conductivity  increases  with  weight  fraction.  Moreover,  the 
paraffin@MF/graphite  slurry  showed  higher  thermal  conductivity 
compared to that of paraffin@MF at 10 wt%, which was attributed to the 
higher thermal conductivity of MF/graphite compared to that of MF. A 
similar  trend  for  the  thermal  conductivity  of  paraffin@SiO2/GO  and 
paraffin@SnO2/CNTs slurries was reported by Yuan et al. [363] and Ma 
et al. [356], respectively. 

3.4.1.58. Specific heat capacity 

3.4.1.59.0. Polymeric  shells. Specific  heat  is  another  important 

Fig. 39. Thermal conductivity of encapsulated PCM slurries (paraffin as core and PMMA as shell) at different particle concentrations [349].  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103740S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

◦

◦

property that characterizes any HTF. However, the specific heat of ePCM 
slurries  has  received  little  attention  and  has  only  lately  been  investi-
gated.  Fang  et  al.  [267]  determined  the  specific  heat  capacity  of 
nano-ePCM slurries and found that when the PCM was  in its solid or 
liquid  states,  the  specific  heat  capacity  was  almost  constant  and 
decreased  with  nano-ePCM  concentration.  However,  the  specific  heat 
capacity  increased  rapidly  during  phase  change,  in  proportion  to  the 
nano-ePCMs concentration. A maximum  enhancement of  15% in spe-
cific  heat  capacity  was  observed  at  15  wt%.  Karaipekli  et  al.  [340] 
studied  the  specific  heat  capacity  of  nano-ePCM  slurries  at  different 
concentrations and temperatures. They revealed that when the PCM was 
◦
solid  (5(cid:0) 22
C)  or  liquid  (40(cid:0) 60
C),  the  specific  heat  capacity  was 
nearly  constant  and  slightly  affected  by  the  addition  of  nano-ePCMs. 
However,  during  phase  change  (22(cid:0) 28
C),  the  specific  heat  capacity 
increased as the temperature and weight fraction increased. The specific 
heat  capacity  was  increased  by  4.5  and  9.6%  at  1.0  and  2.0  wt%, 
respectively. They concluded that during the solid-liquid phase change, 
the  addition  of  nano-ePCMs  significantly  improved  the  specific  heat 
capacity  of  the  carrying  fluid.  Fig.  40  illustrates  the  specific  heat  ca-
pacity of nano-ePCM slurries at different concentrations and tempera-
tures, as reported in [340]. Fu et al. [341] measured the specific heat 
capacity of nano-ePCM slurries with different shell materials, at various 
concentrations and temperatures. Their results revealed that the addi-
tion of nano-ePCM particles improved the specific heat capacity of the 
◦
carrying fluid within the temperature range of (cid:0) 20 to 40 
C. The specific 
◦
heat capacity values showed a maximum between (cid:0) 10 and 0 
C due to 
the phase-change of water. However, a slight increase in specific heat 
capacity was observed in the range of 0 to 10 
C. Furthermore, slurries 
with a PS/silica shell were found to have a higher specific heat capacity 
compared to slurries with a PS shell. Recently, Dutkowski et al. [357] 
examined in detail the effects of both temperature and ePCM concen-
tration on the specific heat capacity of ePCM slurries. They observed that 
the addition of ePCMs to the carrying fluid caused an increase in the 
specific heat capacity of the slurry during the phase-change process. As 
the weight fraction varied between 8.6 and 30.1 wt%, the specific heat 
capacity at the melting point increased by almost 266%. Furthermore, 
the specific heat capacity of slurries with solid PCMs was higher than 
that  of  slurries  with  liquid  PCMs.  When  the  concentration  varied  be-
tween 8.6 and 30.1 wt%, the specific heat capacity of slurries with liquid 

◦

PCM decreased by 6.7%, whereas the specific heat capacity of slurries 
with solid PCM increased by 17.5%. 

◦
C and 55(cid:0) 65

3.4.1.60.0. Carbon-modified  shells. Ma  et  al.  [352]  found  that  the 
specific heat of paraffin@TiO2/GO and paraffin@TiO2 slurries, at 3 wt% 
◦
and between 40(cid:0) 50
C, was significantly higher than that 
of  the  carrying  fluid.  Because  of  the  occurrence  of  a  phase-change 
◦
transition, a sharp increase was observed around 60
C. Xu et al. [189] 
observed  different  behaviors  regarding  the  specific  heat  capacity  of 
paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs  and  paraffin@Cu-Cu2O  slurries  at  4  wt%. 
When  the  PCM  was  solid,  the  specific  heat  capacity  of  the  paraf-
fin@Cu-Cu2O slurry was higher than that of water, while the specific 
heat capacity of the paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs slurry was lower. How-
ever, when the PCM was liquid, both specific heat capacities were lower 
than that of water. In addition, during phase change, both specific heat 
capacities were greater than that of water, but the paraffin@Cu-Cu2O 
slurry had a larger heat capacity compared to paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs, 
which  was  attributed  to  the  higher  encapsulation  efficiency  of  paraf-
fin@Cu-Cu2O. Liu et al. [355] showed that the specific heat capacity of 
an ionic liquid increased by 13.4% as the temperature varied from 30 to 
◦
25
C.  The  specific  heat  capacity  of  paraffin@MF/graphite  and  paraf-
fin@MF slurries exhibited a maximum value during the phase transition. 
The specific heat capacity of the paraffin@MF/graphite slurry at 10 wt% 
was  enhanced  by  70%  compared  to  the  pure  fluid.  Moreover,  it  was 
found that as the weight fraction of paraffin@MF/graphite increased to 
20 wt%, the maximum value of the specific heat capacity increased by 
two fold compared to the ionic liquid. Yuan et al. [363] compared the 
specific heat capacity of the carrying fluid with paraffin@SiO2/GO and 
paraffin@SiO2  slurries  at  10  wt%  within  the  temperature  range  of 
◦
30(cid:0) 85
C. The specific heat capacity of both slurries exhibited a sharp 
increase  during  the  phase-change  transition  at  approximately  60 
C. 
However, when temperature was higher than 70 
C, the specific heat 
capacity  had  a  lower  value  compared  to  that  of  the  carrying  fluid.  A 
similar trend was obtained by Ma et al. [194] for paraffin@SnO2/CNTs. 

◦

◦

3.4.2. Rheological properties 

3.4.2.61. Polymeric  shells. Rheological  properties  have  a  significant 
impact  on  pressure  drop,  pumping  power,  and  heat  transfer  rate. 
Though the benefits of ePCM slurries for thermal applications depend on 

Fig. 40. Specific heat capacity of nano-encapsulated PCM slurries (n-nonadecane as core and P(St-co-MAA) as shell) at different weight concentrations and tem-
peratures [340]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103741S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

the compromise between the viscosity increase and thermal properties 
improvement, the viscosity of ePCM slurries as well as their rheological 
behavior  have  received  less  attention  than  thermal  properties.  Yang 
et al. [358] prepared four types of micro-ePCM slurries with tetradecane 
encapsulated by PEMA, PMMA, PS, or PVAc shells. It was found that 
tetradecane  could  not  be  encapsulated  with  PVAc  since  the  phase 
change cannot be manifested. They attributed this to the volatile nature 
of the monomer, which made polymerization at the surface of tetrade-
cane difficult. However, tetradecane could be encapsulated with PMMA, 
PS,  and  PEMA,  resulting  in  a  core@shell  structure  with  good 
heat-storage properties. It was revealed that the viscosity of the slurries 
increased slowly with an increase in weight fraction until it reached a 
◦
maximum value at a weight fraction of 40%. The viscosity at 25 
C and a 
particle concentration of 40% was about 20 times the viscosity of water. 
Fu et al. [341] investigated the viscosity of nano-ePCM slurries with and 
without silica in the shell material. It was observed that the viscosity of 
both  slurries  increased  with  weight  fraction  while  it  decreased  with 
temperature. At the melting point and 5 wt%, viscosity with and without 
silica increased by almost 21 and 16.7%, respectively. Zhang and Zhao 
[347] measured the rheological properties of two different micro-ePCM 
slurries at different weight fractions, ePCM sizes, and temperatures. It 
was  found  that  both  slurries  showed  a  Newtonian  behavior  for  shear 
(cid:0) 1, and that viscosity decreased with tempera-
rates greater than 200 s
ture while it increased with particle size and concentration. At various 
weight  fractions  and  a  temperature  of  27 
C,  Delgado  et  al.  [348] 
investigated the rheological properties of micro-ePCM slurries contain-
ing paraffin as the PCM and PMMA as the shell. It was shown that the 
viscosity  of the  slurry at  14,  20,  and  30  wt% was  5,  6,  and 18  times 
higher than that of the carrying fluid. Moreover, when the shear rate 
increased, the viscosity dropped until it reached the Newtonian plateau, 
where it stayed constant, as illustrated in Fig. 41. It was found that the 
viscosity-shear  rate  profiles  could  be  predicted  by  the  Carreau  model 
[364].  Yamagishi  et  al.  [359]  found  that  the  apparent  viscosity  of 
n-dodecane and n-tetradecane slurries depended on various parameters, 
such as temperature, concentration, and micro-ePCM size. The viscosity 
of slurries was higher at higher concentrations, particularly at concen-
trations  greater  than  30  wt%.  It  was  observed  that  surfactants  were 
effective in lowering the viscosity, and that the slurry with surfactant 
exhibited Newtonian behavior. This behavior was attributed to the fact 
that  surfactants  affected  the  core-shell  or  fluid-PCM  interactions. 
Alvarado  et  al.  [360]  presented  the  relative  viscosity  of  micro-ePCM 
slurries  based  on  n-tetradecane  as  PCM  and  gelatin  as  shell.  It  was 

◦

Fig.  41. Viscosity  versus  shear  rate  for  micro-encapsulated  PCM  slurries 
(paraffin as core and PMMA as shell) at different weight concentrations [348]. 
(Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

◦

observed that the relative viscosity, defined as the ratio of the apparent 
viscosity  of  the  micro-ePCM  slurry  to  that  of  the  carrying  fluid,  was 
independent of temperature. Viscosity was lower at higher temperatures 
and lower weight fractions. The findings further showed that the slurries 
exhibited Newtonian behavior up to 17.7 wt%. At six different ePCM 
concentrations, Dutkowski and Fiuk. [361] performed a detailed study 
on  the  rheological  properties  of  micro-ePCM  slurries  prepared  with 
Micronal@DS  5039  X–water  aqueous  solution.  It  was  found  that  the 
aqueous  solution  had  a  viscosity  of  several  hundred  to  several  dozen 
C.  Viscosity 
times  that  of  water  in  the  temperature  range  of  10-50 
increased  as  the  weight  fraction  of  capsules  increased.  On  the  other 
hand, the rheological behavior study demonstrated that the viscosity of 
the slurry dropped with an increase in shear rate until it reached the 
Newtonian  plateau, where  it appeared  to be  constant, indicating  that 
there existed a shear rate threshold beyond which the slurry exhibited 
Newtonian behavior. Furthermore, when steady-state conditions were 
maintained, the phase-change process of the micro-ePCM slurry had no 
discernible  effect  on  viscosity  near  the  melting  point.  However,  the 
phase-change  process  influenced  viscosity  during  unsteady-state  con-
ditions. It was proposed to measure the melting temperature of PCMs 
through viscosity measurements in case PCM properties were unknown 
[365].  Latibari  et  al.  [362]  examined  the  rheological  properties  of 
photothermal slurries with CrodathermTM 60 as the PCM and PU as the 
shell.  Results  showed  that  the  viscosity  of  the  slurry  increased  with 
weight fraction and decreased with temperature. It was observed that 
viscosity was not affected by the phase-change transition and was almost 
8-14 times greater than that of water. Furthermore, increasing the shear 
rate caused the viscosity to drop rapidly, and then it became constant, 
resulting in non-Newtonian behavior. 

3.4.2.62. Carbon-modified shells. To the best of our knowledge, only one 
study  has  been  performed  on  the  viscosity  of  ePCM  slurries  with  a 
carbon-modified shell. Xu et al. [353] measured the viscosity of paraf-
fin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs and paraffin@Cu-Cu2O slurries at 4 wt%, and found 
a  viscosity  enhancement  of  33  and  22%,  respectively,  compared  to 
water. This indicated that the paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs slurry was more 
viscous than the paraffin@Cu-Cu2O slurry. 

3.4.3. Optical properties 

Solar-thermal systems based on the direct volumetric absorption of 
solar radiation (to be discussed in Section 3.5) are directly dominated by 
the optical properties of the HTF. As a result, developing novel HTFs 
with  outstanding  thermophysical  characteristics  and  photothermal 
conversion  performance  is  critical.  Several  attempts  were  made  to 
improve the optical properties of pure HTFs by suspending ePCM par-
ticles  into  the  carrying  fluid.  Wang  et  al.  [334]  studied  the  spectral 
transmittance  of  several  colloidal  fluids  at  the  wavelength  range  of 
200(cid:0) 2000 nm, including the carrying fluid (a mixture of ethanol and 
water),  paraffin@MEL  slurry  at  1  wt%,  a  mixture  of  paraffin@MEL 
slurry at 1 wt% and MWCNTs at 0.005 wt%, and a MWCNTs nanofluid at 
0.005 wt%. It was observed that transmittance considerably decreased 
with  the  addition  of  MWCNTs  to  the  carrying  fluid,  indicating  high 
optical  absorption  over  the  studied  wavelength  range.  However,  the 
micro-ePCM  slurries  with  and  without  MWCNTs  had  almost  zero 
transmittance,  indicating  higher  optical  absorption  compared  to  the 
MWCNT nanofluid. Ma et al. [352] prepared a micro-ePCM slurry con-
taining paraffin as PCM and titania/GO as a shell to improve the effi-
ciency 
of 
paraffin@titania/GO  and  paraffin@titania  slurries  at  3  wt%  revealed 
that the paraffin@titania/GO slurry was darker. Therefore, it exhibited 
superior  light-absorption  properties  in  the  range  of  visible  light 
compared to paraffin@titania. This result indicates that the modifica-
tion of a titania shell with GO played a key role in enhancing the optical 
properties of the slurry. Xu et al. [353] measured the optical absorption 
of  paraffin@Cu-Cu2O  and  paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs  slurries  for  direct 

photographs 

collectors. 

direct 

solar 

The 

of 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103742S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

solar  collectors.  It  was  found  that  paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs  exhibited 
better light absorption. They attributed this finding to the CNTs struc-
ture, which was similar to hexagonal carbon. Liu et al. [355] prepared 
micro-ePCM  slurries  by  suspending  paraffin@MF/graphite  and  paraf-
fin@MF  composites  into  an  ionic  liquid  to  examine  the  effect  of 
embedding graphite in the shell on the photothermal performance of the 
slurry.  It  was  observed  that  the  optical  absorption  of  paraffin@MF/-
graphite was four times higher than that of paraffin@MF. This result was 
ascribed to the resonant band-to-band transition and the effect of plas-
mon  excitation.  Yuan  et  al.  [363]  found  that  the  optical  absorption 
properties  of  paraffin@SiO2/GO  were  higher  than  that  of  paraf-
fin@SiO2, which indicated that adding GO to the silica shell improved 
the solar absorption of micro-ePCM slurries. Ma et al. [356] examined 
the  optical  properties  of  paraffin@SnO2/CNTs  and  paraffin@SnO2 
slurries. It was shown that paraffin@SnO2/CNTs exhibited a three-fold 
increase  in  optical  absorbance  within  the  range  of  visible  light  as 
compared  to  paraffin@SnO2,  indicating  that  embedding  CNTs  within 
the shell material can significantly improve optical absorption. Latibari 
et al. [362] prepared CrodathermTM 60@PU slurries with the addition of 
graphite nanoplatelets (GNPs) to improve optical and thermal proper-
ties.  The  optical  transmittance  of  the  slurries  was  measured  at  room 
temperature  and  over  a  wavelength  range  of  200(cid:0) 2500  nm  using  a 
UV-Vis-NIR  spectrophotometer.  It  was  found  that  the  GNPs  played  a 
significant role in the absorption of visible light. Gao et al. [366] pro-
posed micro-ePCM slurries with superior magnetic and optical proper-
ties  using  octadecane@MF  composites.  MF  was  modified  with  GO  or 
rGO to improve the optical properties and thermal conductivity of the 
micro-ePCMs, while octadecane was doped with Fe3O4-OA to enhance 
magnetic  properties  when  the  micro-ePCMs  were  recycled  under  an 
external  magnetic  field.  Results  showed  that  the  rGO-modified  slurry 
possessed the highest optical absorbance, followed by the GO-modified 
slurry, which had a higher absorbance than the unmodified micro-ePCM 
slurry and water, as shown in Fig. 42 (a) and (b). The attributed reasons 
for  this  phenomenon  were  twofold.  First,  the  optical  absorbance  was 
improved with GO due to electron conjugation and aromatic character 
effects. Second, a large amount of oxygen-containing functional groups, 
causing damage to the π-π conjugated system of GO, underwent reduc-
tion by UV radiation. 

3.5. Solar photothermal absorption and storage using ePCM slurries/ 
dispersions 

Solar energy appears to be the best choice among other renewable 
energy  technologies  because  of  its  abundance,  sustainability,  and 
cleanliness, as well as its ability to be produced at a lower cost and on a 
larger scale [367,368]. Photothermal, photochemical, and photovoltaic 
conversions  are  all  efficient  methods  for  converting solar  energy into 
other forms of useful energy. However, solar photothermal conversion 
coupled  with  TES  is  one  of  the  most  convenient  and  frequently  used 
methods to harvest solar energy due to its high energy conversion and 
simplistic operational mechanism. There are numerous applications for 
solar  photothermal  conversion  that  span  a  wide  temperature  range, 
including  solar  cookers,  solar  water  heaters,  and  concentrated  solar 
power [369] (refer to Section 2.5). 

Solar collectors, which collect solar energy and convert it to thermal 
energy,  are  the  cornerstone  of  photothermal  systems.  Solar-thermal 
collectors  can  be  classified  as  direct  or  indirect  solar  collectors.  For 
indirect-absorption  solar  collectors  (IASC),  also  called  surface- 
absorption  solar  collectors,  solar  radiation  is  first  absorbed  and  then 
indirectly transferred to the HTF. However, the high surface tempera-
ture  of  the  IASC  results  in  significant  heat  losses  and  low  conversion 
efficiencies. Therefore, an alternative type of solar collectors called the 
direct-absorption  solar collector  (DASC), also known as a  volumetric- 
absorption  solar  collector,  was  developed  for  further  improvement  of 
the energy efficiency of solar-thermal collectors [6]. There are key dif-
ferences  between  IASCs  and  DASCs.  IASCs  are  based  on  the  surface 

Fig.  42. a)  Photographs  and  b)  optical  absorbance  of  magnetic  micro-ePCM 
slurries (octadecane doped with Fe3O4-OA as core and MF as shell) with and 
without modifying the shell with GO or rGO [366]. (Reused with permission 
from Elsevier). 

absorption of solar radiation using an absorber plate, whereas in DASCs, 
solar radiation is volumetrically absorbed within the HTF without the 
need  for  an  absorber  plate.  The  energy  efficiency  of  IASCs  can  be 
improved  by  increasing  the  thermal  properties  of  conventional  HTFs. 
Improvement of the optical properties is not necessary owing to the high 
absorptivity  of  the  coated  surface.  On  the  other  side,  due  to  the  low 
absorptivity of conventional HTFs, optical properties are more impor-
tant in DASCs than thermal properties. In DASCs, the problem of peeling 
or oxidation of the absorber plate in IASCs is avoided; yet, the working 
fluids  in  DASCs  are  directly  exposed  to  solar  radiation  and  must  be 
durable with cyclic solar radiation. 

Conventional  HTFs,  such  as  ethylene  glycol,  molten  salt,  thermal 
oils,  and  water,  possess  limited  thermal  characteristics  and  are  weak 
absorbers over the visible and ultra-violet ranges of the solar spectrum 
(absorption of only 13% of solar radiation), resulting in poor thermal 
and  optical  properties,  which  result  in  a  decrease  in  the  energy  effi-
ciency  of  solar-thermal  collectors.  For  solar-thermal  collectors,  nano-
fluids, which are mixtures of nanoparticles and conventional HTFs, have 
been  proposed  to  achieve  better  performance.  Studies  on  nanofluid- 
based  IASCs  have  shown  that  the  efficiency  of  IASCs  is  enhanced 
mainly  owing  to  the  increased  thermal  conductivity  of  nanofluids. 
However,  the  IASC  efficiency  is  found  to  drop  at  higher  nanoparticle 
concentrations due to the increase in viscous forces, which leads to a 
decrease in heat transfer rates and an increase in pumping power [215]. 
On the other hand, studies performed on nanofluid-based DASCs have 
revealed  that  the  addition  of  nanoparticles  (e.g.  plasmonic  nano-
particles)  to  conventional  HTFs  can  improve  optical  features  even  at 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103743S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

very low concentrations as long as long-term radiation stability [370] 
and thermal stability [371] are maintained. The reported data indicates 
that nanoparticle concentration has a significant impact on the perfor-
mance of DASCs. When nanoparticle volume fraction is above an opti-
mum value, incident radiation is absorbed in the thin top layer of the 
nanofluid instead of being volumetrically absorbed, and consequently, a 
DASC approaches the surface-absorption limit of IASCs [369]. Relative 
to IASCs, nanofluid-based DASCs show an increase in solar-to-thermal 
efficiency  [372].  Some  concerns  with  nanofluids  include  their  rela-
tively low heat capacity in comparison with conventional HTFs, which 
indicates that high receiver efficiency can be obtained at high solar ra-
diation  levels  [373],  and  the  time  mismatch  between  solar  energy 
availability and energy demand, which reduces the utility of solar col-
lectors [374]. 

Other  than  the  limited  thermal  and  optical  characteristics  of  con-
ventional HTFs, the stored energy in solar-thermal collectors based on 
conventional HTFs or nanofluids is also a major issue. The stored ther-
mal energy can be released when solar radiation is intermittent (e.g., 
cloudy  periods  of  the  day),  which  may  hinder  their  widespread 
commercialization. Recently, ePCM slurries and dispersions were found 
to be an appealing option for solar-thermal collectors due to their su-
perior  thermal  and  optical  properties,  constant  temperature  during 
solid-liquid  transition,  high  latent  heat  storage  capacity,  and  better 
matching between energy supply and demand [31]. ePCM slurries and 
dispersions exhibit superior thermal and optical properties compared to 
pure fluids and colloidal dispersions. In addition, they can release and 
store  a  considerable  amount  of  latent  heat  during  phase  change  at 
constant  temperature.  In  the  following  sections,  research  studies  are 
reviewed for the application of ePCMs in DASCs and IASCs. 

3.5.1.

Indirect surface-absorption systems 

There are various types of IASCs, among which evacuated-tube col-
lectors and flat-plate collectors are the most common. IASCs consist of 
an absorber plate of steel, aluminum, copper, or polymers to which a 
wavelength-selective or black coating is applied. The coated plate ab-
sorbs solar radiation and transforms it into thermal energy, resulting in a 
significantly high surface temperature. Then, the HTF flowing below the 
absorber plate collects heat indirectly via both conduction and convec-
tion. Since the exposed absorber plate has the highest temperature in the 
system,  a  large  amount  of  heat  is  lost  to  the  environment  by  both 

convection and radiation and to the other components by conduction. 
Moreover, the high temperature of the absorber leads to a decrease in 
optical absorption due to peeling and oxidation of the coated surface. 
Therefore,  IASCs  typically  exhibit  low  overall  conversion  efficiencies, 
especially at high operating temperatures. A schematic representation of 
an ePCM slurry-based IASC is presented in Fig. 43. 

Although reported data have shown that ePCM slurries offer higher 
thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity relative to conventional 
HTFs, studies on IASCs based ePCM slurries are still largely unexplored. 
Dutkowski et al. [375] presented a preliminary research study regarding 
the effect of ePCM water slurries (with paraffin as a core and PMMA as a 
shell) at 4.3 and 8.6 wt% on the efficiency of flat-plate solar collectors. 
The solar irradiance varied between 250 and 950 W/m2. Their results 
revealed that at the same solar irradiance, the higher the load fraction of 
ePCM,  the  lower  the  outlet  temperature  from  the  solar  collector, 
allowing  for  a  reduction  in  heat  loss.  At  the  maximum  radiation  in-
tensity, the temperature of the ePCM slurry at 8.6 wt% was around 10 
degrees lower than that of water. Serale et al. [191] numerically eval-
uated the performance of a flat-plate solar collector based on an ePCM 
slurry with n-eicosane as the PCM and glycol-water as the carrying fluid. 
It was shown that the total and instantaneous photothermal conversion 
efficiencies  using  the  ePCM  slurry  surpassed  that  of  the  glycol-water 
mixture,  with  efficiency  enhancements  of  4  and  6%  reported  at  vol-
ume  concentrations  of  30  and  40%,  respectively.  Huang  et  al.  [376] 
characterized  the  thermal  charge/discharge  process  of  a  TES  system 
with a helical coil exchanger under constant heat flux and turbulent flow 
conditions. Water was used as the carrying fluid and microencapsulated 
paraffin  as  the  heat  storage  medium.  An  ePCM  slurry  with  a  melting 
temperature  of  65 
C  and  various  concentrations  was  tested  and 
compared to the pure fluid. They observed that slurries with 50 vol% 
were not suitable for thermal storage due to the low heat transfer rate. 
Moreover,  the  location  and  size  of  the  heat  exchanger  were  found  to 
significantly impact thermal performance of the TES system. 

◦

3.5.2. Direct volumetric-absorption systems 

The twin design aims of any solar-thermal collector are to minimize 
heat  loss  and  maximize  solar  absorption,  consequently  maximizing 
solar-to-thermal efficiency. Conventional IASCs intrinsically suffer from 
high thermal losses due to their hot surface temperatures, hence their 
low efficiency. Such drawback is significantly limiting the photothermal 

Fig. 43. Schematic illustration of an indirect-absorption solar collector (IASC) based on an ePCM slurry. Solar radiation is first absorbed by the absorber plate and 
then indirectly transferred to the HTF. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103744S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

utilization of solar energy. To overcome this limitation, the concept of 
DASCs was proposed in 1975 by Minardi and Chuang [377]. In contrast 
to IASCs, the incident solar radiation is directly absorbed by the bulk 
HTF  (i.e.,  volumetric  absorption)  rather  than  by  the  coated  surface. 
Therefore,  thermal  resistance  between  the  absorber  plate  and  HTF  is 
completely eliminated, and heat losses are minimized due to the lower 
surface temperature of the collector. A schematic representation of an 
ePCM slurry-based DASC is illustrated in Fig. 44. As the surface tem-
perature of the capsules is expected to be greater than the temperature of 
the  surrounding  fluid  (since  the  shell  material  is  engineered  for 
maximum  solar  absorption),  ePCMs  are  considered  to  behave  as  heat 
sources for the surrounding fluid during the thermal charging and dis-
charging  processes  (i.e.,  heat  is  transferred  from  capsules  to  fluid). 
Although DASCs can outperform IASCs [6], there are still many attempts 
to  acquire  DASCs with  superior  photothermal  conversion  efficiencies. 
One  of  these  attempts  is  by  suspending  ePCMs  in  conventional  solar 
fluids. In contrast to ePCM-based IASCs, studies on ePCM-based DASCs 
have  received  more  attention  from  the  scientific  community.  Fig.  45 
presents  the  photothermal  conversion  efficiency  of  micro/nano-ePCM 
slurries/dispersions  with  different  core-shell  combinations  when  used 
for direct-absorption solar applications. Photothermal efficiencies pro-
vide a strong indicator of the combined optical and thermal function-
ality of ePCMs as solar energy is absorbed, the PCM cores are melted, 
and  thermal  energy  is  retained  while  transferring  heat  to/from  the 
ePCMs  during  charging/discharging.  The  photothermal  (solar--
to-thermal)  conversion  efficiency  in  an  ePCM-based  direct-absorption 
system can be defined as [311]: 

η =

mΔH
AIt

,

(14)  

where m is the mass of ePCMs, ΔH is the latent heat enthalpy during 
phase transition, A is the effective surface area, I is solar intensity, and tis 
the irradiation time. 

As shown in Fig. 45, for the same core material, modifications to the 
shell material result in varying photothermal efficiencies based on the 
ability of the shell to absorb one or more spectral bands in the incident 
solar radiation. This motivates the synthesis of composite shells made of 
multiple martials able to absorb different bands of the solar spectrum. 
For example, with TiO2  used in the shell, which is almost exclusively 
◦
sensitive to absorbing UV light, and n-eicosane (melting point of 38
C) 
as a core material, a TiO2/CuS-GO composite shell reaches an efficiency 
of 97.1%. CuS and GO were utilized as photothermal fillers, with CuS 
nanoparticles  loaded  into  GO  nanosheets  that  served  as  structural 

supports.  CuS has a broad absorption band over  the whole spectrum, 
with  a  prominent  absorption  peak  in  the  near-infrared  range.  This 
combination maximizes the use of solar energy and enhances the pho-
tothermal  efficiency.  On  the  other  hand,  using  Crodatherm  (melting 
◦
C)  as  a  core  material  with  polyurea  as  a  shell,  which  is 
point  of  60
sensitive  to  UV  light,  results  in  a  photothermal  efficiency  of  30%, 
meaning  that  the  potential  of  solar  photothermal  conversion  is  not 
efficiently utilized with the polyurea shell (more details are presented in 
Sections 3.6.2 and 5.1). 

◦

As  illustrated  in  Fig.  46,  Wang  et  al.  [334]  compared  the  photo-
thermal conversion performance (during irradiation time of 3000 s) of 
MWCNT-ePCM slurries at 5, 10, and 15 wt% with that of water-ethanol 
mixture and MWCNT nanofluid at 0.005 wt%. At the charging stage, the 
temperature rise of the MWCNT-ePCM slurry was found to be lower than 
that of MWCNT nanofluid and higher than that of the pure fluid. The 
terminal temperature of the MWCNT nanofluid and slurry with 5 wt% 
was increased by 16.3 and 9.5 
C, respectively. Moreover, the terminal 
temperature of the slurries was further reduced as the weight concen-
tration was increased from 5 to 15 wt%. This result was attributed to the 
heat-absorption and high reflectivity of the slurry at higher concentra-
tions. Moreover, at the discharging stage, the terminal temperature of 
the slurry at different concentrations was found to be greater than that of 
the MWCNT nanofluid. As compared to the base fluid, an increase of 
about 4.6 
C in the terminal temperature of the slurry (at 15 wt%) was 
observed, indicating that suspending both nanoparticles and ePCMs into 
the base fluid revealed a promising solution for DASCs to overcome the 
intermittence of solar radiation. 

◦

Ma et al. [352] measured the photothermal conversion performance 
of an ePCM slurry and a GO-ePCM slurry under an irradiation time of 
4000 s and a weight concentration of 3%. It was found that the tem-
◦
perature of the GO-ePCM slurry increased from 30 to 92
C, while the 
◦
C. Moreover, 
temperature of the ePCM slurry increased from 30 to 85
the  effective  receiver  efficiency of  both  slurries was  calculated  at  the 
same  temperature  and  weight  fraction,  and  it  was  observed  that  the 
effective receiver efficiency of the GO-ePCM slurry was greater than that 
of the  ePCM slurry.  Their result indicated that GO granted the slurry 
with  superior  photothermal  conversion  properties.  Xu  et  al.  [353] 
measured the photothermal conversion performance of the base fluid, 
CNT nanofluid, paraffin@Cu-Cu2O slurry, and paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNT 
slurry, at a weight concentration of 4%. The overall results showed that 
the  CNT  nanofluid,  paraffin@Cu-Cu2O  slurry,  and  paraffin@Cu--
Cu2O/CNT slurry had higher temperatures compared to the base fluid 
during 3500 s irradiation time. However, before 500 s, the addition of 

Fig. 44. Schematic illustration of a direct-absorption solar collector (DASC) based on an ePCM slurry. Solar radiation is volumetrically absorbed within the HTF 
without the need for an absorber plate. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103745S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 45. Photothermal conversion efficiency of various micro/nano-ePCM slurries/dispersions for volumetric solar-absorption applications  

Fig. 46. Temperature variation of MWCNTs-ePCM slurries at 5, 10, and 15 wt% while irradiated for 3000 s at the a) charging and b) discharging stages. Also shown 
are the temperature variations for a 1:2 ethanol/water mixture and a 0.005 wt% MWCNTs nanofluid [334]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

particles had no significant impact on temperature, while after 500 s, the 
temperature of the CNT nanofluid was higher than that of the slurries, 
which was ascribed to the heat absorption of ePCMs during the melting 
process.  After  3000  s,  the  temperature  of  the  CNT  nanofluid,  paraf-
fin@Cu-Cu2O  slurry,  and  paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNT  slurry  increased  to 
99.3, 96.5, and 88.7
C, respectively, while the temperature of the base 
◦
fluid was only 79.8
C. Moreover, the calculated photothermal conver-
sion efficiency showed that the paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNT slurry had the 
highest efficiency, which makes them favorable for DASCs. 

◦

Chen  et  al.  [354]  observed  that  during  7000  s  of  irradiation,  the 
temperature of an ePCM slurry at 5 wt% increased to 75 
C, while the 
◦
temperature at 10 wt% increased to 80 
C. However, the temperature at 
◦
15 wt% increased to 65 
C. The decrease in temperature was attributed 
to the reflection of radiation at higher weight concentrations. Moreover, 
it was found that the ePCM slurries at 10 and 15 wt% exhibited higher 
and  lower  receiver  efficiencies  compared  to  the  slurry  at  5  wt%, 

◦

respectively.  Liu  et  al.  [355]  examined  the  photothermal  conversion 
performance  of  graphite-ePCM-based  DASCs  at  different  weight  frac-
tions. Their results indicated that the temperature of the ePCM slurry at 
10  wt%  was  lower  than  that  of  the  base  fluid,  resulting  in  a  lower 
photothermal  conversion  performance  and  thermal  storage  capacity. 
The authors attributed this result to the white color of the ePCM slurry 
and the resulting higher light reflection. 

Yuan et al. [363] studied the variation in temperature under irradi-
ation for 3000 s for slurries of paraffin@SiO2/GO and paraffin@SiO2 at 
10 wt%. It was found that the temperature of the paraffin@SiO2/GO and 
◦
C, respectively, with the 
paraffin@SiO2 slurries increased to 80 and 67 
paraffin@SiO2/GO slurry having a higher receiver efficiency. Ma et al. 
[356] indicated that the temperature of a paraffin@SnO2  slurry and a 
paraffin@SnO2/CNT  slurry  at  5  wt%  increased  to  90.2  and  82.5 
C, 
respectively.  In  addition,  it  was  shown  that  the  paraffin@SnO2/CNT 
slurry had a higher conversion efficiency. Latibari et al. [362] measured 

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103746S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

◦

the photothermal conversion performance of an ePCM slurry containing 
water  and  0.1%  of  GNP.  It  was  shown  that  the  temperature  of  the 
GNP-ePCM slurry at 16 wt% and under an irradiation time of 3000 s 
increased to 85 
C, while the temperature of the base fluid and ePCM 
◦
C, respectively. This result was attributed 
slurry increased to 55 and 35 
to the white color of the ePCM slurry and the poor light absorption of the 
base fluid. The authors concluded that the required time for the base 
fluid  and  ePCM  slurry  to  achieve  85 
C  was  greatly  reduced  in  the 
presence of GNP. 

◦

Gao et al. [366] evaluated the photothermal performance of the base 
fluid, ePCM slurry, GO-ePCM slurry, and rGO-ePCM slurry. The ePCMs 
were produced with MF as the shell and octadecane modified by OA and 
Fe3O4 as the PCM. It was found that the rGO-ePCM slurry attained the 
highest  thermal  storage  capacity  and  temperature  in  DASCs.  They 
attributed the photothermal performance enhancement to the superior 
absorption property of rGO. A summary of the photothermal conversion 
performance  and  efficiency  data  of  ePCM  slurries  is  presented  in 
Table 10. 

3.6. Functional requirements of ePCM slurries/dispersions in solar 
photothermal systems 

3.6.1. The solid-liquid PCM core 

To  date,  various  core  materials,  including  organic  and  inorganic, 
have been used in ePCM systems. The selection of a PCM as the core 
material mainly depends upon the intended application. In solar pho-
tothermal  systems,  paraffin  is  the  most  preferred  core  material.  Non- 
encapsulated  paraffin  has  the  advantages  of  little-to-no  supercooling, 
long-term chemical stability, wide melting temperature range (up to 100 
◦
C), non-corrosiveness, and commercial availability. However, the main 
drawbacks of paraffin are low thermal conductivity, flammability, and 
low  latent  heat  storage  density  (see  Section  2.2.4).  To  resolve  this 
problem, paraffin has been encapsulated using a variety of shell mate-
rials, as will be discussed later. The advantages of encapsulating paraffin 
are:  1)  absence  of  any  reaction  between  paraffin  and  its  surrounding 
environment, 2) ability to resist changes in volume during phase-change 
transitions,  3)  better  leakage  prevention,  and  4)  higher  specific  heat 
capacity, thermal conductivity, and light absorption properties. These 

properties have demonstrated that encapsulated paraffin has great po-
tential applications in solar-thermal systems. 

3.6.2. The encapsulating solid shell 

3.6.2.63. Surface-modified shells. As previously shown, polymer is one 
of the most commonly used shell materials for creating ePCMs due to its 
appropriate plasticity and outstanding sealing tightness compared with 
inorganic shell materials. PMMA, PS, poly(urea-formaldehyde) (PUF), 
poly(melamine-formaldehyde) (PMF), and PUR are commonly chosen as 
shell materials to encapsulate PCMs. Among the organic shell materials, 
MF  shells  have  been  widely  employed  due  to  their  low  price,  high 
strength, good stability, and thermal durability [6]. 

Since  polymer  shells  have  low  thermal  conductivity,  researchers 
have  suggested  inorganic  shell  materials  which  have  undoubtedly 
higher thermal conductivities compared to polymers. The most widely 
used  inorganic  materials  for  encapsulating  PCMs  are  titania  (TiO2) 
[292], silica (SiO2) [291], zinc oxide (ZnO) [378], tin dioxide (SnO2) 
[365],  and  calcium  carbonate  (CaCO3)  [379].  However,  these  shell 
materials are usually white-colored with poor optical properties, which 
seriously limits their application in DASCs. Consequently, it is impera-
tive  to  develop  ePCMs  with  superior  photothermal  conversion  capa-
bility.  Recently, 
to  use 
surface-modified  shells  instead  of  conventional  shells,  including 
TiO2/GO  [352],  Cu/Cu2O/CNTs  [353],  MWCNTs  [354],  MF/graphite 
[355],  SiO2/GO  [363],  SnO2/CNTs  [380],  PMMA/GNP  [362],  and 
MF/rGO [366]. The proposed shells, due to the introduction of carbon 
materials as fillers, were found to exhibit higher thermal conductivity 
and  solar-absorption  capability  compared  to  conventional  polymeric 
and inorganic shells (refer to Section 3.5.2). 

researchers  have  attempted 

some 

3.6.2.64. Multiple concentric shells. One of the current research hotspots 
is  producing  ePCMs  with  multi-layered  shells  for  solar  volumetric- 
absorption  applications.  Liu  et  al.  [381]  fabricated  bifunctional 
micro-ePCMs for solar-thermal energy storage and solar photocatalysis. 
The capsules were produced with n-eicosane as PCM and SiO2/cadmium 
sulfide  (CdS)  as  double-layered  shell  material.  It  was  found  that  the 
micro-ePCMs achieved an energy storage efficiency of 46%, an increase 

Table 10 
Reported data on the photothermal conversion performance and efficiency of various ePCM slurries/dispersions.  

Core@shell 

Irradiance 
time 

Paraffin@MF 

3000 s 

ePCM 
size 

10 μm 

Paraffin@titania-GO 

4000 s 

2(cid:0) 5 μm 

Carrying fluid 

Concentration 

Main results 

Ethanol/water 
MWCNT 
nanofluid 
Water 

5, 10 and 15 wt 
% 

3 wt% 

4 wt% 

Paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/ 

3500 s 

688 nm 

Water 

CNTs 

Acid@MWCNTs 

7000 s 

Paraffin@MF/graphite 

6000 s 

50(cid:0) 60 
nm 

Not 
reported 

Water 

0-15 wt% 

[BMIM]BF4 

0-20 wt% 

Paraffin@SiO2/GO 

3000 s 

20 μm 

Water 

10 wt% 

Paraffin@SnO2/CNTs 

3000 s 

1(cid:0) 5 μm 

Water 

CrodathermTM 60@PU 

3000 s 

3.34 μm 

Water 

5 wt% 

16 wt % 

-0.1%GNP 

Octadecane@MF/rGO 

800 s 

Not 
reported 

Water 

15.0 wt% 

Hybrid slurries possess lower photothermal conversion compared to 
MWCNT-nanofluids at the charging state. However, an inverse trend 
was observed at the discharging state. 
Paraffin@titania-GO slurry showed superior photothermal conversion 
performance relative to paraffin@titania slurry. 
Paraffin@Cu-Cu2O/CNTs slurry has higher photothermal conversion 
efficiency compared to CNT nanofluids, paraffin@Cu-Cu2O slurry, and 
base fluid. 
Acid@MWCNTs slurry with 10 and 20 wt% showed higher and lower 
photothermal conversion efficiency compared to the base fluid, 
respectively. 
- Paraffin@MF/graphite slurry with 10 wt% exhibited higher 
photothermal conversion performance and thermal storage capacity 
compared to paraffin@MF slurry. 
- Photothermal conversion performance of paraffin@MF/graphite is 
reduced as the weight concentration is increased. 
Paraffin@SiO2/GO slurry revealed higher receiver efficiency and 
photothermal conversion performance compared to paraffin@SiO2/ 
GO slurry. 
Paraffin@SnO2/CNTs slurry showed higher photothermal conversion 
performance compared to paraffin@SiO2/GO slurry. 
Slurry with GNP showed higher photothermal conversion performance 
relative to the slurry without GNP. 
Octadecane@MF/rGO slurry has higher photothermal conversion 
performance as compared to octadecane@MF/rGO, octadecane@MF/ 
rGO, and octadecane@MF slurries. 

Ref. 

[334] 

[352] 

[353] 

[354] 

[355] 

[311] 

[356] 

[362] 

[366]  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103747S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

reliability, 

in  phase-change 

in phase-change enthalpy over 70 J/g, and a thermal conductivity in-
crease  of  580%.  Therefore,  the  micro-ePCMs  exhibited  excellent  per-
thermoregulation,  and 
formance 
solar-thermal  performance.  The  micro-ePCMs  also  revealed  excellent 
photocatalytic activity under solar radiation. The capsules led to pho-
todegradation  in  MB  by  about  90  wt%  under  an  irradiation  time  of 
14400 s. Furthermore, the capsules showed a fluorescent property due to 
the CdS layer. It was concluded that these unique bifunctional properties 
can be utilized for sustainable solar photocatalytic and photochemical 
systems. Yuan et al. [363] fabricated double-layered micro-ePCMs that 
contained  n-eicosane  as  a  PCM  and  PMF/polydopamine  (PDA)  as  a 
double-layer  shell.  They  found  that  with  the  addition  of  PDA,  the 
durability remained unchanged, the latent heat increased to over 190 
J/g,  and  the  ePCMs  exhibited  excellent photothermal  conversion  fea-
tures, including a quick heating rate and high latent heat. In addition, 
the PDA layer decreased the leakage rate and strengthened the shell. 

Recently,  Pornea  and  Kim  [382]  designed  and  synthesized 
micro-ePCMs with a three-layered shell, containing TiO2, SiO2, and PDA 
as shell materials and n-eicosane as PCM, as shown in Fig. 47. The au-
thors provided an extensive investigation on the chemical structure and 
composition, thermal induction capacity, and crystallinity of the ePCMs, 
and it was found that the micro-ePCMs had a phase-change enthalpy of 
125.92 J/g. Their study confirmed that the combination TiO2, SiO2, and 
PDA  not  only  improved  the  durability,  photocatalytic  activity,  and 
structural  stability  of  the  ePCMs,  but  also  promoted  localized  visible 
light  absorption  and  scattering  in  the  shell.  Therefore,  the  designed 
micro-ePCMs  were  deemed  promising  for  solar-thermal  conversion 
applications. 

3.7. The influence of key design parameters on solar ePCM systems 

3.7.1. Size of PCM capsules 

The size of the PCM capsules is a factor that can greatly affect the 
thermal and optical characteristics of the slurry/dispersion as a whole. 
In addition, the size distribution of ePCMs in the slurry/dispersion may 
be non-uniform, and the ePCM motion may significantly affect the heat 
transfer  and  flow  characteristics.  However,  limited  studies  have 
attempted  to  capture  the  effect  of  this  parameter.  Lin  et  al.  [383] 
numerically analyzed the heat transfer characteristics of ePCM slurries 
under  various  volume  concentrations  (5-25  vol%)  and  sizes  (5-1000 
µm). Their results showed that a smaller capsule size led to higher heat 
transfer enhancement, particularly when the size was smaller than 100 
μm. Otherwise, the size effect on the heat transfer coefficient was not 

Fig.  47. A  composite  three-layered  shell  of  TiO2,  SiO2,  and  PDA  micro- 
encapsulating an n-eicosane core (modified from [382]). 

noticeable. The mean heat transfer coefficient improved by almost 5.3% 
as  the size  was  decreased from 1000  to 100 μm. Furthermore, it  was 
found  that  as  the  volume  concentration  increased,  the  average  heat 
transfer  coefficient  initially  increased,  then  dropped,  reaching  a 
maximum value of almost 107 W/m2•K at a volume concentration of 20 
vol%. The decrease in heat transfer coefficient was attributed to the high 
viscosity and low thermal conductivity of the slurry. 

Xu et al. [384] also numerically investigated the effect of capsule size 
on  the  heat  transfer  performance  of  an  ePCM  slurry.  Their  results 
showed that for a diameter less than or equal to 10 µm, the capsules were 
uniformly distributed throughout the pipe. However, at diameters be-
tween  100  and  1000  µm,  the  distribution  was  non-uniform  and  the 
capsules accumulated at the center of the tube. Also, when capsule sizes 
were small, relative velocity between the capsules and water was nearly 
zero,  indicating  that  the  slurry  could  be  considered  as  a  single-phase 
fluid  (at  least  from  a  momentum  transfer  perspective).  However,  the 
relative velocity increased significantly when the capsule size increased. 
In  addition,  it  was  revealed  that  pumping  power  was  reduced  with 
smaller  capsule  sizes.  The  pressure-drop  and  viscosity  dramatically 
increased  by  almost  31  and  85.5%  respectively,  as  the  size  increased 
from 500 to 1000 µm. Ma et al. [385] examined the size effect on the 
velocity distribution, pressure drop, and volume fraction distribution of 
a  slurry  in  a  horizontal  pipe  subjected  to  constant  heat  flux.  It  was 
concluded that as the size decreased from 1000 to 1 µm, the mean heat 
transfer  coefficient  increased  by  243%.  Furthermore,  excellent  heat 
transfer performance with no penalty in pressure drop was observed for 
capsule sizes in the range of 10-100 μm. 

3.7.2. Morphology of PCM capsules 

As one can notice from the previous sections, most research studies 
on ePCMs to date have focused on spherical shapes. To the best of our 
knowledge,  only  one  study  has  taken  into  account  the  possibility  of 
having various ePCM morphologies. Liu et al. [386] aimed to investigate 
the  morphology  effect  on  thermal  storage  performance  and  thermal 
response of ePCMs. They designed and fabricated spherical, tubular, and 
octahedral ePCMs with n-eicosane as the core and TiO2 as the shell, as 
illustrated in Fig. 48. The thermal analysis under non-isothermal con-
ditions indicated that the spherical ePCMs showed the highest amount of 
heat charging/discharging due to their highest encapsulation efficiency, 
while  the  tubular  ePCMs  had  the  fastest  thermal  response  because of 
their specific internal nanostructures. The spherical ePCMs showed the 
best  energy storage,  followed  by  the  octahedral  ePCMs,  and  then  the 
tubular ePCMs. All the studied ePCMs exhibited excellent photocatalytic 
capabilities, temperature regulation, thermal durability, prominent heat 
charging/discharging performance, and good shape stability. 

3.7.3. The core-to-shell ratio 

The  core-to-shell  ratio  is  another  influencing  factor  for  ePCMs. 
However, few studies have examined its impact on the thermal stability 
and the core/shell structure of ePCMs. The reported data has shown that 
a smaller core-to-shell ratio means having a thicker shell and less PCM 
content, and hence, a smaller capacity of latent heat storage. At a higher 
core-to-shell ratio, however, the ePCM strength diminishes and the risk 
of  PCM  leakage  increases.  Zhang  et  al.  [163]  microencapsulated 
n-octadecane with a PU shell at core-to-shell mass ratios of 75:25 and 
70:30. It was shown that as the mass ratio increased, the mean diameter 
of  the  micro-ePCMs  increased  significantly.  Specifically,  the  mean 
diameter  at  mass  ratios  of  75:25  and  70:30  was  6.9  and  7.1  µm, 
respectively. It is also observed that the latent heat of the ePCM with a 
mass ratio of 75:25 is lower than that of 70:30. However, the mass ratio 
of 75:25 resulted in better thermal stability. 

Roy  and  Sengupta  [387]  evaluated  the  properties  of  micro-
encapsulated SA and n-eicosane with shell thicknesses of 15 and 30% 
when subjected to radiation and thermal cycling tests. It was observed 
that for at least 100 heating/cooling cycles, the ePCMs with a thickness 
of  30%  were  thermally  and  structurally  stable.  However,  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103748S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 48. SEM image of a) tubular, b) octahedral, and c) spherical micro-ePCMs (n-eicosane as core and TiO2 as shell) [386]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier).  

micro-ePCMs with a shell thickness of 15% failed the heating/cooling 
cycling tests. Moreover, degradation in thermal properties of the ePCMs 
was observed under the radiation test (1 MeV radiation). Hawlader et al. 
[158] showed that a lower amount of shell material led to incomplete 
encapsulation  of  the  PCM,  and  that  the  efficiency  of  micro-ePCMs 
increased as the core-to-shell mass ratio decreased, enabling the rapid 
release and storage of thermal energy. 

Ohtsubo  et  al.  [388]  microencapsulated  fenitrothion  with  a  PUR 
shell to examine the relationship between mechanical strength and the 
mean diameter, shell thickness, and their ratio. The results showed that 
the breaking behavior was mainly affected by the mean diameter. The 
smaller the pressure required to damage half of the ePCMs, the higher 
the mean diameter-to-shell ratio. Su et al. [316] studied the impact of 
different core-to-shell ratios (1:1, 3:1, and 4:1) on the performance of 
ePCMs. MF and lauryl alcohol were employed as shell and core mate-
rials, respectively. It was proven that higher PCM content was always 
required to release/store more thermal energy. However, a reduced shell 
thickness can have a negative impact on the mechanical properties of the 
capsules. By striking a balance between core content and shell thickness, 
it was found that the best performance of the ePCMs was achieved at a 
mass ratio of 3:1. 

Zou et al. [375] prepared ePCMs with the different core-to-shell ra-
tios of 2:1, 3:2, 1:1, and 1:2. Melamine urea-formaldehyde was used as a 
shell and paraffin  as a PCM. The shell was  doped with Ag, CNT, and 
graphene  nanomaterials.  The  authors  found  that  the  freezing  and 
melting  latent heats decreased with  the reduction  of the  core-to-shell 
ratio.  This  was  mainly  attributed  to  the  decrease  in  the  PCM  content 
as the core-to-shell ratio dropped. Zhang et al. [309] prepared ePCMs, 
with poly(2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorostyrene) as the shell and n-octadecane as 
the PCM, at six different core-to-shell ratios. It was revealed that ePCMs 
with a core-to-shell mass ratio of 2:1 had the highest encapsulation ef-
ficiency, minimum size, and highest thermal storage efficiency, while 
ePCMs with a core-to-shell ratio of 3:1 had the lowest latent heat and 
encapsulation efficiency. Furthermore, it was observed that the thermal 
conductivity of ePCMs was not affected by the core-to-shell ratio. 

3.7.4. Loading fraction of PCM capsules 

As previously described in Section 3.4, dispersing ePCMs into a fluid 
can  significantly  alter  the  thermophysical  properties  of  the  fluid. 
Numerous studies have reported that increasing the loading fraction of 
ePCMs  leads  to  an  increase  in  specific  heat,  in  particular  during  the 
phase-change process, an increase in dynamic viscosity, and an increase 
or a decrease in thermal conductivity. Moreover, the addition of PCM 
capsules to a pure fluid led to a moderate-to-substantial increase in the 
absorption property of the fluid, mainly depending on the shell material. 
Note that the absorption properties of ePCM slurries have been mostly 
examined at only one loading fraction. 

While there are several studies that examined the loading fraction 
effect  on  the  thermophysical  and  optical  properties  of  ePCM  slurries, 
there are limited studies on the impact of loading fraction on the pho-
tothermal performance of ePCM slurries for solar systems. The study by 
Liu et al. [355] revealed that, despite the fact that more ePCMs can result 
in an improvement in photothermal conversion, a high loading fraction 
of  ePCMs  does  not  always  lead  to  a  higher  heat  transfer  rate.  They 
observed  that  an  ePCM  slurry  at  20  wt%  had  lower  photothermal 

performance  and  thermal  storage  capacity  than  that  at  10  wt%.  This 
result was attributed to the higher reflectivity of the slurry at 20 wt%. 
Fig. 49 illustrates the photothermal conversion performance and ther-
mal storage capacity of slurries at 10 and 20wt%. Dutkowski et al. [375] 
observed that the more capsules are in the carrying fluid, the lower the 
temperature  of  the  solar  collector.  The  outlet  temperature  of  a  solar 
collector with an ePCM slurry at 8.6 wt% was 10 K lower than that of the 
pure fluid, indicating that ePCM slurries are very effective in reducing 
heat  loss  to  the  environment.  Wang  et  al.  [334]  observed  that  sus-
pending ePCMs in a fluid has an adverse effect. The photothermal per-
formance of slurries was found to decrease with increasing the loading 
fraction, which was due to the high reflectivity of micro-ePCMs. They 
suggested modifying the shell material with a nanolayer to considerably 
improve the optical absorption properties of ePCMs. 

3.7.5. Flow rate 

Mass/volume flow rate is another parameter that may affect the ef-
ficiency of ePCM slurries in solar systems. However, very limited studies 
have taken this parameter into consideration, which may broaden the 
possible  applications  of  ePCM  slurries  in  the  area  of  solar  systems. 
Dutkowski  et  al.  [375]  evaluated  the  photothermal  efficiency  at  the 
different mass flow rates of 20, 40, and 80 kg/h, under different irra-
diance values. It was observed that an increase in solar irradiance led to 
an increase in the temperature of both the pure fluid and slurry. How-
ever, the temperature of the slurry decreased with increasing the mass 
flow  rate  at  the  same  irradiance,  thereby  providing  a  higher  energy 
conversion efficiency. Fu et al. [335] performed an experimental study 
on an ePCM slurry-based PVT system. Their results showed that as the 
flow  rate  increased,  the  maximum  temperature  on  the  surface  of  the 
panel decreased. Moreover, by increasing the flow rate from 200 to 400 
ml/min, the average electrical efficiency increased from 12.2 to 12.4% 
and the thermal efficiency increased from 58.3 to 68.5%. 

3.8. Comparing macro-, micro-, and nano-ePCMs 

The encapsulation of PCMs is  important to prevent the leakage of 
liquid  PCMs,  improve  heat  transfer  by  overcoming  the  low  thermal 
conductivity of PCMs, control volume change during solid-liquid tran-
sition,  and  reduce  chemical  interaction  with  the  environment.  PCM 
encapsulation  can  be  classified  into  three  types  based  on  their  size; 
namely,  macroencapsulation  (≥ 1  mm),  microencapsulation  (1(cid:0) 1000 
µm),  and  nanoencapsulation  (≤ 1  µm).  Table  11  summarizes  the  ad-
vantages and disadvantages of PCM encapsulation at different scales. 

Macroencapsulation  is  the  most  common  technique  for  encapsu-
lating PCMs, in which a considerable amount of PCM, that can range 
from a few grams to a kilogram, is encapsulated. PCMs can be macro-
encapsulated in different shapes, such as tubes, rectangular panels, and 
spheres. The most cost-effective macro-encapsulants are mild steel, tin- 
plated  cans,  and  plastic  bottles  (made  of  low/high  density  poly-
propylene  and  polyethylene).  In  general,  macro-ePCMs  can  be  easily 
fabricated  into  any  desired  shape  or  size  to  suit  various  applications. 
They can be employed for a wide range of energy storage purposes by 
carefully  selecting  the  capsule  design  and  material,  which  can  be 
directly used as a heat exchanger or integrated into building materials. 
Although  macroencapsulation  techniques  have  been  known  for  many 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103749S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 49. a) Thermal storage capacity and b) temperature rise as a function of irradiation time for a pure ionic liquid ([BMIM]BF4) and slurries containing different 
micro-ePCMs at different weight concentrations [355]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

Table 11 
The advantages and disadvantages of ePCM encapsulation at different scales.  

Encapsulation 
technique 

Macroencapsulation (≥ 

1mm)  

Microencapsulation 
(1(cid:0) 1000 µm)  

Nanoencapsulation (≤ 

1 µm)  

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

• Leakage/perforation 

issues.  

• Poor conductivity.  
• Non-uniform 

solidification (PCM 
core and boundary).  

• Complicated 

incorporation into 
building materials. 

• Leakage/damage 

issues.  

• High viscosity. 

• High supercooling 

degree.  

• Encapsulation 

techniques are limited.  

• High cost.  

• Can be easily handled 
during production.  

• Low supercooling 

degree.  

• Easy to integrate into 
building materials.  

• Volume change 

resistivity during solid- 
liquid transition.  
• Various encapsulation 

techniques are 
available.  

• High heat transfer area.  
• High mechanical 

stability.  

• Volume change 

resistivity during solid- 
liquid transition.  
• Excellent suspension 

stability.  

• High heat transfer area.  
• Promising structures to 
integrate into building 
materials.  

years, further work is required to address concerns over corrosion pro-
tection,  leakage/perforation  issues,  and  improvement  of  heat  transfer 
rates. For example, recently, V´erez et al. [389] experimentally examined 
the effect of the design of macro-ePCMs on the energy storage perfor-
mance using two rectangular slabs with thicknesses of 17 and 35 mm. 
Their results revealed that, compared to the thicker slab, the thinner slab 
resulted in higher thermal efficiency with reductions of 14 and 30% in 
charging and discharging times. One can conclude that the ePCM size 
can critically affect the TES performance. 

Unlike macro-ePCMs, which do not require any predefined proced-
ures to encapsulate the PCM, micro-ePCMs require more sophisticated 
techniques.  In  microencapsulation,  PCM  capsules,  which  are  mostly 
spheres, are formed by coating a small amount of PCM with organic or 

inorganic shell materials using several chemical, physical, and physical- 
chemical techniques. Microencapsulation is an effective way to prevent 
PCM  leakage  in  TES  systems  under  several  heating/cooling  cycles, 
reduce  interaction  of  the  PCM  with  the  outside  environment,  and 
enhance heat transfer rate due to the large surface area. Sari et al. [390] 
observed that micro-ePCMs have higher thermal reliability and chemical 
stability compared to macro-ePCMs. However, micro-ePCMs are more 
difficult to manufacture than macro-ePCMs since their size is less than 1 
mm.  Yamagishi  et  al.  [359]  showed  that  the  damage  rate  of 
micro-ePCMs  decreased  as  their  size  was  reduced,  and  that  smaller 
micro-ePCMs (5-10 μm) exhibited higher mechanical strength and could 
better withstand shear forces while being pumped. Therefore, the sta-
bility of micro-ePCMs was found to be strongly affected by their size. 

The most recent technique to overcome the drawbacks of uncoated 
PCMs  is  nanoencapsulation,  which  is  similar  to  microencapsulation, 
with  the  exception  that  it  involves  ePCMs  at  the  nanoscale.  Nano-
encapsulation is expected to result in higher heat transfer rates due to 
the massive surface area of nano-ePCMs. Nano-ePCMs are also known to 
be physically more stable than micro-ePCMs. Sukhorukov et al. [391] 
demonstrated that the deformation of ePCMs with a size of 10 nm was 
lower than that of 10-µm capsules when the same force was applied. Yet, 
it should be emphasized that nanoencapsulation of PCMs is still in the 
infancy stage. Therefore, at present, a clear picture of the characteristics 
of nano-ePCMs and their benefits over macro- and micro-ePCMs cannot 
be drawn. 

3.9. Conclusions and future research directions 

Despite  the  huge  potential  for  micro/nano-ePCM  slurries  and  dis-
persions  in  photothermal  applications,  where  they  perform  the  com-
pound  functions  of  solar  absorbers,  storage  media,  and  heat  carriers, 
there  is  a  number  of  critical  challenges  that  must  be  resolved  before 
micro/nano-ePCMs may be used in thermal and solar applications in a 
commercial capacity. 

Perhaps the most demanding challenge facing ePCMs is related to 
their synthesis and encapsulation method. This is particularly the case 
for nano-ePCMs, which have shown superior stability, heat transfer, and 
solar absorption characteristics over conventional micro-ePCMs. Phys-
ical  and  physical-chemical  methods  have  shown  their  limitation  in 
achieving nano-size capsules. However, nano-ePCMs can be produced 
using  chemical  methods,  particularly  polymerization  methods,  which 
necessitates further research into these methods. Moreover, it was found 
that the selection of the ePCM preparation method is highly dependent 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103750S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

on  the  core/shell  material,  capsule  size,  shell  thickness,  and  desired 
thermal, chemical, and mechanical properties. Therefore, the procedure 
must often be custom-tailored to produce desirable micro/nano-ePCMs. 
This is a costly, complicated, and time-consuming process that results in 
techniques limited to the lab scale without any prospects for widescale 
production. Therefore, the future direction should be the proposition of 
novel  cost-effective  techniques  which  combine  the  simplicity  of  the 
synthesis process with encapsulation of more than one core/shell ma-
terial type. 

The  use  of  complementary  and  orthogonal  characterization  tech-
niques  is  highly  recommended  to  adequately  identify  the  structural, 
thermophysical, and optical properties of micro/nano-ePCMs. However, 
some  of  these  techniques  are  not  recommended  as  they  can  be  very 
costly and complex to use (e.g., SAXS and WAXS), while others may hide 
the impurities of ePCMs or even damage them under intense laser ra-
diation (e.g., Raman spectroscopy). Therefore, simpler, faster, and more 
efficient  techniques  for  the  characterization  of  micro/nano-ePCMs 
should be explored. 

Despite  its  paramount  importance  for  practical  deployments,  un-
derstanding  and  evaluating  the  chemical,  mechanical,  and  thermal 
stability of micro/nano-ePCMs is still in its infancy. Clearly, a uniform 
standard for the preparation of stable micro/nano-ePCMs needs to be 
developed.  Although  it  can  change  the  morphology  and  structure  of 
ePCMs, one parameter that has not yet been reported is the long-term 
direct exposure to cyclic solar radiation. Stability evaluation of ePCM 
slurries/dispersions is still at an early stage, and only a few character-
ization  techniques  have  been  reported.  However,  these  techniques 
either require extreme dilution of the slurry/dispersion, cannot be per-
formed  without  capsule  damage,  or  are  limited  by  the  centrifuge  ca-
pacity.  Consequently,  the  development  of  non-invasive  stability 
evaluation techniques is critical to further advance the field of ePCM. 

The  efficiency  of  micro/nano-ePCM  slurries/dispersions  in  solar 
photothermal applications is determined by their thermal, rheological, 

and optical properties. However, studies on these properties for different 
capsules sizes and shapes, at different particle loadings, under unsteady- 
state conditions, using non-paraffin cores, and during phase change, are 
still  largely  unexplored.  The  particle  loading,  in  particular,  can  be  a 
decisive factor since using too high or low a concentration can severely 
reduce photothermal efficiency due to reflection losses or radiation non- 
absorption  losses,  respectively.  Moreover,  compared  to  thermal  con-
ductivity and optical properties, limited studies have been devoted to 
the  measurement  of  heat  capacity  (before,  during,  and  after  phase 
transition) and rheological properties of ePCMs. 

The presented data revealed that slurries/dispersions with conven-
tional  polymeric  shells  were  significantly  less  promising  in  the 
enhancement  of  thermal  conductivity  and  solar-weighted  absorption 
relative to carbon-modified shells. In particular, double-layered shells 
were found to increase the photothermal conversion properties, reduce 
the leakage rate, and strengthen mechanical properties of the capsule. 
Furthermore,  nano-sized  PCM  capsules  were  found  to  incur  a  lower 
penalty on viscosity (and pumping requirements) relative to micro-sized 
ones, especially at high concentrations. Therefore, it is highly recom-
mended that future development efforts be focused on nano-ePCM sys-
tems  with  carbon-  or  metal-modified  shells  for  volumetric  direct- 
absorption applications. 

4. Theory and fundamentals of solar ePCM systems 

4.1. Modeling of flow and heat transfer in ePCM slurries/dispersions 

From  the  perspective  of  thermal  and  hydrodynamic  transport,  an 
ePCM slurry/dispersion is a two-phase solid-liquid system that exhibits 
different  behaviors  at  different  scales.  By  delving  into  the  system,  as 
shown in Fig. 50, it includes molecules/atoms at the molecular scale, 
PCM molecular assemblies at mesoscale I, micro/nano-capsules at the 
microscale,  capsules  aggregated  at  mesoscale  II,  and  whole  unit 

Fig. 50. Multi-scale structures encountered in the analysis of ePCM slurries. This includes molecules/atoms at the molecular scale, PCM molecular assemblies at 
mesoscale I, micro/nano-capsules at the microscale, capsule aggregates at mesoscale II, and whole unit operation. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103751S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

operation at the macroscale. Some behaviors, such as molecules/atoms, 
discrete entities, and unit operations, have well-established models that 
make them relatively simple to identify. However, despite their impor-
tance in understanding and modeling dynamic behaviors, complex be-
haviors at scales such as those for PCM molecular assemblies and ePCM 
clusters are not well described. The complexity lies in understanding and 
analyzing the material and interfacial structures at mesoscale I, as well 
as the heterogeneous flow structures at mesoscale II, before introducing 
their  effects  on  neighboring  scales  (boundary  scales  and  ePCM 
particles). 

Many researchers have experimentally and numerically investigated 
the  different scales  and physical phenomena in ePCM slurries/disper-
sions to reveal the thermal transport mechanisms associated with the 
phase-change process. Because of the problem complexity and building 
on  the  rapid  development  of  computers,  numerical  methods  have 
proven to be a powerful tool due to their ability to provide the benefits of 
high efficiency and low cost [118]. Therefore, the purpose of this section 
is  to  address  the  possible  models  to  be  used  to  simulate  ePCM  slur-
ries/dispersions,  including  their  characteristics  and  limitations,  and 
demonstrate their applicability to ePCM systems. While not all of the 
models listed below have been applied to the field of ePCMs, they should 
be considered as candidate simulation methods in future works. 

Fig.  51.  illustrates  the  range  of  numerical  techniques  that  will  be 
discussed  in  the  following  sections.  Micro  and  mesoscale  models  are 
discrete in nature, capturing comprehensive information about particle 
dispersion  and  trajectory,  particle-wall  interactions,  and  particle- 
particle  interactions.  Macroscale  models  are  based  on  a  continuum 
approach, in which the ePCM slurry/dispersion is viewed as a homo-
geneous medium with effective properties. Multi-scale models combine 
discrete and continuum approaches. 

The  Knudsen  number  is  commonly  used  to  assess  whether  a  fluid 
phase  may  be  deemed  continuous  or  not.  Knudsen  number  can  be 
expressed as, 

Kn =

λkn
L

,

(15)  

where  λKn  is  the  molecular  mean  free  path  and  L  is  characteristic 
physical  length  scale. Fluid  flow  can be categorized  into  four regions 
based on the Knudsen number [392]: continuum flow (Kn < 0.001), slip 
flow  (0.001  < Kn  < 0.1),  transition  flow  (0.1  < Kn  < 10),  and  free 
molecule flow (Kn > 10). 

4.1.1. Continuum models 

In  general,  continuum  mechanics  is  a  discipline  that  studies  the 
behavior of a system while ignoring its particulate nature. As a result, an 
area  can  be  divided  indefinitely  with  no  individual  particles.  This 
simplification allows us to study fluid movement on scales larger than 
particle distances. The flow and heat transfer of ePCM slurries/disper-
sions  are  simulated  using  two  models  under  the  general  umbrella  of 
continuum mechanics: single-phase and two-phase models. 

Single-phase models. To date, the majority of numerical studies on ePCM 
slurries/dispersions  has  been  based  on  a  single-phase  approach  that 
assumes the two phases (PCM capsules and the carrying fluid) are well 
mixed and travel at equal velocities in thermal equilibrium, i.e., there 
are no velocity or temperature slips between them. Other common as-
sumptions in single-phase models include [6,118,191,393,394]:  

• Below a threshold of ePCM concentration, the slurry/dispersion is 

considered Newtonian (usually less than 30%). 

• Thermophysical properties of the slurry that are dependent on tem-
perature include thermal conductivity, specific heat, and density.  
• The capsules are rigid and the shell is thin with an appropriate ratio 
to the core. This way, the PCM makes up the majority of the capsule 
volume. 

• The  phase-change  process  is  governed  by  conduction  and  convec-
tion,  with  natural  convection  controlled  by  the  Boussinesq 
approximation. 

According to the way of handling the phase-change process in the 
ePCM slurry/dispersion, the single-phase approach is divided into three 
models: the heat source-term model, the effective heat-capacity model, 
and  the  enthalpy  model.  The  finite-difference  method  (FDM),  finite- 
element  method  (FEM),  or  finite-volume  method  (FVM)  are  used  to 
discretize the governing equations of fluid flow and heat transfer. After 
discretizing  the  equations,  the  temperature  and  velocity  profiles  are 
obtained. The previously mentioned single-phase models are commonly 
implemented  in  commercial  computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD) 
packages, such as ANSYS Fluent and COMSOL Multiphysics [116]. 

4.1.1.66.0. Heat source-term model. This methodology assumes that 
the phase-change effect—heat absorption or generation—is equivalent 
to internal heat source within the fluid, thus serving as a heat source in 
the energy equation. As shown in Fig. 52, an ePCM particle consisting of 
a  core  and  shell  can  be  considered  a  standard  spherical  particle. 

Fig. 51. Classification of the numerical simulation methods for ePCM slurries/dispersions into microscale, mesoscale, macroscale, and multiscale.  

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103752S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

4.1.1.67.0. Effective heat-capacity model. This approach is regarded 
as a simple and effective heat transfer model for ePCM slurries in which 
the complicated source term is avoided; thus, it can be easily used in 
commercial CFD packages [396]. Effective heat capacity (ceff) includes 
both  sensible  heat  (cp)  and  latent  heat  (Hs-l).  The  general  energy 
equation  based  on  the  effective  heat-capacity  model  is  written  as 
follows, 

ρceff

∂T
∂t

= ∇.(k∇T).

(25) 

An accurate result is dependent on selecting an appropriate model 
that describes actual variation in the specific heat of the slurry [118,397, 
398]. In Eq. (25), it can be seen that temperature is the only unknown 
variable,  where  determining  the  specifications  of  ceff  is  key  to  this 
method, 

Fig.  52. Schematic  diagram  of  an  ePCM  particle  consisting  of  a  core  with 
radius rco  and a shell with thickness rpa-rco. 

Assuming  the  slurry  is  pumped  through  a  circular  pipe,  the  energy 
equation in cylindrical coordinates is [393,395,396], 

ρslcp, slu

∂Tb
∂x

=

1
r

∂
∂r

(

kslr

)

∂Tb
∂r

+ S.

(16) 

The velocity equation of the fully-developed laminar slurry flow in 

the circular pipe is: 

u = 2umax[1 (cid:0) (r / ro)2].

(17) 

Thermophysical property correlations are used to find the density, 
thermal conductivity, and specific heat of the ePCM slurry, as will be 
detailed in Section 4.2. 

The  fluid  internal  heat  source,  S,  is  defined  as  the  product  of  the 
absorption/generation rate per particle and the number of ePCM parti-
cles per unit volume of slurry. The heat absorption/generation rate per 
particle is expressed as follows: 

Q = (cid:0) 4πr2

pahpa(Tpa (cid:0) Tf ).

And the number of ePCM particles per unit volume is: 

N =

3C
4πr3
pa

.

(18) 

(19) 

As a result, the source term in Eq. (16) becomes, 

S = Q.N = (cid:0)

3C
rpa

hpa(Tpa (cid:0) Tf ).

(20) 

H =

Equivalently, the control energy equation in spherical coordinates is: 

r2ρpacp, pa

∂Tpa
∂t

=

(
kpar2∂Tpa
∂r

∂
∂r

)

.

(21) 

ceff = {

cp,s + cp,l
2

+

cp,s, T < Ts (solid state)
Hs (cid:0)
l
Tl (cid:0) Ts
cp,l, T ≥ Tl (liquid state)

, Ts ≤ T < Tl (mushy state)

.

(26) 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  previous  empirical  equation  considers 
latent heat, Hs-l, a constant within the phase-change temperature range, 
i.e., within the mushy zone. An alternative empirical relationship for ceff 
as a function of temperature can be obtained using data from DSC [399], 
as follows, 

ceff (T) =

dHs (cid:0)
dt

/(
l

m

)

,

dT
dt

(27)  

where the heat flow rate through ePCM particles is represented by dHs-l/ 
dt, and the rate of temperature increase or decrease is represented by dT/ 
dt, which is known from the scanning rate of the DSC test. It is worth 
noting  that  theceff(T)profile  obtained  by  DSC  is  typically  non-linear, 
necessitating  piecewise  linear  interpolation  to  be  used  in  numerical 
simulations. 

Total enthalpy model. In the final single-phase strategy, cp  and Hs-l 
are  merged  into  the  total  enthalpy,  H,  as  a  primary  variable  for  the 
energy equation, as shown in Eq. (28) [118,400], 

ρ

∂H
∂t

= ∇.(k∇T).

(28) 

The critical step, as with the effective heat-capacity model, is to use 

an accurate H(T) relationship, as given in Eq. (29) [401,402], 

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

∫T

Ti

Cp, s, T < Ts (solid state)

∫Ts

Cp, sdT + Hs (cid:0)

l

T (cid:0) Ts
Tl (cid:0) Ts

, Ts ≤ T < Tl (mushy state)

,

(29)  

Ti

∫Ts

Ti

Cp, sdT + Hs (cid:0)

l +

∫T

Tl

Cp, ldT, T ≥ Tl (liquid state)

The  thermophysical  properties  of  shell  material  are  calculated  as 

follows: 

rco < r < rsh : cp,pa = cp,sh, kpa = ksh, ρpa = ρsh.

(22) 

The  thermophysical  properties  of  core  material  are  calculated  as 

follows: 

0 < r ≤ rco : kpa = kco, ρpa = ρco,

(cid:0)

)

Tpa

cp,pa

= {

cp,co +

(cid:0) cp,co, Tpa < Tm (cid:0) ΔTpa
Hs (cid:0)
ΔTpa

l
, Tm (cid:0) ΔTpa ≤ Tpa ≤ Tm

.

cp,co, Tpa > Tm

(23)  

(24)  

where Ti is the initial temperature at total enthalpy H = 0 kJ/kg. 

Two-phase  models. In most cases, the slip velocity between ePCM par-
ticles and the carrying fluid is non-zero, especially at high ePCM particle 
concentrations  [403].  As  a  result,  particle  movement  causes  spatially 
and temporally non-uniform distributions of concentration and thermal 
properties through the flow domain. To capture these effects, two-phase 
Eulerian–Eulerian models were proposed to describe the flow and heat 
transfer  of  ePCM  slurries  and  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the 
thermal  and  hydrodynamic  transports  in  the  solid-liquid  two-phase 
system. Generally, three different Eulerian–Eulerian methods have been 
described in the literature: mixture model, Eulerian, and volume of fluid 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103753S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[404].  In  numerical  investigations  of  ePCM  slurries,  the  two-phase 
Eulerian (TPE) model was used. The TPE model regards the solid and 
liquid phases as interpenetrative continua with interphase momentum 
and  energy  exchange.  While  both  phases  share  the  same  pressure, 
separate continuity, momentum, and energy equations are used for each 
phase  (i.e.,  fluid  and  particles),  while  using  appropriate  interaction 
terms to represent interphase effects. 

The  following  are  assumptions  commonly  employed  in  the  TPE 

model to simplify computations [385]:  

• It is assumed that solid particles are smooth and spherical, with a 

uniform diameter.  

• The  slurry/dispersion  is  considered  to  be  incompressible  and 

Newtonian.  

• Inelasticity  of  ePCMs  is  considered,  so  the  energy  loss  caused  by 
collisions can be evaluated in the kinetic theory of granular flow.  

• The flow of ePCM slurry can be laminar or turbulent. 

The mass conservation equations are as follows: 

∂
∂t

∂
∂t

∂
∂t

(αlρl) + ∇.(αlρlvl) = 0,

(αsρs) + ∇.(αsρsvs) = 0.

The momentum conservation equations are as follows: 

(αlρlvl) + ∇.(αlρlvlvl) = (cid:0) αl∇P + αlρlg + ∇. τ→

l + Fsl, l,

τ→

l = αlμl[∇vl + (∇vl)T] (cid:0)

2
3

αlμl(∇.vl)I,

(30)  

(31) 

(32)  

(33)  

(αsρsvs) + ∇.(αsρsvsvs) = ( (cid:0) αs∇P (cid:0) ∇Ps) + αsρsg + ∇. τ→

→
s (cid:0) F

sl,s,

∂
∂t

[
s = αsμs

τ→

∇vs + (∇vs)T (cid:0)

2
3

]

(∇.vs)I

+ ( (cid:0) Ps + ξs∇.vs)I.

(34)  

(35) 

The first term on the right-hand side of Eqs. (32) and (34) shows the 
pressure gradient, the second and third terms are for gravity and stress. 

→
The  last  term  represents  the  interfacial  forces,  F

→
phases, which are due to the drag force,  F

→
dr, lift force,  F

sl,  between  the  two 

td. This is in addition to the virtual-mass force, 

→
bulent dispersion force,  F
→
vm, applicable only when the density of the dispersed phase is much 
F
lower than that of the liquid phase [405]. As a result, the final term of 
the momentum equation can be expressed as follows (i represents s or l 
phase), 
→
F

→
lift,i + F

→
dr,i + F

→
sl,i = F

→
td,i + F

vm,i.

(36) 

lift, and tur-

The  drag  force,  lateral  lift  force,  turbulent  dispersion  force,  and 
virtual mass force exerted on scattered ePCM particles can be calculated 
using the following equations: 
⃒
(
⃒
⃒
⃒

Cdrρiαpa

⃒
⃒
⃒ v→
⃒

dr =

→
F

v→

v→

v→

pa (cid:0)

pa (cid:0)

)

(37)  

,

i

i

3
4d pa

→
F

lift,i = (cid:0) Cliftρiαpa v→
i (cid:0)

v→

pa × ∇ × v→
i,

→
F

→
F

td,i = Ctdρiki∇vpa,
⎛
⎝di v→
dt

vm,i = Cvmρiαpa

i

⎞

⎠,

dpa v→
dt

pa

(cid:0)

(38)  

(39)  

(40)  

where Cdr, Clift,Ctdand Cvm  are the drag, lift, turbulent dispersion, and 
virtual mass force coefficients, respectively. The diameter and volume 
fraction of dispersed ePCM particles are dpa and αpa. 

The parameters P, μ, and ξ in Eqs. (33) and (35) denote the pressure, 
shear viscosity, and bulk viscosity of each phase, which are affected by 
the magnitude of velocity fluctuations of the ePCM particles. These three 
quantities can be derived from the kinetic theory of granular flow after 
solving the conservation equation of solid fluctuating energy to obtain 
the granular temperature [385]. As for energy conservation, presently, 
there are two approaches for dealing with an ePCM slurry/dispersion 
based on the TPE model; namely, the effective specific-heat model [385, 
406] and the total enthalpy model [407,408]. Each is adopted for the 
energy  conservation  to  describe  phase  change  in  the  ePCM  particle 
phase. 

4.1.2. Discrete models 

The  physical  meaning  of  a  discrete  model  is  straightforward—it 
models discrete entities in the flow domain as the primary elements in 
the simulation, with their motions and interactions computed individ-
ually.  In  such  methods,  each  discrete  entity  can  represent  a  given 
physical  particle.  Discrete  models,  like  continuum  models,  are  rarely 
solved analytically. Discrete models are discretized at the implementa-
tion level, with the physical models already being discrete. As a result, 
discretization  is  essential  to  numerically  integrate  forces  between 
discrete elements and to update their states (e.g., velocity and position) 
[409]. The strength of many discrete models primarily stems from the 
well-known molecular dynamics (MD) method at the microscale. As a 
result, as the foundation of this approach, molecular dynamic simula-
tions  are  revised  first,  followed  by  Monte  Carlo  simulations  and 
smoothed particle hydrodynamics. 

4.1.2.70. Molecular  dynamics. The  MD  approach  considers  the  in-
teractions of a group of molecules and atoms (system components) as 
fluid particles. Over a given time period, the dynamics and interactions 
of molecules and atoms are computed. The calculation period is defined 
as the time required to reach a dynamic evaluation between molecules 
and atoms [410]. MD has a very small time step, usually on the order of 
fs (10

(cid:0) 15 s) [116]. 

MD solves the system of interacting particles using Newton’s equa-
tion  of  motion  to  specify  the  trajectories  of  atoms  and  molecules. 
Therefore, thermophysical properties can be derived. Using interatomic 
potential  force  fields,  such  as  the  Lennard-Jones  potential,  the  forces 
between  particles  are  calculated.  The  calculation  of  the  force  field  is 
regarded  as  the  most  critical  factor  influencing  MD  accuracy  [410]. 
Based  on  knowledge  of  the  forces  acting  on  molecules,  the  velocity, 
acceleration, and position of particles can be calculated. Thus, statistical 
averaging is used to calculate bulk flow domain properties such as ve-
locity, vorticity, stream function, viscosity, density, mass diffusivity, and 
pressure [410]. 

The  MD  method  has  been  applied  in  a  variety  of  fields,  including 
physics, biophysics, pharmacophores, and multiphase flow. Despite the 
differences  in  particle  characteristics  and  interaction  models  between 
these fields, they all share common aspects. For instance, the principle of 
conservation of energy is explicitly used. In other words, there are no 
hidden  energy  dissipation  or  energy  production  during  the  particle 
interaction process without addressing a quantitative description. The 
random  behavior  of  particles  with  high  motion  fluctuations  is  then 
tracked. This often takes a long time, and most of the details of such 
behavior are eventually discarded [410]. 

The most common codes for MD are the large-scale atomic/molec-
ular massively parallel simulator (LAMMPS) package [411,412], mate-
rials  studio  package  [123,413],  and  condensed-phase  optimized 
molecular potentials for atomistic simulation studies (COMPASS) [414]. 
It is reported that MD is suitable for simulating complex fluids and ge-
ometries, as well as non-equilibrium processes at the atomic level [410]. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103754S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

However,  MD  is  disadvantaged  by  difficulties  in  selecting  the  most 
appropriate force field [413] and being computationally demanding in 
terms of the number of particles [116]. 

A  few  researchers  used  MD  to  study  phase-change  processes.  For 
example,  Zhang  et  al.  [123]  used  MD  to  study  the  thermophysical 
properties of a paraffin-ethylene-vinyl acetate PCM with different con-
centrations of graphene (0.7, 1.5, 3.6, and 7.0 wt%). Results showed that 
using graphene at 0.7 wt% provided the highest thermal conductivity 
and diffusion coefficient, enhancing molecule mobility and encouraging 
phonon transport. Yu et al. [413] employed an optimized MD method to 
create  a  physical  model  of  an  NaCl-SiO2-based  molten-salt  composite 
PCM, and to study the effect of adding SiO2  nanoparticles on the ther-
mophysical  parameters  of  the  PCM.  Results  showed  that  simulated 
densities  under  the  chosen  force  field  were  10.8%  lower  than  the 
experimental  data.  Furthermore,  2.4  vol%  of  SiO2  nanoparticles 
increased  the  thermal  conductivity  of  NaCl  by  44%  while  increasing 
viscosity by 23.6%. 

Some studies reported that MD is an effective way to describe the 
melting behavior of PCM slurries. For example, Rao et al. [414] inves-
tigated the melting behavior of n-nonadecane PCM slurries using MD. 
The melting temperatures simulated were very close to the experimental 
data. Using the COMPASS force field, Wang et al. [415] investigated the 
melting  mechanism  in  a  nano-ePCM  slurry.  The  simulated  results 
revealed that the heat capacity of the nano-ePCM slurry decreased as the 
mass fraction of PCM (octadecane) increased. Furthermore, a sharp heat 
capacity  peak  was  observed  near  the  melting  temperature,  indicating 
that a large amount of latent heat was absorbed. 

4.1.2.71. Monte Carlo models. A Monte Carlo (MC) simulation is based 
on  calculating  the  characteristics  of  a  given  system  by  generating 
enough  stochastic  events  to  catch  and  record  its  behavior.  It  is  less 
complicated than a MD in that it does not require a force field [416]. 
Monte Carlo methods make use of the concept of computational parti-
cles, which are significantly larger than actual molecules but behave like 
them.  In  the  direct-simulation  Monte  Carlo  method,  for  example,  a 
computational particle may represent a set of 106(cid:0) 1011 molecules [417, 
418]. 

The Monte Carlo method begins with an initial particle configuration 
in a given system and then attempts to change this original configura-
tion. The Stokes-Einstein equation [419] is used to select the particles to 
be changed. The movement may be accepted or rejected based on an 
acceptance criterion. The acceptance standard should ensure that new 
configurations sampled in the simulation are drawn from a statistical 
mechanics ensemble distribution and are sampled with the appropriate 
weight. After the acceptance/rejection step, one value for the property 
of interest is obtained, and an accurate average value of the property can 
be obtained after many repetitions of the move [416]. The implemented 
scheme must be ergodic, which means that every accessible particle in 
the configuration space must be able to reach any other particle in the 
space with an infinite number of Monte Carlo moves. 

4.1.2.72. Smoothed  particle  hydrodynamics. Smoothed  particle  hydro-
dynamics (SPH) is a well-known mesh-free method that has received a 
lot of attention. SPH represents the entire continuous system as a series 
of particles, each with its own set of information and adhering to the 
governing  equations.  The  simulation  is  carried  out  after  marking  the 
location and specifying all the physical information for each particle. As 
such, SPH has the advantage of being able to easily capture the interface 
and distribute the particles freely [420]. Using kernel and particle ap-
proximations, approximate numerical solutions are obtained based on 
the  motion  and  physical  properties  of  particles.  A  weight  function 
known  as  the  smoothing  kernel  function  is  used  inside  the  integral 
representation  of  the  field  function  approximation  in  kernel  approxi-
mation. By contrast, the particle approximation substitutes a sum of all 
the  equivalent  values  of  surrounding  particles  for  the  integral 

representation of the field function [420]. 

The requirement for virtual particles in SPH increases the number of 
particles  inside  the  domain,  making  the  method  computationally 
expensive  and  difficult  to  implement  in  available  solvers  [421].  Far-
rokhpanah  et  al.  [421]  focused  on  using  SPH  to  simulate  conduction 
heat  transfer  within  a  PCM.  Modifying  heat  capacity  in  the  energy 
equation took into account the amount of released and absorbed latent 
heat  during  phase  transition.  The  proposed  model  used  five  different 
methods to improve accuracy, yielding five equations. The robustness of 
SPH  was  demonstrated  by  comparing  the  five  equations  to  available 
analytical and numerical studies. 

4.1.3. Limitations of continuum and discrete models 

Notwithstanding  their  tremendous  success,  continuum  numerical 
approaches  (macroscale)  have  their  own  limitations.  Despite  the  fact 
that continuum approaches are more suitable for systems with smoother 
spatial  and  temporal  variations,  the  continuum  assumption  fails  for 
problems with length scales of 10 nm or smaller [410]. The single-phase 
model, in particular, is limited by the inaccurate/incomplete capture of 
the  interactions  between  ePCM  particles,  particles  and  the  container 
wall, and particles and the carrier fluid. Furthermore, the slip velocity 
may not be zero due to a variety of factors, such as particle-fluid friction, 
gravity, and sedimentation, as well as the non-uniform distribution of 
ePCM concentration and thermal properties in the flow domain. More-
over, when an ePCM particle undergoes phase change, a portion of it 
becomes liquid. As a result, the carrier liquid, solid phase of the shell, 
and liquid phase of the core all coexist. These phases can have different 
velocities and temperatures [408]. This necessitates a thorough exami-
nation  of  each  phase  without  losing  the  discrete  character  of  the 
micro/nano-ePCM particles. 

The non-uniform distribution of ePCM particles within flow systems 
is expected due to lateral migration, particularly near the entrance re-
gion and boundary layers, which violates the homogeneous assumption 
of the single-phase model. Additionally, because Brownian motion and 
thermophoresis can have a large effect on nano-ePCM particle disper-
sions, temperature and velocity slips between fluid and particles can be 
significant.  As  a  result,  it  appears  that  using  a  two-phase  model  is 
preferable to using a single-phase one. Ma et al. [385] demonstrated that 
the two-phase Eulerian model could predict the variation of solid par-
ticle concentration and provide high accuracy in energy transport per-
formance, particularly for particles larger than 100 μm in diameter. 

The concept of interpenetrative continua in the energy equations of 
the two-phase Eulerian model, on the other hand, ignores the develop-
ment of the phase-change process within ePCM particles. As a result, the 
thermophysical  properties  of  ePCM  particles  are  assumed  to  be  the 
same, as is the temperature distribution within the particles. As a result, 
the energy exchange would be linear during phase change based on the 
heat  transfer  and  temperature  difference  between  particles  and  the 
carrying fluid, which requires ad hoc assumptions. Thus, errors in the 
simulation  results  are  unavoidable.  Many  studies  reported  that  the 
phase-change  process  within  spherical  capsules  was  reduced  non-
linearly, resulting in nonlinear energy exchange between particles and 
the carrier fluid [406,422,423]. Moreover, because of the existence of 
particle shells, the phase-change process of each particle is independent, 
and the temperature distribution of the particles is discrete rather than 
continuous, according to Lin et al. [383]. Despite the benefits of discrete 
approaches (at the micro and mesoscales) in revealing the details of a 
complex process, discrete methods require a large amount of computer 
memory  and  computational  time,  severely  limiting  the  size  of  their 
computational domain. 

4.1.4. Multi-scale models 

Multi-scale  problems  encompass  any  system  or  process  that  spans 
multiple geometric or temporal scales. For example, fluid flow can be 
classified into three scales: macroscale, mesoscale, and microscale. The 
continuity and Navier-Stokes equations are the governing equations for 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103755S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

fluid at the macroscale, as they reliably predict velocity, density, and 
pressure. At the mesoscale level, sometimes referred to as the mean-free- 
path  scale,  the  kinetic  theory  based  on  the  well-known  Boltzmann’s 
equation is utilized to describe the one-particle phase-space distribution 
function. Additionally, Newton’s law [424] is applied at the microscale 
level to establish the real position and velocity of fluid particles (mole-
cules/atoms). The inherent time scale at each level is also different. For 
example, the typical time scale in the macroscale is about one second; 
(cid:0) 14  s 
however,  at  the  microscale,  it  drops  down  to  around  10
[425].  Thus,  to  faithfully  comprehend  a  multi-scale  phenomenon, 
coupled  analysis  on  multiple  scales  rather  than  an  individual  one  is 
required. It should be noted that, despite the notable multi-scale char-
acteristics,  multiphase  flow  computer  simulations  have  traditionally 
followed  two  approaches:  fully  continuum  or  fully  discrete,  with  no 
explicit consideration of multi-scale structures. 

(cid:0) 12(cid:0) 10

The  main  principle  behind  multi-scale  models  is  that  the  various 
scales  are  regulated  by  distinct  equations  and  solved  numerically  in 
distinct ways. Then, they exchange the needed data by coupling at the 
interface (i.e., solving regionally and coupling at the interface) [425]. 
The  information  exchange  at  the  interface  can  be  expressed  mathe-
matically as [425,426], 

U = Cu,

u = RU,

(41)  

(42)  

where U and u are the macroscopic and microscopic variables, respec-
tively, and C and R denote the compression and reconstruction opera-
tors,  respectively.  Using  various  averaging  methods,  the  compression 
operator  C  is  easily  defined.  It  compresses  massive  amounts  of  data 
obtained  from  nano/micro-scale  numerical  solutions.  The  reconstruc-
tion operator R, on the other hand, is difficult to create. However, both 
operators are based on fundamental physical principles such as mass and 
energy  conservation,  as  well  as  being  physically  meaningful,  mathe-
matically stable, computationally efficient, and easily implementable. 

The main idea behind the coupled solution method is to divide the 
domain  into  three  regions;  namely,  the  particle  region  (discrete),  the 
continuum region, and the hybrid region. The exchange happens at the 
interface of the particle and continuum regions within the hybrid region. 
The information exchange process should be repeated indefinitely until 
the  convergence  criterion  is  met.  Different  coupling  pairs  have  been 
investigated, such as FVM with LBM, FVM with MD, FVM with MC, and 
LBM with MD. Using FVM and LBM as an example, the coupling pro-
cedure can be summarized as follows:  

1-  Assume the initial conditions at the interfaces.  
2-  The  FVM  numerical  simulation  is  performed  in  the  continuum 

region.  

3-  The FVM numerical solution yields the temporary solution; thus, the 
proposed  reconstruction  operator  is  used  to  transform  data  at  the 
interface with the hybrid area.  

4-  The LBM numerical simulation is performed in the discrete region.  
5-  In the same manner as in Step 3, the temporary solution obtained 
from the LBM numerical simulation is transformed at the interface 
with the hybrid region to be used in the FVM simulation using the 
proposed compression operator.  

6-  Steps  2  to  5  are  repeated  until  the  solutions  achieve  convergence 

standards. 

It should be noted that the numerical data obtained from the micro/ 
nanoscale solution is significantly larger than the data obtained from the 
macroscale  solution.  As  a  result,  numerical  solutions  are  transferred 
from  one  with  fewer  data  points  to  one  with  more  data  points.  The 
following  subsections  introduce  the  fully-discrete  coarse-grained  and 
hybrid continuum-discrete methods as specific implementations of the 
multi-scale approach. 

4.1.4.73. Fully-discrete  coarse-grained  methods. Coarse  graining  is  the 
process  of  converting  a  microscopic  description  to  a  simpler  macro-
scopic  one  by  removing  degrees  of  freedom  and  shrinking  the  di-
mensions  of  the  state  space,  making  a  large  system  computationally 
tractable.  Coarse  graining  is  a  technique  that  aggregates  clusters  of 
atoms into a single bigger unit [427]. The larger unit is more restricted 
in its degrees of freedom than the atoms. The coarse-graining process has 
the  disadvantage  of  causing  information  loss  in  the  system.  Further-
more, determining which degree of coarse-graining is optimal in some 
ways,  as  well  as  identifying  microstates  that  can  be  reliably 
coarse-grained, are both significant challenges in this procedure [428]. 
Dissipative particle dynamics (DPD), as an example of fully-discrete 
coarse-grained methods, bears a strong resemblance to MD and can be 
thought  of  as  a  coarse-grained  version  of  it.  DPD  tackles  a  cluster  of 
atoms or molecules (coarse-grained) rather than an individual atom or 
molecule  as 
in  MD  [429].  DPD  evolved  as  a  result  of  an 
application-driven  need  to  simulate  molecular  systems  for  which  the 
current space and time constraints of MD are insufficient. DPD’s accu-
rate  representation  of  thermal  fluctuations  distinguishes  it  from  con-
ventional  continuum  methods,  enabling  accurate  representation  of 
critical physical phenomena occurring at the micro and nanoscales, such 
as  heat and  mass diffusion [430]. Additionally,  its spatial scales  vary 
considerably across the physical domain and encompass a wide range of 
sizes,  from  macro  to  nanoscales.  Abu-Nada  [431,432]  investigated 
steady-state  2-D  conduction  heat  transfer  with  a  variety  of  boundary 
conditions, including those with and without internal heat generation. 
Analytical solutions and finite-difference techniques were benchmarked 
against the DPD simulations. Temperature distributions in the conduc-
tion domain were found to be accurately predicted by DPD. In addition, 
Abu-Nada [433,434] also implemented the DPD technique for natural 
convection applications, including heat transfer enhancement of nano-
particles  [435].  Ng  and  Sheu  [436]  established  the  DPD  model  with 
energy conservation to accurately simulate the speed of the solid-liquid 
interface in the mushy zone, particularly in the case of a high thermal 
conductivity ratio. The effective thermal diffusivities of mushy particles 
were linearly interpolated using the estimated solid percentage. When 
numerical solutions to one- and two-dimensional solidification problems 
were  compared  to  analytical  solutions  and/or  experimental  results, 
there was a high degree of agreement. 

4.1.4.74. Hybrid continuum-discrete methods. The analysis of ePCM flow 
systems  has  traditionally  been  conducted  using  Eulerian–Eulerian 
methods  [393,396,397].  These  techniques  begin  by  solving  conserva-
tion equations on a set grid and then adding suitable source terms to 
account for mass, momentum, and energy transfer between phases [397, 
408].  Recent  attention  has  focused  on  a  hybrid  continuum-discrete 
approach  that  can  account  for  the  continuum  nature  of  the  carrying 
fluid  using  the  Eulerain  description  and  the  discrete  nature  of  ePCM 
particles  using  the  Lagrangian description. Rather  than depending on 
semi-empirical correlations  to determine interfacial forces  and fluxes, 
hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian methods directly acquire these variables via 
direct coupling at the two-phase interface. The carrying fluid and ePCM 
particles can be solved in two different frames of reference by applying 
Eulerian-Lagrangian models to ePCM slurries/dispersions. 

The  physical  phenomena  captured  using  Eulerian-Lagrangian 
models include temperature and velocity slips between fluid and parti-
cles  [437],  colloidal  and  collisional  interactions  between  particles 
[438],  non-homogeneities  in  the  particle  spatial  distribution  [439], 
particle  agglomeration  [440],  and  particle-wall  interactions  [441]. 
Eulerian-Lagrangian  methods  would  use  the  continuum  technique 
wherever possible while incorporating the preceding physical processes 
via the particle approach. As a result, Eulerian-Lagrangian methods can 
accurately capture physical phenomena at a much lower computational 
cost. However, the degree to which a model is coupled determines its 
accuracy,  which  can  be  classified  into  four  categories.  Only  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103756S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

continuous phase can influence the particle phase in one-way coupling. 
In  two-way  coupling,  both  phases  can  influence  the  other.  When  a 
particle disrupts the fluid phase and interacts with another particle, this 
is referred to as three-way coupling. Finally, four-way coupling accounts 
for particle interactions as well as particle-wall interactions [442]. 

The  mass,  momentum,  and  energy  conservation  equations  for  the 

continuous phase can be written as follows [404], 

∇.(ρbvb) = 0,

∇.(ρbvbvb) = (cid:0) ∇P + ∇.(μb∇vb) + Sp,m,

(cid:0)

∇.

)

ρbcp,bvbTb

= ∇.(kb∇Tb) + Sp,e,

(43)  

(44)  

(45)  

where Sp,m in Eq. (44) is a source term that represent momentum transfer 
between the carrying fluid and ePCM particles. This can be determined 
by  finding  the  change  in  the  momentum  of  particles  as  they  move 
through  a  control  volume.  The  source  term,  Sp,e  in  Eq.  (45)  denotes 
energy transfer between the fluid and particles. It can be determined by 
calculating energy variations of the particles as they traverse the fluid 
phase. Sp,m and Sp,e can be expressed as follows, 

Sp,m =

∑

npa

mpa
δV

F,

∑

Sp,e =

npa

mpa
δV

cp,pa

dTpa
dt

,

(46)  

(47)  

where δV denotes the cell volume and npa is the number of solid particles 
contained within a cell volume. The mass and total specific force acting 
on an ePCM particle are denoted bympaand F, respectively. 

In Eq. (46), the total specific force, F, is made up of body and hy-
drodynamic forces, such as gravity, drag, thermophoresis, Saffman’s lift, 
magnetic, Brownian, and virtual mass forces [404]. 
The energy equation of a particle is as follows: 

mpacp,pa

dTpa
dt

= Nupaπdpakb

(cid:0)

Tb (cid:0) Tpa

)
,

where Nupa can be calculated as follows, 
pa Pr0.3,

Nupa = 2.0 + 0.6Re0.5

(48)  

(49)  

where Re and Pr are the Reynolds and Prandtl numbers, respectively. 

Thus, in hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian methods, the carrying fluid is 
treated as a continuum and the computational speed is determined by 
how the computational domain is discretized while treating PCM cap-
sules as particles with distinct properties. Newton’s second law is used to 
predict the positions and velocities of N particles in linear motion given 
external and interparticle forces. The deterministic forces operating on 
the carrying fluid can be mathematically replaced by random fluctuating 
forces when it comes to the mobility of ePCM particles in the carrying 
fluid.  These  random  forces  have  a  zero  mean  over  time,  and  their 
amplitude is determined by the dissipation fluctuation theorem. 

The  equations  that  regulate  phenomena  in  the  Eulerain  reference 
frame can be solved using different numerical techniques, such as FDM 
[443], FEM [444], FVM [445], and LBM [446]. Similarly, phenomena in 
the  Lagrangian  reference  frame  are  governed  by  approaches  such  as 
Langevin-dynamics  [447],  Brownian  dynamics  [448],  Stokesian  dy-
namics [449], and particle-in-cell. 

Rostami [450] used the Eulerian-Lagrangian approach in two-way 
coupling  to  investigate  the  heat  transfer  characteristics  of  a  paraffin 
wax  micro-ePCM  slurry  in  a  mini-channel.  A  thin  layer  of  Fe3O4  was 
used to coat the particles, with volumetric concentrations ranging from 
0  to  10%.  Drag,  buoyancy,  and  weight  were  the  forces  acting  on  the 
particle phase. The control volume and SIMPLE methods were used to 
solve  the  velocity  and  temperature  fields  for  the  carrying  fluid.  The 
fourth-order Runge-Kutta method was used to solve for the velocity of 
particles. The temperature of the particles was determined by solving 

the  transient  conduction  equation.  The  results  indicated  that  when 
Reynolds  number  was  1000,  volumetric  concentration  was  10%,  and 
there was no supercooling, the Nusselt number increases by 13%. 

tube  with 

heated  wall 

surfaces.  The 

Shabgard  et  al.  [451]  simulated  the  settling  of  a  PCM  slurry  in  a 
vertical 
arbitrar-
y–Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) approach was adopted and implemented 
in  a  finite-volume  formulation  using  two  coupling  methods.  A 
body-conformal  mesh  was  used  to  account  for  particle  sedimentation 
and  interface  morphological  changes.  The  average  Nusselt  number  at 
the particle surfaces was obtained, which could be utilized as an input to 
mixture-based Eulerian–Eulerian models (that are less computationally 
expensive) for simulating slurry flows. 

4.2. Thermophysical property correlations for ePCM slurries/dispersions 

The  governing  equations  presented  in  Section  4.1  show  that  the 
required  slurry  thermophysical  properties  are  specific  heat  capacity, 
thermal conductivity, viscosity, and density. Therefore, this section aims 
to present the experimental and theoretical correlations that represent 
each property. 

4.2.1. Specific heat capacity 

The effective specific heat of an ePCM slurry cp, sl is made up of the 
specific heats of the ePCM particles cp, pa and base fluid cp, b. The first 
step in calculating the effective specific heat capacity of an ePCM slurry 
is to assume that the specific heat of the PCM is the same in both solid 
and liquid phases (i.e. cp, pa= cp, s= cp, l), so it is calculated as follows in 
the absence of phase-change processes [452], 

cp, sl = mf cp, pa +

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) mf

)
cp, b,

(50)  

wheremfrepresent the mass fraction of PCM. 

Based on available parameters, there are two methods for calculating 
cp, pa. Chen et al. [453] proposed calculating cp, pa by treating an ePCM 
particle as a core and shell, as shown below, 

cp, pa =

(cp, co + ycp, sh)ρcoρsh
(yρco + ρsh)ρpa

,

where ρpa is calculated as following, 

ρpa =

(1 + y)ρcoρsh
ρsh + yρco

.

(51)  

(52) 

The models above do not consider the phase-change process inside 
the ePCM particles. However, if the latent heat of the ePCM particles is 
known and the phase-change process is taken into account when esti-
mating  heat  transfer  performance,  the  effective  specific  heat  of  the 
ePCM slurry will be a function of temperature during the phase transi-
tion, cp,pa = cp,pa(T), which can be related to the latent heat of fusion as 
follows [396,454], 

∫Tl

Hs (cid:0)

l =

cp, pa(T) dT.

Ts

(53) 

As shown in Fig. 53, the variation of effective specific heat of ePCM 
particles with temperature within the phase-change temperature range 
can  be  represented  by  five  different  profiles.  Rectangles,  middle  tri-
angles, and sinusoidal curves are used to represent symmetric profiles, 
while  the  two  oppositely  oriented  triangles  are  used  to  represent 
asymmetric profiles. The effective specific heat for each case is described 
next [396,398,452]. 

For the right triangle profile: 

cp, pa(T) = cp, s + 2

(

)

l

(cid:0)

Hs (cid:0)
T 2
mr

cp, s
Tmr

(T (cid:0) Ts).

(54) 

For the left triangle profile: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103757S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

T < 30∘C :

T ≥ 30∘C :

⎧

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

co = 4.047
A = 3.86 × 10(cid:0) 3 + 3.944 × 10(cid:0) 2∅

B = 9.698 × 10(cid:0) 2 (cid:0) 0.56568∅ + 0.16672∅2

,

Tc = 25.35

co = 4.054
A = (cid:0) 6.667 × 10(cid:0) 3 + 0.2555∅

B = (cid:0) 0.25721 (cid:0) 0.2252∅ + 9.708 × 10(cid:0) 2∅2

Tc = 36.24

(62) 

It is worth highlighting that the majority of authors extend the use of 
correlations for micro-ePCM slurries in their numerical simulations to 
nano-ePCM dispersions [454,456,457]. 

4.2.2. Thermal conductivity 

As a starting point, calculating the thermal conductivity of a slurry is 
possible  using  the  Maxwell  model  [458].  Because  it  assumes  no  slip 
between the base fluid and particles, it is known as a static model. The 
formula obtained can be written as follows: 

ksl = kf

2 + kpa/kf + 2∅(kpa/kf (cid:0) 1)
.
2 + kpa/kf (cid:0) ∅(kpa/kf (cid:0) 1)

(63) 

And  the  thermal  conductivity  of  the  core-and-shell  particles  is 

calculated from [453], 

1
kpadpa

=

1
kcodco

+

dpa (cid:0) dco
kshdpadco

,

(

)2

dco
dpa

=

ρsh
ρsh + yρco

.

(64)  

(65) 

This model typically produces accurate results for spherical ePCMs. 
However, as the shape of suspended particles deviates from spherical, 
the accuracy of the model degrades. Furthermore, the predicted thermal 
conductivity values for the slurry are less than the experimentally re-
ported  ones  due  to  the  enhancement  caused  by  particle-carrier  fluid 
interactions [394]. Hamilton and Crosser [459] considered this effect 
and modified Maxwell’s model by introducing the shape factor of sus-
pension particles as follows: 

Fig. 53. Sine curve, left triangle, right triangle, rectangle, and middle triangle 
profiles  for  the  variation  of  specific  heat  capacity  of  ePCM  particles  with 
temperature. 

(

cp, pa(T) = cp, s + 2

(cid:0) Hs (cid:0)
T 2
mr

l

+

cp, s
Tmr

)

(T (cid:0) Tl).

For the middle triangle profile: 

(55) 

cp,pa(T)= {

[

]

cp,s +

cp,l (cid:0) cp,s
Tl (cid:0) Ts

+

4Hs (cid:0)
l
(Tl (cid:0) Ts)2

(T (cid:0) Ts), Ts ≤ T ≤

)

(

Ts + Tl
2

[

]

cp,l +

4Hs (cid:0)
l
(Tl (cid:0) Ts)2 (cid:0)

cp,l (cid:0) cp,s
Tl (cid:0) Ts

(Tl (cid:0) T),

.

)

(

Ts + Tl
2

< T ≤ Tl

For the rectangular profile: 

cp, pa(T) =

Hs(cid:0) l
Tmr

.

For the sine curve profile: 

cp, pa(T) = cp, s +

(

π
2

l

Hs (cid:0)
Tmr

(

)

[
π

sin

(cid:0) cp, s

)]

T (cid:0) T1
Tmr

.

(56) 

(57) 

(58) 

Thus, Eq. (50) can be rewritten to represent the effective specific heat 

of the ePCM slurry undergoing phase change, as follows [452], 
)
cp, b.

cp, eff , sl = mf cp, pa(T) +

1 (cid:0) mf

(cid:0)

(59) 

ksl = kf

kpa + (w (cid:0) 1)kf + (w (cid:0) 1)(kpa (cid:0) kf )∅
,
kpa + (w (cid:0) 1)kf (cid:0) (kpa (cid:0) kf )∅

(66)  

In  an  important  study  [452],  the  right  triangle,  left  triangle,  rect-
angular, and sine curve models were compared for microcapsules con-
taining 20(cid:0) 25% PCM. The results revealed that the difference between 
the four models was less than 4%. 

Another  correlation  based  on  experimental  data  for  nano-ePCM 

dispersions is written as follows [340], 

cp, sl =

(1 (cid:0) ∅)ρb cp, b + ∅ρpacp, pa
.
(1 (cid:0) ∅)ρb + ∅ρpa

(60) 

Based on the experimental results of Karaipekli et al. [340], Haddad 
et al. [455] derived the following correlation for nano-ePCM dispersions 
(n-nonadecane  as  a  core  and  styrene/methacrylic  acid  copolymer  as 
shell): 

where w represents the shape factor of suspension particles and it varies 
within the range of 3-3.13 [394]. The model is reduced to Maxwell’s 
model by substituting w = 3, which is the shape factor of a spherical 
capsule.  However,  this  modified  model  failed  in  several  aspects, 
including  underestimating  the  thermal  conductivity  enhancement 
caused  by  dispersing  nanoparticles  and  considering  the  temperature 
dependence of nanoparticle size [454]. 

Several authors explored the augmentation of thermal conductivity 
caused  by  particle-particle,  particle-liquid,  and  particle-wall  in-
teractions while the  ePCM  slurry passes through channels. They used 
particles  and  fluids  with  the  same  thermal  conductivity  at  different 
particle  P´eclet  numbers  and  found  the  following  relationships 
[460–463], 

cp, sl = co + AeB(T(cid:0) Tc )2,

Where for, 

(61)  

keff = f .ksl,

kf = 0.020833Tf (cid:0) 0.0275,

kpa =

rpa
+ rpa (cid:0) rco
ksh

,

rpa
kco

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103758S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

ksl = kf

2 + kpa
kf
2 + kpa
kf

(

+ 2∅
(

(cid:0) ∅

kpa
kf

kpa
kf

)

(cid:0) 1

) ,

(cid:0) 1

f = 1 + A∅Pem,

⎧
⎨

⎩

A = 3.0, m = 1.5, Pe < 0.67
A = 1.8, m = 0.18, 0.67 ≤ Pe ≤ 250
A = 3.0, m = 1/11, Pe > 250

.

It is worth mentioning that Eqs. (63) and (67) are the most frequently 
used correlations for numerical simulations of nano/micro-ePCM slur-
ries/dispersions. On the other hand, inspired by the linear relationship 
between thermal conductivity and the volume concentration of nano-
particles  in  a  nanofluid,  many  researchers  employed  the  following 
equation to calculate the effective thermal conductivity [454], 

ksl
kf

= 1 + Nc∅,

(68)  

where Nc is a constant referred to as the number of thermal conductivity, 
which can be altered by changing parameters such as the size, shape, 
and concentration of nanoparticles, as well as the type of base fluid. It 
can also be affected by the preparation method, suspension temperature, 
ultrasonication time, and other factors. It is important to note that Eq. 
(68) is limited to dilute suspensions and a low volume fraction of nano- 
ePCMs (5%) [454]. For a suspension of nano-ePCMs in water that in the 
temperature range of 25 (cid:0)
C, Haddad et al. [455] derived another 
correlation based on the available experimental data of Karaipekli et al. 
[340], 
(cid:0)

◦
(cid:0) 34

)

(cid:0)

ksl =

0.63456 + 2.5 × 10(cid:0) 2∅
(cid:0) 1.39 + 10.99∅ + 10.59∅2 + 3.3466∅3

+

)
10(cid:0) 11T 6.37

(69) 

The  thermal  conductivity  obtained  in  [455]  was  compared  to  the 
thermal conductivity of nanofluids at the same concentrations. For both 
of them, thermal conductivity increased as the particle volume fraction 
and  temperature  increased.  Additionally,  the  results  were  consistent 
with some experimental data published in the literature. 

4.3. Viscosity 

The most common models for predicting the effective viscosity of an 
ePCM slurry, applicable to Newtonian fluids (∅ < 30%), are Einstein’s 
[464], Batchelor’s [465], and Vand’s [466] models, which are respec-
tively expressed as: 

μsl = μf (1 + 2.5∅),

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

μsl = μf

μsl = μf

1 + 2.5∅ + 6.2∅2

)
,

1 (cid:0) ∅ (cid:0) A∅2

)

(cid:0) 2.5.

(70)  

(71)  

between viscosity and nanoparticle volume fraction [454], as follows: 

μsl
μf

= 1 + Nv∅.

(73) 

It is worth mentioning that Eq. (73) is valid only for a low volume 

(67) 

fraction of nano-ePCMs (5%). 

Another  correlation  was  developed  [455]  for  a  suspension  of 
C,  as 

nano-ePCMs  operating  in  the  temperature  range  of  25  (cid:0)
shown below, 

◦
(cid:0) 34

(cid:0)

μsl =

2.838 + 0.3753∅1.79

)

(1 + T)(cid:0) 0.355.

4.3.1. Density 

ρsl = (1 (cid:0) ∅)ρf + ∅ρpa,

(74)  

(75) 

The most widely used equation for calculating the density of a nano/ 
micro-ePCM  slurry/dispersion  is  as  follows  [394,468]:  where  ρpa  is 
computed as shown in Eq. (52). Based on experimental results, another 
relationship was derived for a suspension of nano-ePCMs, valid in the 
◦
temperature range of 25(cid:0) 34
C, as follows: 
)
1.0008 + 2.03 × 10(cid:0) 3∅
(cid:0) 10.79 + 8.84∅ (cid:0) 11.53∅2 + 4.063∅3

)
10(cid:0) 8T 3.18.

ρsl =

+

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(76) 

Correlations such as those mentioned above are derived using strict 
assumptions  regarding  temperature  and  PCM  concentration  values. 
However, a thorough theoretical understanding of energy transport at 
the nanoscale is required, especially for thermal conductivity and spe-
cific heat. This includes both fundamental knowledge gained through 
statistical thermodynamic analysis of such nano-systems and theoretical 
modeling  of  nanoscale  energy  transport  mechanisms.  As  a  result,  the 
following  two  sections  will  discuss  the  theoretical  foundations  for 
analyzing energy transport at the nanoscale in PCMs. 

4.4. Theoretical background of thermal conductivity in PCMs 

Thermal conductivity is similar to the majority of non-equilibrium 
transport  quantities  that  cannot  be  solved  in  closed  form  without 
imposing certain assumptions. A thorough theoretical investigation of 
the thermal conductivity of solid and liquid PCMs that is consistent with 
experimental data is required for further development and enhancement 
of the performance of PCMs in latent TES systems. Thermal conductivity 
in solids is fundamentally based on the kinetic theory of thermal con-
duction in gases, which provides a framework for analyzing the micro-
scopic processes governing heat conduction. Therefore, in the current 
section, gas thermal conductivity is revisited first, followed by solid and 
liquid thermal conductivity. 

(72) 

4.4.1. Gas thermal conductivity 

In Vand’s model, A is a parameter that varies between 1.16 and 4.5 
for different materials and sizes [455]. It is worth noting that Vand’s 
model  is  most  frequently  used  by  researchers  because  it  is  relatively 
insensitive  to  particle  size  in  the  range  of  3  to  300  μm  and  valid  for 
volume ratios of less than 37%. Chai et al. [394] compared the previ-
ously mentioned correlations at various PCM volume concentrations. A 
was 1.16, 3.4, and 4.45 in Eq. (72) when the volume fraction was less 
than 10%. The viscosity predictions from all correlations were quite low 
and  showed  little  difference  from  the  base  fluid.  When  the  volume 
concentration  exceeded  10%,  the  predictions  showed  a  significantly 
larger difference from the base fluid, and they increased drastically as 
concentrations  increased,  except  for  the  Einstein  model.  The  most 
notable increase was in Eq. (72) when A was equal to 4.45. It is worth 
noting  that  Eq.  (72)  is  also  the  most  frequently  used  correlation  for 
numerical  simulations  of  nano/micro-ePCMs  in  mini/microchannels, 
with A = 1.16 [467]. 

Thermal conductivity in gases is caused by energy transfer between 
gas  molecules,  which  is  highly  dependent  on  the  average  distance 
traveled by a phonon between collisions. This is known as the mean free 
path  of  molecules,  λ.  High-temperature  gas  molecules  diffuse  among 
low-temperature gas molecules, collide with them, and release kinetic 
energy. The mean free path, λ, is related to the mean free path compo-
nents in the x-, y-, and z-directions, as shown in Fig. 54, via the following 
relationship: 

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(Δx)2 + (Δy)2 + (Δz)2
.

λ =

(77) 

If an isotropic substance is assumed, then phonons can travel in all 
three directions in space equally well. Therefore, Δx = Δy = Δz and Eq. 
(77) can be rewritten as follows, 

(Δx)2 =

1
λ2.
3

(78) 

Another  correlation  was  established  using  the  linear  relationship 

The total heat flow rate is expressed as follows, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103759S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 54. Relationship between the mean free path in three dimensions and the 
mean free path in the heat flow direction. 

Q = cvmΔT,

Fig. 55. Sketches of a) mass-spring system of lattice material, b) non-vibrating 
atom, and c) atom vibration associated with phonon generation. 

(79)  

where cv and m are the isochoric specific heat capacity and mass of the 
material, respectively, and ΔT is the temperature change across Δx. The 
mass of the material can be expressed as follows, 

m = ρV = ρAΔx,

(80)  

where  ρ,  V, and  A  are  the  density,  volume,  and  area  of  the  material, 
respectively. Thus, Eq. (79) can be rewritten as follows: 

Q = cvρAΔxΔT.

(81) 

By defining the mean time interval between two phonon collisions as 

τ, we obtain the heat transferred within the time τ as follows, 

˙Q =

Q
τ

=

cvρAΔxΔT
τ

.

(82) 

From Fourier’s law, the thermal conductivity coefficient is expressed 

as follows, 
˙QΔx
AΔT

k =

.

By substituting Eqs. (78) and (82) into Eq. (83), we obtain, 

k = cvρ

Δx2
τ

= cvρ

1

3λ2
τ

=

1
cvρ
3

λ
τ⏟⏞⏞⏟

λ.

v

(83) 

(84) 

temperature increases, its vibrations deviate from the equilibrium state. 
Following that, high-energy phonons are created and diffuse, resulting 
in the formation of a temperature gradient [470]. As a consequence, in 
the presence of a temperature gradient, heat will flow from the hot end 
to the cold end, as shown in Fig. 56. 

Each phonon carries an amount of energy equal to hv instead of the 
kinetic  energy  equal  to  1/2mv2  since  a  phonon  is  massless.  Phonon 
transport is modeled like that of gas molecules, which is known as the 
phonon  gas  model  (FGM)  [471].  By  analogy,  to  describe  the  thermal 
conductivity of a crystal lattice, the phonon gas model considers pho-
nons  in  crystalline  solids  to  be  gas  particles.  This  approach  has  been 
shown  to  be  effective  for  understanding  heat  transport  in  solids  at 
various  scales.  According  to  the  model,  each  phonon  contributes  the 
following to the heat flux [471]: 

Q = hω

vg
∼
V

,

(86)  

where ω is the phonon frequency, h is the reduced Planck’s constant, vgis 
phonon  velocity,  and  Ṽ  is  the  volume  per  mode  of  vibration.  The 

Therefore, the gas thermal conductivity coefficient is expressed as 

follows, 

k =

1
3

cvρvλ =

1
Cvvλ,
3

(85)  

where Cv is the heat capacity per unit volume obtained from the product 
ofcvandρ. 

4.4.2. Solid thermal conductivity 

For solids, heat can be conducted via excitations caused by electrical 
carriers  (electrons  or  holes)  or  lattice  waves  (phonons).  In  metallic 
materials,  the  majority  of  heat  transfer  occurs  via  electrical  carriers 
[469]. However, in crystalline dielectric materials, lattice waves are the 
dominant heat transporters [469]. When heat energy reaches the surface 
of crystalline PCMs, it is transferred to the atoms located on the surface. 
Each atom vibrates as it receives heat, which is then transferred at the 
same rate to neighboring atoms. Thus, a quasi-particle exists as a result 
of  the  vibrational  waves  called  phonons.  For  this  reason,  the  lattice 
structure of the crystalline PCM can be assumed as a coupled mass and 
spring system, as illustrated in Fig. 55. At low temperatures, atoms in the 
crystal  lattice  vibrate  close  to  their  equilibrium  positions,  working  to 
prevent  the  phonon  from  being  excited.  However,  when  crystal 

Fig. 56. Phonon energy variation with temperature and distance. In the pres-
ence of a temperature gradient, heat will flow from the hot end to the cold end. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103760S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

problem with this model is mainly encountered with materials that do 
not have well-defined phonon dispersion and therefore do not have well- 
defined velocities. According to Eq. (86), knowing the phonon velocity 
determines the rate at which the energy of a phonon moves through the 
material (from the hot end to the cold end). 

Thermal energy does not flow directly through the crystal but rather 
diffuses through it according to the type of phonon scattering. Phonon 
scattering can be classified into three types: phonon-phonon scattering, 
phonon-defect scattering, and phonon-interface scattering [470]. 

Phonon-phonon collisions (also known as three-phonon scattering) 
are  further  classified  into  two  types  [472]:  normal  processes  (N  pro-
cesses) and Umklapp processes (U processes). As illustrated in Fig. 57, 
energy and momentum are conserved in N processes, whereas U pro-
cesses conserve only energy. When only a few phonons are present in the 
crystalline PCM, the probability of a phonon collision is extremely small, 
resulting in a long mean free path. However, as the number of phonons 
increases,  the  collision  probability  increases,  the  mean  free  path  be-
comes shorter, and the thermal conductivity increases as well. Thus, the 
greater the degree of phonon collision in a PCM, the greater its thermal 
conductivity and ability to conduct heat. Defects in the PCM lattice in-
crease  the  likelihood  of  phonon  scattering,  such  as  reflection  and 
diffraction, which has a detrimental effect on phonon transport. Small 
impurities in the PCM lattice increase thermal resistance and decrease 
thermal conductivity [490]. Point defects, dislocations, vacancy defects, 
and impurities are the most frequent types of lattice defects [473]. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  effect  of  phonon-boundary  scattering  is 
greatest at low temperatures, where the mean free path of the phonon is 
the longest. In composite PCMs, the interface between the filler matrix 
and  the  PCM  is  the  primary  barrier  to  thermal  transport.  Interfacial 
resistance impedes heat flow within composite PCMs, minimizing the 
advantage  of  using  a  highly  thermally  conductive  filler.  As  a  result, 
composite  materials  have  a  lower  thermal  conductivity  than  thermal 
conductivity fillers [474]. 

The thermal conductivity of solids is similar to that of kinetic gases, 
taking  into  account  the  direct  factors  affecting  thermal  conductivity, 
including  heat  capacity  per  unit  volume,  Cv,  phonon  velocity,  v,  and 
phonon mean free path, λ. This is in addition to the three phonon po-
larizations in solids: one longitudinal and two transverse branches. The 
Debye formulation can be used to estimate the lattice thermal conduc-
tivity  of crystalline materials with respect  to the lattice vibration fre-
quency,  assuming  that  the  dispersion  relation  and  bulk  mean  free 
pathways  are  well  approximated  as  isotropic  [475].  The  thermal 

conductivity model is given as follows: 

k =

1
3

∫∞

0

cv(ω)v(ω)λ(ω) dω.

(87) 

By assuming a spring connecting two types of atoms with masses M1 
and M2, the bonds between the atoms are described by a spring constant, 
and then the solution of the lattice vibration frequency, ω, is given as a 
function of wavevector, k, as follows [476], 

ω(k )2 = SC

(

1
M1

+

1
M2

)

((

+ SC

1
M1

+

1
M2

)2

(cid:0)

4
M1M2

)1/2

sin2k a
2

,

(88)  

where a is the distance between two atoms at equilbrium, i.e., the lattice 
constant, and SC is the spring constant. Then, the dispersion relation can 
be used to calculate the phonon velocity, as follows [477], 

v =

dωk
dk

.

(89) 

The phonon dispersion relationship is considered critical for thermal 
transport research since it establishes a link between statistical atomic 
behavior and macroscopic heat transfer [477]. 

The basic  assumption in  Eq.  (87) is  that, as  previously stated,  the 
dispersion relation and bulk mean free paths are isotropic. This holds 
true for gases (such as molecules, photons, and free electrons), as well as 
electrons  and  phonons  in  amorphous  materials.  Yet,  the  dispersion 
relation of electrons and phonons in crystalline materials is direction- 
dependent, necessitating a more generic form of Eq. (87) [478]. Thus, 
introducing the mean free path into Eq. (87), to acquire better knowl-
edge of the internal heat transport mechanisms of crystalline materials, 
will produce more accurate results [479]. 

The mean free path is affected by three forms of phonon scattering. 
Whichever of the three factors produces the shortest mean free path has 
a real influence over the other scattering processes. Matthiessen’s rule 
defines the effective mean free path, λeff, as follows [2, 24], 

1
λeff

=

1
λph

+

1
λd

+

1
λb

,

(90)  

where λph, λd, and λb  denote the mean free path as determined by the 
phonon-phonon,  phonon-defect,  and  phonon-boundary  scatterings, 
respectively.  Fig.  58  shows  a  representation  of  phonon  mean  free 
pathways due to different scattering types. 

Therefore,  to  focus  on  the  bulk  mean  free  path,  λ,  and  reflect  its 
contribution on thermal conductivity, the integral variables in Eq. (87) 
are changed from ωto λ, with an exchange of the order of integration and 
summation [478]: 

kbulk = (cid:0)

∫∞

∑

s

0

1
Cvλbulk
3

(

dλbulk
dω

)(cid:0) 1

dλbulk.

(91) 

The negative sign is introduced since the dominant trend of dλbulk/ 
dω is negative, therefore, the resultant value of kbulk is positive [478]. 
By applying Fubini’s theorem, we can exchange the summation and 

integration in Eq. (91) and rewrite it as follows: 

∫∞

kbulk =

kλdλbulk,

0

where, 

kλ = (cid:0)

∑
1
3

s

Cvλbulk

(

dλbulk
dω

)(cid:0) 1

,

(92)  

(93)  

Fig.  57. Phonon-phonon  collisions  are  classified  into  a)  normal  (N)  and  b) 
Umklapp (U) processes. Energy and momentum are conserved in N processes, 
whereas U processes conserve only energy. 

wherekλis the thermal conductivity per mean free path. 

Holland [480] provided another analytical model of crystal thermal 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103761S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

follow the model of kinetic gas conduction, which assumes that the gas 
particles are dilute and non-interacting [475]. 

The majority of the theoretical expressions for liquid thermal con-
ductivity are based on Bridgman’s model. It assumes a liquid as a cubic 
lattice with side lengths of d. Each corner contains a molecule with 2KBof 
energy  transferred  at  the  speed  of  sound  from  the  water  molecule  to 
other neighboring molecules through the cross-sectional area d2 [483], 
yielding, 

kBridgman =

2kBvsound
d2

= 2kBvsoundn2/3,

(98)  

where vsound  is the longitudinal sound speed in the liquid, and d is the 
mean distance between the centers of molecules, which can be expressed 
in terms of the molecular density of the liquid as d=n

(cid:0) 1/3. 

Prior  to  proceeding,  it  is  worth  noting  that  amorphous  solids  and 
liquids exhibit a similar degree of short-range order in their structure, as 
evidenced by the similarity of the theories used to describe their thermal 
conductivity. A clear similarity can be seen between Eqs. (97) and (98). 
Xi et al. [484] recently proposed a unified formula for calculating the 
thermal conductivity of liquids and amorphous solids at room temper-
ature based on their structural similarity. 

Bridgman’s model was shown to agree well with the experimental 
thermal conductivity results of polar liquids, such as ethanol, hydrogen 
sulfide,  and  methanol  [475].  However,  it  deviated  from  the  experi-
mental results of other liquids, such as water and molten salts [475]. 
Bridgman’s  model  was  developed  based  on  a  reinterpretation  of  the 
rigid spheres assumption in the kinetic theory of gases, as follows [485], 

k = 2.8kBUsn2/3.

(99) 

In Eq. (99), the numerical coefficient of 2.8 was  initially 3 [484]. 
However,  it  has  been  modified  to  obtain  better  agreement  with  the 
experimental  data.  Due  to  uncertainty  around  the  sound  velocity  in 
many liquids, a semi-empirical relationship for sound speed in liquids 
based on more certain physical characteristics gained acceptance [486], 
as follows: 
(

)1/2

(95)  

Us =

,

(100)  

1
ρks

(96)  

where ks is the adiabatic compressibility. Thus, Eq. (99) is rewritten as 
follows, 

k = 2.8kBn2/3

)1/2

.

(

1
ρks

(101) 

Fig. 58. Phonon mean free paths due to a) phonon-phonon, b) phonon-defect, 
and c) phonon-boundary scattering. 

conductivity that completely accounts for the effect of longitudinal and 
transverse phonons on heat conduction. The formula, as indicated in Eq. 
(94), is made up of two parts: thermal conductivity of transverse kTraand 
longitudinal phonons kLon, 

k = kTra + kLon,

(94)  

where, 

kTra =

kLon =

2
3

2
3

∫θT /T

0

∫θL/T

0

CTraT 3x4ex(ex (cid:0) 1)(cid:0) 2dx
τ(cid:0) 1
Tra

,

CLonT 3x4ex(ex (cid:0) 1)(cid:0) 2dx
τ(cid:0) 1
Lon

,

where x = hω
)(cid:0)
(
KB
h

KBT, and by considering i = Tra or Lon, θi  = KBωi
. 

)3

KB
2π2vi

h  and Ci  =

At  this  point,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  amorphous  solids  have 
vibrational modes that can conduct heat. However, since they do not 
have long-range order like crystalline material, heat is transferred via 
collective vibrations distinct from phonons, referred to as locons, dif-
fusions, and propagons [481]. The Cahill–Pohl model was proposed for 
the  minimum thermal conductivity of  the amorphous solid, assuming 
that the mean free path of each vibrational mode is half its wavelength. 
Later on, their model was simplified to [482], 

k =

1.21
3

kB(2vTra + vLon)n

2

3,

(97)  

where KB is Boltizmann’s constant, vTra is the transverse speed of sound, 
vLon is the longitudinal speed of sound, n is the number density of atoms. 

4.4.3. Liquid thermal conductivity 

Thermal conduction processes in liquids are based on the movement 
and vibration of molecules as a response to the temperature gradient. 
However,  because  of  the  strength  of  the  density  and  intermolecular 
contacts  in  liquid  molecules,  thermal  conduction  in  liquids  does  not 

However, due to difficulty in obtaining adiabatic compressibility, the 
isothermal compressibility kTis used instead, which is much simpler to 
obtain [486], yielding, 

k = 2.8kBn(cid:0) 2/3

)1/2

.

(

1
ρkT

(102) 

Overall,  consistency  between  Bridgman’s  model  and  experimental 
data is insufficient. This difference in ionic liquids and ionanofluids is 
typically between 5 and 15%, and it can reach up to 50% [486]. 

On the other hand, Chapman and Enskog [475] revised the kinetic 
gas theory to integrate the comparatively high density of liquids into a 
new kinetic theory of liquids. Their concept is based on the observation 
that liquid molecules collide more frequently than gas molecules. Their 
assumption  is  backed  by  the  effective  scattering  diameter  of  liquid 
molecules, D, which can be computed using viscosity measurements: 

kChapman(cid:0) Enskog =

μChapman(cid:0) Enskog =

[
1 +

ko
g(D)

2
5

]2

πρD3g(D)

+

∏
,

3kB
2m

[

μo
g(D)

1 +

4
15

]2

πρD3g(D)

+

∏
3
,
5

(103)  

(104) 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103762S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

ko =

μo =

25
32

25
32

3kB
2m

,

√

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
πmkBT
D2π
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
πmkBT
,
D2π

∏

=

4
ρ2D4g(D)
9

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
πmkBT

(cid:0)

g =

)

,

11ρb
9

1 (cid:0)
1 (cid:0) 2ρb

b =

2
3

πD3,

,

(105)  

(106)  

(107)  

(108)  

(109)  

where ko is the dilute-gas thermal conductivity, μo is viscosity, D is the 
effective molecule diameter,ρis liquid density, mis the mass of a liquid 
molecule,  and  T  is  absolute  temperature.  Unfortunately,  the  Chap-
man–Enskog kinetic theory of liquids failed to account for the temper-
ature dependence of liquid thermal conductivity [475]. 

Another  well-known  model  for  liquid  thermal  conductivity  was 
established by Horrocks and McLaughlin [487]. It was based on the fact 
that liquids have a lattice structure through which excess energy caused 
by a temperature gradient is transferred in two ways. The first is by the 
movement of molecules between cells, expressed as follows: 

kconv =

(

)1

2Cv
vf

kBT
2πm

nh
N

√

̅̅̅
2
a

(

1 (cid:0)

(

)

)
e

nh
N

(cid:0) eo
kB T

,

where vfis the free volume of the liquid, eo is the height of the boundary 
potential  barrier  restricting  a  molecule  to  its  cell,  nhis  the  number  of 
vacancies, N is Avogadro’s number, m is the mass of a molecule, and Cv is 
the  specific  heat  per  molecule.  The  second  way  is  via  a  vibrational 
mechanism in which the molecule vibrates inside its cell, as follows: 

equilibrium. This theorem is represented by the so-called "Green-Kubo" 
relations [489]. This avoids some of the complexities associated with 
non-equilibrium approaches due to the large temperature gradients. The 
general form of Green-Kubo relations used in MD calculations is: 

Y = β

∫∞

0

〈Ao(t)Ao(0)〉eqdt,

(114)  

where  Y  is  the  transport  coefficient  of  interest  (in  our  case,  thermal 
conductivity), Ao is an observable, and β is a constant. The expressions 
for  Ao  and  β  depend  on  the  considered  coefficient. Depending  on  the 
macroscopic quantity of interest, the derivation of Green-Kubo formulas 
can be quite different. In the case of thermal transport, the Green-Kubo 
formula  establishes  a  relationship  between  thermal  conductivity  and 
heat flux spontaneous fluctuations as follows [490], 

k =

V
kBT 2

∫∞

0

〈J(t).J(0)〉dt,

(115)  

where J(t) is the heat flux vector at time t, V and T are system volume 
and temperature, respectively. 

The  total  heat  flux  is  the  summation  of  the  convective  term,  Jc, 
arising primarily from the diffusion of particles, and the virial term, Jv, 
arising primarily from atomic interactions. Each term can be expressed 
as follows [490]: 

(110)  

J(t) = Jc(t) + Jv(t),

Jc =

1
V

[

∑

eivi

i

]

,

Jv =

1
2V

[

∑
(cid:0)

i<j

(cid:0)

Fij.

vi + vj

))

]

rij

,

(116)  

(117)  

(118)  

kvib = P

[

ε
π2R2
om

{

11C14

)14

(ro
a

(cid:0) 5C8

(ro
a

}]1/2

)8

√

(cid:0)

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)
1 (cid:0)
a

nh
N

2

,

m

Cv

(111)  

where  ei  and  vi  are  the  per-atom  energy  and  velocity,  Fij  is  the  force 
between atoms i and j, viand vj  are their velocities, and rij  is the sepa-
ration distance between them. Therefore, 

where P represents the probability that energy is transferred when two 
vibrating molecules collide and ε is the depth of the potential well at the 
equilibrium diameter ro. C14and C8  are lattice summation constants of 
values 12.05899 and 12.80194. Therefore, 

k =

V
kBT 2

∫∞

0

((Jc(t) + Jv(t)).(Jc(0) + Jv(0)))dt.

(119)  

k = kvib + kconv.

(112) 

4.5. Theoretical background of specific heat capacity in PCMs 

However, it is reported that the thermal conductivity of simple liq-
uids up to their boiling points is almost entirely due to the vibrational 
contribution  and  that  convective  contributions  can  be  ignored  [487]. 
Thus, 

k ≈ kvib.

(113) 

By  comparing Horrocks and McLaughlin’s and Bridgman’s models 
with  experimental  data,  values  from  the  Horrocks  and  McLaughlin 
model agree on average within 20% of experimental values, as opposed 
to values from Bridgman’s model, which are within about 35% [487]. 
Another approach to determining the thermal conductivity of liquids 
is grounded in MD simulations, where the central premise is to consider 
that  every  substance is  composed  of  elementary  particles  at the  most 
fundamental  level  (atoms  or  molecules).  Once  the  fundamental  dy-
namics  parameters  of  these  molecules  are  determined  (i.e.,  position, 
velocity, and interaction force), macroscopic physical properties of the 
substance,  such  as  volume,  temperature,  and  pressure,  can  be  deter-
mined using statistical methods [488]. 

Transport coefficients, such as thermal conductivity, viscosity, and 
diffusion,  are  determined  from  MD  by  utilizing  the  fluctuation- 
dissipation  theorem,  which  establishes  a  relationship  between  non- 
equilibrium  coefficients  and  spontaneous  fluctuations  occurring  at 

In the early nineteenth century, the French physicists Pierre-Louis 
Dulong  and  Alexis-Th´er`ese  Petit  demonstrated  that  the  gram-atomic 
heat  capacity  (specific  heat  multiplied  by  its  atomic  weight)  of  an 
element is constant; that is, approximately six calories per gram atom for 
all solid elements. They accounted for the molar specific heat of the solid 
at high temperatures using the energy equipartition theorem of classical 
statistical  mechanics.  They  assumed  that  at  high  temperatures,  solid 
atoms  behaved  like  simple  harmonic  oscillators,  with  all  vibrational 
degrees  of  freedom  fully  excited.  Their  model  is  known  as  the 
Dulong–Petit law, which is defined as follows [491]: 

cp = 3R = 3NAkB,

(120)  

where  R  and  Na  are  the  gas  constant  in  kJ/kmol•K  and  Avogadro’s 
number, respectively. 

The weaknesses of the model lie in the overestimation of the cp  of 
many  materials,  such  as  graphite  and  diamond,  and  an  inability  to 
predict material behavior at low temperatures [492]. Additionally, it has 
been observed experimentally that the cp  of certain solids decreases as 
the  temperature  decreases,  which  contradicts  the  Dulong–Petit  law 
[492].  Later  on,  and  under  the  umbrella  of  the  quantum  harmonic 
oscillator, Einstein used new assumptions to overcome the previously 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103763S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

mentioned shortfalls. He believed that all atoms vibrated at the same 
frequency, leading to: 

cp,E = 3NAkBfE

)

,

(

TE
T

(121)  

where fE

(cid:0)

)

TE
T

is the Einstein heat capacity function and TE  = hωE
k B

. It is 

worth  mentioning  that  when  T  ≫  TE,  cp  in  the  Einstein  model  can 
expressed as cp,E = 3NAkB, which is consistent with the Dulong–Petit law. 
Debye  offered  another  model  based  on  the  concept  of  collective 
lattice vibrations. He made the assumption that the crystal is an isotropic 
continuum  and  that  elastic  waves  accurately  described  the  thermal 
motion of atoms. Each mode of elastic wave vibration has a harmonic 
oscillator  analogy.  Additionally,  he  took  into  account  all  vibrations 
below  the  Debye frequency  (upper limit  of  the  specified  elastic  wave 
frequency). His model is expressed as follows: 

cp = 9NAkB

(

T
TDe

)3 ∫TD

0

x4ex
(ex (cid:0) 1)2 dx,

(122)  

where x = hωE
kBT. When T ≫ TDe,the model showed good agreement with 
the Dulong–Petit law and the Einstein model. However, when T ≪ TDe, 
the low frequancy modes are excited by thermal excitation. The cp  of 
Debye model becomes, 
(

.

(123) 

cp =

NAkB

12
5

)3

T
TDe

Eq. (123) is referred to as Debye-T3 law. 
Although the Einstein and Debye models provide an excellent bal-
ance  of  precision  and  applicability  in  describing  the  heat  capacity  of 
solid  states,  it  is  difficult  to  predict  melting,  which  is  a  significant 
shortcoming in crystal thermodynamics theory. This is due to the diffi-
culties in controlling anharmonicity around the melting point, which is 
believed to produce instability that drives the discontinuity in the free 
energy  curve.  The  underlying  mechanisms  responsible  for  the  lattice 
instability  that  drives  the  transition  to  the  liquid  state  are  currently 
unknown,  and  no  self-consistent  solid-state  model  can  predict  it.  The 
reason behind this is that the interactions in a liquid are both strong and 
system-specific,  suggesting  that  energy  greatly  depends  on  the  liquid 
type, leading to a statement that liquid energy cannot be calculated in 
general form. Computational methods like MD and density functional 
theory are often needed to understand the transition from solid to liquid 
[493]. Modern MD approaches, such as the instantaneous normal mode 
theory  [494]  and  the  two-phase  thermodynamic  model  [495],  are 
helpful for deriving thermodynamic properties for MD simulations, but 
their implementation is rather complicated. Consequently, scientists and 
engineers have relied primarily on empirical criteria to estimate ther-
modynamic properties of liquids. 

Bolmatov et al. [496] developed a phonon theory of liquid thermo-
dynamics that encompasses both classical and quantum regimes. They 
hypothesized that the phonon states of a liquid are only impacted by its 
relaxation time, τ, which  is the average time between two successive 
atomic jumps at a single place in space. They were able to obtain liquid 
energy in the following way: 
)

)(

(

(

(

(

E = NT

1 +

3D

αT
2

hωD
T

(cid:0)

)3

D

ωF
ωD

))
,

hωF
T

(124)  

where α is the coefficient of thermal expansion, ωD is Debye’s frequency, 
and  ωF = 2π
τ  is  Frenkel’s  frequency.  Then,  for  each  temperature,  they 
utilized Eq. (124) to evaluate the isochoric heat capacity of a liquid, as 
follows: 

Cv =

1
N

dE
dT

,

(125)  

where  N  is  the  number  of  phonon  longitudinal  modes.  The  results 
revealed  that  the  obtained  liquid  energy  described  the  experimental 
behavior of an extensive variety of simple and complicated liquids. 

By  knowing  the  values  of  thermal  conductivity  and  specific  heat 
capacity of a PCM, the rate of heat transfer from a heat source to the 
innermost part of a PCM can be determined using thermal diffusivity, as 
follows: 

α =

k
ρcp

.

(126)  

4.6. Optical properties and radiation transfer in ePCM slurries/ 
dispersions 

Understanding  the  fundamentals  of  radiation  transfer  and  optical 
properties of ePCM slurries/dispersions is key in DASCs that rely on the 
dual  functionality  of  ePCMs  for  solar  absorption  and  storage.  For 
instance, in the DASC system that was discussed in Section 3.5.2, part of 
the incident solar radiation was directly absorbed by the carrying fluid 
and the other part by the ePCM particles, which is highly dependent on 
their  optical  properties  and  the  nature  of  their  interactions  with  the 
electromagnetic waves. Therefore, the following sections are dedicated 
to presenting the foundation of radiation transfer in ePCM slurries and 
dispersions, in addition to analytically and numerically evaluating their 
optical properties. 

4.6.1. Radiation transfer in ePCM slurries/dispersions 

The interactions of electromagnetic waves with an ePCM slurry are 
somewhat  different  from  their  interactions  with  a  homogeneous  me-
dium such as a liquid or gas. In general, electromagnetic waves traveling 
through a homogeneous medium can be reflected, absorbed, or trans-
mitted [497], as illustrated in Fig. 59 (a). 

When photons reach a participating radiative medium (solid, liquid, 
or gas), their energy is attenuated exponentially throughout the medium 
due to absorption and scattering. The absorbed energy is converted into 
internal energy, the amount of which is proportional to intensity of the 
incoming  electromagnetic  waves  and  traveled  distance  through  the 
medium. However, due to scattering, radiation is redirected from the 
direction of propagation to be augmented in another direction. 

Assuming that the incident waves, Iη, are traveling within an infini-
tesimal  volume  in  the  direction ̂s  through  a  medium  with  a  constant 
refractive  index,  i.e.,  waves  traveling  in  a  straight  line,  as  shown  in 
Fig. 59 (a), we obtain, 

(dIη)abs = (cid:0) ση,aIηds,

(dIη)sca = (cid:0) ση,sIηds,

(127)  

(128)  

where  ση,sand  ση,a  are  the  scattering  and  absorption  coefficients, 
respectively. By summing up Eqs. (127) and (128), then integrating the 
resultant equation over a geometric path ̂s, we obtain, 

⎛

Iη(s) = Iη(0)exp

⎝ (cid:0)

∫s

0

⎞

(σaη + σsη)ds

⎠ = Iη(0)e(cid:0) τη ,

(129)  

where the total attenuation of waves by both absorption and scattering is 
quantified using the extinction coefficient,ση,ex, defined as, 

ση,ex = ση,a + ση,s.

(130) 

The optical path length, τη, is a dimensionless quantity that aids in 
determining  the  phase  of  light  and  controlling  interference  and 
diffraction as it travels. It is defined based on the extinction coefficient, 
as follows: 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103764S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 59. Electromagnetic radiation interactions with a) a homogeneous medium and b) a small particle. This includes transmission, absorption, reflection, refraction, 
and diffraction. 

∫s

τη =

ση,exds.

0

(131) 

As for interacting with a small individual particle, the direction of 
incident  photons  may  change,  as  seen  in  Fig. 59  (b).  This  directional 
change can take place through one of three methods [497]:  

• Diffraction:  The  photon  may  change  its  direction  without  ever 

colliding with the particle.  

• Reflection: The photon may be reflected from the particle.  
• Refraction:  The  photon  may  change  its  direction after  penetrating 

the particle. 

These three mechanisms are collectively known as the scattering of 

radiation. 

The mechanism of interaction between electromagnetic waves and 
particles is determined by the relative size of the particle in comparison 
to the characteristic wavelength of incident radiation, λ. This is quan-
tified using the size parameter of the particle, defined as follows, 

χη =

2πrpa
λ

,

(132)  

where rpa is effective radius of the particle. 

When electromagnetic waves interact with an ePCM slurry, they are 
partially absorbed by the liquid and partially absorbed and scattered by 
the ePCM particles. As a result, an ePCM slurry can be optically viewed 
as  a  participating  radiative  medium.  The  radiative  transfer  equation 
(RTE) can then be used to evaluate radiative transfer within the ePCM 
slurry in the presence of absorption, emission, and/or scattering. The 
RTE  describes  the  radiative  intensity  field  within  an  enclosure  as  a 
→
function  of  radiation  direction  (unit  vector,  ̂s),  location,  r
,  and  a 
spectral variable, e.g., wavenumber, η. 

To compute the net radiative heat flux across a surface element, it is 
necessary to evaluate radiative energy contributions from all possible 
directions and wavenumbers. When an electromagnetic wave travels in 
the direction of ̂s through an ePCM slurry, it loses energy by absorption 
and scattering away from the direction of travel, while acquiring energy 
through emission and scattering in the direction of travel ̂s from other 
directions. As a result, the RTE depicts the intensity change by adding 
the  contributions  from  absorption,  emission,  in-scattering,  and  out- 
scattering  along  the  direction  of  ̂s.  Consequently,  the  RTE  in  its  full 
form  is  given  by  (computations  detail  can  be  found  elsewhere,  e.g., 
[497]), 

dIη(τη, ̂s )
dτη

̂s = ση,aIbη(τη, ̂s ) (cid:0) ση,aIη(τη, ̂s ) (cid:0) ση,sIη(τη, ̂s )

+

ση,s
4π

∫

4π

Iη(τη, ̂si)ϕη(̂si, ̂s)dΩ i ,

(133)  

where Iη  is radiation intensity, τη  is optical path length, Ibη  is Planck’s 
function,  and  Ω  is  solid  angle.  ϕη(̂si, ̂s) denotes  the  scattering  phase 
function which describes the likelihood that a ray from one direction, ̂si, 
will be scattered in another direction, ̂s. The right-hand side of Eq. (133) 
shows  that  intensity  increases  by  emission  (ση,aIbη)  and  in-scattering 
while  decreasing  by 
from  other  directions 
absorption (ση,aIη(τη, ̂s)) and out-scattering away from the incident di-
rection (ση,sIη(τη,̂s)). All quantities in Eq. (133) are a function of location, 
time, and wavenumber. Since the intensity and scattering phase function 
are both functions of ̂si and ̂s, Eq. (133) can also be written as follows: 

4πIη(τη, ̂si)ϕη(̂si, ̂s)dΩi

(cid:0) ση,s
4π

∫

)

dIη(τη, ̂s )
dτη

̂s + Iη(τη, ̂s ) = (1 (cid:0) ωη)Ibη(τη, ̂s ) +

ωη
4π

∫

4π

Iη(τη, ̂si)ϕη(̂si, ̂s)dΩi,

(134)  

where  ωηis  the  single  scattering  albedo,  which  indicates  the  relative 
importance of scattering to absorption. When ωη  = 0, the medium does 
not scatter at all, whereas ω  = 1 indicates pure scattering. The single 
scattering albedo is formulated as follows, 

ωη ≡

ση,s
ση,a + ση,s

=

ση,s
ση,ex

.

(135) 

The last two terms in Eq. (134) are frequently combined, and this is 
known as the source function for radiative intensity, defined as follows: 

Sη(τη, ̂s) = (1 (cid:0) ωη)Ibη(τη, ̂s ) +

ωη
4π

∫

4π

Iη(τη, ̂si)∅η(̂si, ̂s)dΩi.

(136) 

Therefore, Eq. (134) can be written in the deceptively simple form of, 

dIη
dτη

̂s + Iη = Sη.

(137) 

The  RTE  is  generally  difficult  to  solve  due  to  several  factors, 
including geometry as problems are often multi-dimensional while the 
majority of exact solutions are for one-dimensional geometries. Another 
factor  is  that  the  temperature  field  is  unknown  and  uncoupled  from 
conduction  and  convection,  so  it  must  be  determined  through  the 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103765S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

directional  and  spectral  integration  of  the  RTE.  It  is  also  common  to 
assume  that  there  is  no  scattering  or  that  scattering  is  isotropic  as 
anisotropic  scattering  is  difficult  to  model  and  is  rarely  reported. 
Furthermore, most calculations are restricted to situations involving the 
domain with constant properties [497]. Some solution methods for the 
RTE are reported in the literature to be used in complex situations with 
the aforementioned difficulties, such as the spherical harmonics method 
[498],  the  discrete  ordinates  method  [499],  the  zonal  method  [500], 
and the Monte Carlo method [501]. 

In  [502],  the  authors  investigated  the  influence  of  radiation  heat 
transfer during the melting of a PCM inside a spherical shell. The RTE 
was expressed under the assumption of isotropic scattering in a spheri-
cally symmetric medium, as follows: 

μ
r2

∂[r2I(r, μ)]
∂r

+

1
r

∂[(1 (cid:0) μ2)I(r, μ)]
∂μ

(cid:0)

+

ση,a + ση,s

)
I(r, μ)

= σaηIbη(T) +

ση,s
2

∫1

(cid:0) 1

I(r, μ′)dμ′,

(138)  

where μ is cosine of the angle formed by the beam’s direction, Ω, and the 
radial vector’s extension, r. The last term in Eq. (138) specifies fluctu-
ation in the intensity of radiation inside a medium as a result of scat-
tering from the incoming direction μ′
. Therefore, the authors solved the 
RTE using the discrete ordinate method. This entailed discretizing the 
full incidence solid angle with a finite number of ordinate directions and 
weight  factors.  Thus,  the  integral  term  in  the  integro-differential  Eq. 
(138) is substituted for a quadrature calculated over each ordinate. This 
resulted in the transformation of the problem into a discrete system of 
differential equations, which can be used to calculate the radiation in-
tensity Ii at any point within the medium: 

μi
r2

∂[r2Ii]
∂r

+

1
r

∂[(1 (cid:0) μ2)I]μ=μi
∂μ

(cid:0)

+

ση,a + ση,s

)
Ii = σaηIbη +

σsη
2

∑n

i=1

wiIi.

(139) 

The  subscript  i  represents  quadrature  points  (ordinate  directions), 
and a weighting factor for each ordinate direction is represented by wi. 
After the radiation intensity is known, the local radiative heat flow, qr, 
which contributes to the energy equation, can be estimated using the 
following expression: 

∫1

qr = 2π

I(r, μ)μdμ = 2π

(cid:0) 1

∑n

i=1

μiwiIi.

where D and H are the electric and magnetic field vectors, respectively, 
and  E  and  μ0  are  electric  field  intensity  and  magnetic  permeability, 
respectively. The charge density owing to free electrons is denoted by ρf, 
and it is considered to be related to the electric field vector as follows: 

∂ρf
∂t

= (cid:0) ∇.(σeE).

(144) 

As  previously  mentioned,  whenever  an  electromagnetic  wave  or 
photon interacts with a medium that includes small particles, the radi-
ative  intensity  of  the  photon  or  wave  may  be  changed  by  absorption 
and/or  scattering.  If  scattering  by  one  particle  is  unaffected  by  the 
presence of other particles, we have independent scattering; otherwise, 
we have dependent scattering. The scattering regime of a particle system 
is  determined  by  three  parameters:  the  size  parameter,  χη,  volume 
fraction, αp, and the interparticle distance to wavelength [505]. 

For  suspension  systems  (nanofluid  or  ePCM  dispersion),  the  inde-
pendent scattering region is widely used since it enables the determi-
nation  of  the  optical  properties  and  radiation  extinction  of  a  particle 
cloud via a first-order summation of the optical properties and radiation 
extinction of individual particles. Siegel and Howell [506] proposed the 
following condition for the interparticle distance that should be satisfied 
for the independent scattering region: 

ID + 0.1D >

λ
2

,

(145)  

where D is equivalent diameter of the particle. According to [507], the 
interparticle distance can be expressed in terms of the volume fraction 
as, 

ID = 2.77Dαpa(cid:0) 3.081.

(146) 

To sum up, if the solid volume fraction, αpa,is less than 10% and a 
particle meets the independent scattering condition, the extinction co-
efficient can be determined using the independent scattering theory [6], 
as follows [497,508], 

ση,ex =

3αpaQ η,ex
2dpa

.

(147) 

However, if αpa is greater than 10% and less than 70%, the modified 
independent scattering theory can be applied, which involves incorpo-
rating a scaling factor based on the solid volume percentage [6,508], 

(140) 

ση,ex =

3αpaQ η,ex
2dpa

Sr,

(148)  

The discrete ordinates method was also used to solve the RTE in its 
form as written in Eq. (134) to analyze the melting process of a fatty 
acid-filled glass brick wall [502]. The melting process was linked to the 
discretized energy equation based on the enthalpy method to compute 
the temperature field, while the LBM was used to compute the velocity 
field. The main conclusions were that convection had a significant effect 
on  the  heat  transfer  process,  whereas  long-wave  radiation  could  be 
ignored when studying the melting process. 

4.6.2. Evaluation of the optical properties of ePCM slurries/dispersions 

Maxwell’s equations serve as the foundation for all scattering the-
ories.  Based  on  electrical  experiments  with  very  coarse  temporal  and 
spatial  resolutions,  Maxwell  proposed  a  set  of  equations  that  fully 
describe  electromagnetic  waves,  i.e.,  the  interactions  of  electric  and 
magnetic fields. The equations are presented as follows [503,504], 
→
∂ D
∂t

̅→
= ∇ × H,

(141)  

D(ω) = ε(ω)E(ω),

→
∂ D
∂t

= (cid:0)

→
× E,

1
μ0

(142)  

(143)  

where Sr is the Singh-Kaviany scaling factor, which introduces the effect 
of  the  solid  volume  percentage  of  ePCM  slurries/dispersions  in  the 
calculation of the extinction coefficient. It can be stated as follows: 

Sr = 1 + 1.84αpa (cid:0) 3.15α2

pa + 7.20α3
pa.

(149) 

Qη,ex in Eq. (147) represents the extinction efficiency, which is equal 
to  the  summation  of  the  absorption  and  scattering  efficiencies.  These 
three  quantities  can  be  determined  using  a  variety  of  analytical  and 
computational  methods.  The  optimal  technique  is  determined  by  the 
geometry, composition, and concentration of the particles, as outlined in 
the following sections. 

Analytical approaches. Rayleigh’s and Mie’s scattering theories are two 
general optical theories that have been widely used. Both are based on 
Maxwell’s  equations  and  impose  rather  strict  conditions.  Both  basic 
theories, as well as Mie’s theory for encapsulated spheres, will be dis-
cussed in the following subsections. 

Rayleigh’s  theory. Two  conditions  must  be  satisfied  if  the  optical 
properties of an individual particle are to be derived using the Rayleigh 
scattering approximation. First, the ePCM suspension should be dilute 
enough so that the dependent scattering effects are negligible. Second, 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103766S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

where  an  and  bn  are  the  Mie  coefficients,  which  can  be  computed  by 
applying Maxwell’s boundary conditions at the surface of the particle 
after  expanding  the  electromagnetic  waves.  Ultimately,  they  can  be 
expressed as follows [511], 

an =

bn =

ψn(x)ψ ′
ξn(x)ψ ′

n(mx) (cid:0) mψ ′
n(mx) (cid:0) mξ

n(x)ψn(mx)
n(x)ψn(mx)

′

mψn(x)ψ ′
mξn(x)ψ ′

n(mx) (cid:0) ψ ′
n(mx) (cid:0) ξ′

n(x)ψn(mx)
n(x)ψn(mx)

(157)  

(158) 

ψ n and ξn are the Riccati-Bessel functions, which must be solved in a 
step-by-step  manner.  To  derive  these  functions,  the  following  mathe-
matical computations based on the recursive technique are used [509, 
512], 

.

(152) 

ξn(z) =

2n (cid:0) 1
z

ξn(cid:0) 1(z) (cid:0) ξn(cid:0) 2(z),

ψ n(z) =

2n (cid:0) 1
z

ψ n(cid:0) 1(z) (cid:0) ψ n(cid:0) 2(z),

ξ′
n(z) = (cid:0)

n
z

ψ n(z) + ψ n(cid:0) 1(z),

ξ′
n(z) = (cid:0)

n
z

ξn(z) + ξn(cid:0) 1(z)

(159)  

(160)  

(161)  

(162) 

the particle size should be smaller than the wavelength of incident ra-
diation. Strictly speaking, the Rayleigh scattering approximation is valid 
under the assumptions of χη << 1 and |m|χη << 1 [497,509], where m =
n + ik is the ratio of the complex refractive indices of the ePCM particle 
to  the  surrounding  fluid  medium.  The  Refractive  index  and  the  ab-
sorption index are denoted by n and k, respectively. 

By  meeting  these  conditions,  the  absorption  and  scattering  effi-

ciencies can be calculated using the following equations, 
]}
(
,

[
1 +

Qη,a = 4χηIm

m4 + 27m2 + 38
2m2 + 3

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 1

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 2

χ2
η
15

{

)

Qη,s =

(

⃒
⃒
⃒
χ4
ηRe
⃒

8
3

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 2

2

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

.

(150)  

(151) 

As a result, the extinction efficiency of a single particle is calculated 

as follows: 

Qη,ex = 4χηIm

{

[

1 +

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 1
⃒
(
⃒
8
⃒
χ4
ηRe
⃒
3

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 2

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

χ2
η
15
2

+

(

)

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 2

]}

m4 + 27m2 + 38
2m2 + 3

It  is  important  to  note  that  there  is  a  lack  of  experimental  in-
vestigations  into  the  absorption  index  of  PCMs.  Additionally,  the  ab-
sorption  of a PCM is changed by  the addition of nanoparticles or the 
encapsulation  of  the  PCM  by  a  shell  [6],  further  emphasizing  the 
importance of conducting systematic investigations to reveal the optical 
properties of ePCMs and NE-PCMs. 

The scattering efficiency varies with the fourth power of particle size, 
as seen in Eq. (152). However, the absorption efficiency varies almost 
linearly  with  particle  size,  even  though  there  is  a  χ2
η  term  inside  the 
imaginary part of  Eq. (150)  [374], which  does  not have  a significant 
impact. By substituting Eq. (152) into Eq. (148), the extinction coeffi-
cient can be defined as follows: 

ση,ex =

12παpa
λ

Im

+

8π4D3αp
λ4

(

[
1 +

χ2
η
15

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 2

)

{

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 1
(

m2 (cid:0) 1
m2 + 2

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

2

)⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒

.

]}

m4 + 27m2 + 38
2m2 + 3

(153) 

In some circumstances, the conditions of χη ≪ 1 and |m|χη ≪ 1 are no 
longer met in a system after some time due to particle clustering. As a 
result, the size and shape of the original particles can be greatly altered. 
The produced clusters are always large and irregular since clustering (i. 
e., aggregation and/or agglomeration) is categorized as a random pro-
cess [505]. 

Mie’s theory. The Rayleigh scattering approximation is applicable to 
small particle sizes. But as the particle diameter and incident wavelength 
become  of  the same  order  of magnitude,  Rayleigh’s theory  no longer 
applies. As a result, Mie’s theory can be used, which takes into account 
the effect of various scattering directions by the expansion of incident 
electromagnetic waves, scattered waves, and waves inside the particle in 
terms  of  spherical  vector  harmonics  [505],  allowing  it  to  describe 
scattering for large particles. The literature can be consulted for more 
information on the calculation procedure (e.g., [510]). 

In  Mie’s  scattering  theory,  the  scattering  Qη,s  and  absorption  Qη,a 

efficiencies can be obtained as follows, 

Qη,s =

2
x2

∑∞

n=1

(2n + 1)

(
|an|2 + |bn|2

)

,

Qη,ex =

2
x2

∑∞

n=1

(2n + 1)Re(an + bn),

Qη,a = Qη,ex (cid:0) Qη,s,

(154)  

(155)  

(156)  

As  initial  conditions,  the  recursive  relationships  listed  below  are 

applied, 

ψ (cid:0) 1(z) = cos(z),

ψ o(z) = sin(z),

ξ(cid:0) 1(z) = exp((cid:0) iz),

(163)  

(164)  

(165)  

ξo(z) = i exp((cid:0) iz).

(166)  
Mie’s  theory  for  encapsulated  spheres. Mie’s  theory,  which  is  fasci-
nating when applied to a single spherical particle, can be extended to a 
coated/encapsulated sphere. Mie’s theory is based on the expansion of 
incident electromagnetic waves, scattered waves, and waves inside the 
particle in terms of spherical vector harmonics. When it comes to coated 
particles, the expansion of these waves applies to the core and each shell. 
Therefore,  the  electromagnetic  fields  must  meet  Maxwell’s  boundary 

Fig. 60. Schematic view of a spherical particle with r (cid:0) 1 concentric shells (or r 
concentric spheres) and s materials (where s = r) embedded in a non-absorbing 
medium. The 1st boundary is between the core and the innermost shell, the 2nd 
boundary is between any two consecutive shells, and the 3rd  boundary is be-
tween the outermost shell and the embedding medium. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103767S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

(167) 

For a 1D system, the discrete form of the electric flux-dependent form 

conditions  at  three  different  boundary  levels,  as  indicated  in  Fig.  60. 
Namely,  the  boundary  between the  core  and  the innermost  shell, the 
boundary between two consecutive shells, and the boundary between 
the outermost shell and the embedding medium. From the first bound-
ary to the third, the solution is worked out step by step [497]. To the best 
of  the  authors’  knowledge,  no  works  have  utilized  Mie’s  theory  for 
encapsulated spheres in ePCM slurries. 

Fig.  60  depicts  a  multilayered  spherical  particle  (i.e.,  r  concentric 
spheres). The core sphere of radius R is represented by material s = 1 and 
refractive index n1. Concentric with the core sphere is a multi-shell of r 
(cid:0) 1of various materials, s = 2, …., r, different thicknessesds, and the 
refractive indices of each material are denoted byns. It is assumed that 
the  coated  particle  is  embedded  in  a  non-absorbing  medium  with  a 
refractive  index  of  nM.  The  relative  complex  refractive  index,  m,  is 
defined as the relative refractive indices from shell sto shell s + 1. For s 
= r, the refractive index nr + 1 corresponds to the refractive index nM of 
the embedding medium. The wavenumber for each medium is defined as 
follows [497], 

ηs =

2πns
λ

.

And the corresponding size parameter, χs, is defined as follows, 

(

χs = ηs+1

R +

)

dj

,

∑s

j=2

(168)  

where η, R, and d are the wavenumber, core radius, and shell thickness, 
respectively. Index j varies from 2 to the number of shell materials used, 
s.  Calculations  details  for  the  extended  Mie  coefficients  for  coated 
spheres and their initial conditions can be found in [497]. 

Basic  optical  theories  such  as  Rayleigh’s  and  Mie’s  theories  have 
clear  physical  implications  and  are  simple  to  solve.  However,  they 
necessitate  extremely  strict  conditions,  and  in  some  cases,  they  are 
inapplicable.  For  example,  only  certain  geometries  have  perfect  solu-
tions  to  Maxwell’s  equations,  such  as  spheres,  spheroids,  or  infinite 
cylinders. In addition, the small size of particles increases the collision 
rate  while  decreasing  interparticle  distance.  Therefore,  particle  clus-
tering often occurs. Rayleigh’s scattering theory in this case cannot be 
used  to  describe  the  scattering  process  because  the  particle  size  has 
increased (i.e., χη ≫ 1). Hence, computational/approximate methods are 
required, as presented next. 

Computational approaches 

T-matrix method. The T-matrix method, also known as the extended 
boundary  condition  method,  begins  the  same  as  Mie’s  theory  by 
expanding the incident, scattered, and internal electromagnetic waves 
into  the  corresponding  vector  spherical  harmonics  [509].  This  is  fol-
lowed  by  finding  the  internal  field  expansion  coefficients,  cn  and  dn, 
through solving a set of linear equations, as follows [509], 
(

)(

(

)

)

Kqn + mJqn
Iqn + mLqn

Lqn + mIqn
Jqn + mKqn

cn
dn

eTM
n
eTM
n

= ((cid:0) i)

.

(169) 

particle’s surface area. eTM

K,J,  L,  and  I  are  area  integrals  evaluated  numerically  across  the 
n  are the incident beam coefficients. 
The coefficients of scattered field expansion, an and bn, are obtained 

n and eTM

in the same way [513], 
(

̃Kqn + m̃Jqn
̃Iqn + m̃Lqn

̃Lqn + m̃Iqn
̃Jqn + m̃Kqn

)(

)

(

=

)

.

an
bn

(cid:0) icn
(cid:0) idn

(170) 

By designating the matrix in Eq. (169) as A and the matrix in Eq. 

(170) as B, we have [513], 
(
(
(

)

)

= BA(cid:0) 1

= T

an
bn

eTM
n
eTM
n

)

.

eTM
n
eTM
n

(171) 

The  T  matrix  in  Eq.  (171)  is  a  transition  matrix  that  converts  the 
coefficients of the incident field to the coefficients of the scattered field. 
This technique is mostly used for axisymmetric particles, such as finite 
circular cylinders and spheroids. 

Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD). Finite-difference time-domain 
(FDTD) is a method for obtaining the optical coefficients of an object 
with  complicated  geometry  and/or  composition  by  directly  solving 
Maxwell’s time-dependent curl equations. The equations are discretized 
in  time  and  space  using  finite-difference  approximations.  As  a  result, 
when  electromagnetic  waves  interact  with  particles,  the  discretized 
Maxwell  equations  are  employed  to  describe  their  propagation  and 
scattering.  Based  on  the  source  of  the  electromagnetic  wave,  conver-
gence information for the scattered field can be obtained. For example, 
when  the  sinusoidal  source  is  used,  the  scattering  information  is  ac-
quired by establishing a steady-state field at each grid. However, when a 
pulse source is utilized, information is extracted when the scattered field 
decreases significantly to a small value. This approach can be used on a 
variety of materials as well as full-wave bands. It can also be used for any 
shape or defect that can be found in the particles [509]. 

of Maxwell’s equations in Eq. (141) is written as follows, 

Ej+1/2(i) (cid:0) Ej(cid:0) 1/2(i)
Δt

=

Hj(i + 1/2) (cid:0) Hj(i (cid:0) 1/2)
Δx

,

(172)  

where i and j are space and time coordinates, respectively. It is important 
to note that the time step must be small enough to ensure that this in-
formation does not travel from one grid cell to the next faster than the 
speed of light in the medium [514]. 

Discrete  dipole  approximation  (DDA). The  discrete  dipole  approxi-
mation (DDA) method solves the integral volume equation discretized 
from Maxwell’s equations for an array of virtual N-point dipoles instead 
of  the  particles.  As  a  result,  this  approach  is  ideal  for  irregular  and 
complex  geometries.  It  solves  the  electrodynamic  interaction  of  elec-
tromagnetic waves and dipoles based on fast Fourier transform (FFT) 
iterations [515]. If the array spacing is narrow enough in comparison to 
the wavelength of electromagnetic waves in the target material, and N is 
large enough to correctly characterize the target shape, the approach is 
valid [516]. DDSCAT [517] and OpenDDA [518] are two well-known 
codes  for  performing  DDA  calculations  to  determine  the  absorption 
and scattering properties of particles. Ref. [516] provides a full account 
of the DDA procedure. 

Generalized multi-particle Mie (GMM) theory. The generalized multi- 
particle Mie (GMM) theory is an extension of Mie’s theory in which the 
incident and scattering electromagnetic fields are expanded in terms of 
vector spherical wave functions [519]. Using this method requires full 
geometric  description  of  particles  or  their  clusters  (aggregates  or  ag-
glomerates). All sorts of materials and full-wave bands can be used in 
this process, but the particles must be homogeneous. In this method, the 
incident  and  scattered  electromagnetic  fields  are  expanded  as  a 
third-kind vector spherical harmonic expansion, as shown in Eqs. (173) 
and (174) [520,521], 

Ei
inc =

∑∞

∑n

∑2

n=1

m=(cid:0) n

p=1

mnpN(1)
p(1)

mnp(ηri),

Ei
sca =

∑∞

∑n

∑2

n=1

m=(cid:0) n

p=1

mnpN(3)
ai

mnp(ηri),

(173)  

(174)  

where η is the wavenumber, ri is the position vector, n is a multi-index 
that  subsumes  the  polarization  p  = 1,  2  and  the  multipole  indices  m 
= (cid:0) n,..., n. The vector spherical wave functions for incoming and out-
(1)
going waves are denoted by N
mnp and N

(3)
mnp. 

Evaluation of the scattered field of each particle is needed to solve 
multi-particle  scattering  problems.  Therefore,  ai
is  determined 
through applying boundary conditions on the surface of a single particle. 

mnp 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103768S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Assuming that the total incident electromagnetic field for each particle is 
inc, which consists of the original incident wave Ei
Ei
o  and the scattered 
(j) from  all  other  particles  in  the  simulation  area,  the 
field 

∑

N
j∕=iEi
s

following relations are obtained [519], 

mnp = ai
ai

mnpi

mnp,

inc = Ei
Ei

o +

∑N

j∕=i

Ei
s(j),

(175)  

(176)  

mn  is the Mie coefficient of single spherical particle i and pi

where ai
the expansion coefficient of the total incident electromagnetic field. 

mnp  is 

4.7. Energy analysis of ePCM-based direct-absorption solar collectors 
(DASCs) 

Generally,  the  energy  efficiency  of  a  latent  TES  system  can  be 
determined, using the first law of thermodynamics, as the ratio of useful 
output  energy  to  input  energy.  Due  to  energy  loss,  the  useful  energy 
output is always less than the energy input in a practical TES system. 
Thus, understanding the energy efficiency of TES can help in increasing 
the amount of stored/released energy by minimizing losses. 

Mosaffa et  al. [522]  conducted an energy analysis  of a latent TES 
system for free cooling applications to demonstrate the advantages of 
cascading PCMs over a single PCM system. Their findings indicated that 
by  employing  multiple  PCMs,  decreasing  the  temperature  difference 
between the HTF and PCM over time increased the energy efficiency. Yu 
et al. [523] investigated the energy performance of a PV/T system based 
on a micro-ePCM slurry. Results showed that, when compared to pure 
water,  the  slurry  provided  a  maximum  improvement  in  energy  effi-
ciency at a lower inlet velocity. Eisapour et al. [524] investigated the 
energy efficiency of a PV/T system with a sinusoidal wavy tube based on 
a micro-ePCM slurry enhanced with nanoparticles as the coolant fluid. 
The electrical and thermal efficiencies of a typical PV/T module were 
increased  from  10.73%  for  the  former  and  58.56%  for  the  latter,  to 
11.33%  and  63.74%,  respectively,  when  using  a  micro-ePCM  slurry 
enhanced with nanoparticles instead of pure water. 

For the energy analysis of a DASC based on an ePCM slurry/disper-
sion, the main idea is that solar radiation is absorbed by both the car-
rying  fluid  and  ePCM  particles.  Thus,  the  overall  energy  efficiency  is 
given as: 

ηtotal =

Quse,slurry
Qsun

.

motion  and  interactions  of  discrete  entities  in  the  flow  domain  are 
individually computed, are constrained by the computer’s memory and 
computational  time.  Multi-scale  models  (e.g.,  coarse-grained  and 
continuum-discrete models) have the potential to overcome the limita-
tions of continuum and discrete models and accurately describe ePCM 
slurries/dispersions  where  coupled  analysis  on  multiple  scales  is 
required. Studies on the mesoscale, in particular, are poorly explored. 
Understanding and analyzing the material and interfacial structures of 
PCM molecular assemblies, as well as the heterogeneous flow structures 
of ePCM clusters, are the main challenges at this scale. 

For a better description of slurry behavior, empirical/semi-empirical 
thermophysical property correlations for the density, heat capacity, and 
thermal conductivity of ePCMs are needed over a broad range of tem-
peratures  and  concentrations.  Parallel  to  experimental  data,  a  funda-
mental understanding of the thermal conductivity and heat capacity of 
PCMs will expedite progress toward the design of advanced PCM sys-
tems  capable  of  storing  and  releasing  latent  heat  more  efficiently. 
Computational methods like molecular dynamics and density functional 
theory  can  allow  us  to  better  understand  the  transition  from  solid  to 
liquid. 

In the design for direct-absorption solar applications, optical prop-
erties of the micro/nano-ePCMs and radiation transfer in their slurries/ 
dispersions  ought  to  be  properly  evaluated.  Although  both  Mie’s  and 
Rayleigh’s theories are based on Maxwell’s equations, only Mie’s theory 
should be used to evaluate the optical properties of most ePCM systems 
as dependent scattering often cannot be ignored. Of particular interest to 
ePCMs is the Mie theory for encapsulated spheres where incident elec-
tromagnetic waves, scattered waves, and waves inside the particle are 
expanded at each shell. However, both Rayleigh’s and Mie’s theories are 
no longer applicable if the particles cluster. In such cases, it is recom-
mended to use computational approaches such as the T-matrix method, 
finite-difference  time-domain,  discrete  dipole  approximation,  or  the 
generalized multi-particle Mie theory. 

5. Recent advances in solar photothermal conversion using 
micro/nano-ePCMs 

In light of this comprehensive review on PCMs and the dual func-
tionality of micro/nano-ePCMs for solar photothermal absorption and 
storage,  it  is  critical  to  highlight  present  knowledge  gaps  and  future 
research  objectives.  As  such,  the  following  sections  will  highlight  a 
number of topics that the authors believe represent potential or realized 
breakthroughs that should guide future research directions. 

(177) 

5.1. Custom engineering of multi-functional PCM shells 

The following expression is used to find the amount of useful heat 

carried by the ePCM slurry, 

Quse,slurry = ˙mslurrycp,eff (Tout (cid:0) Tinlet).

The received energy from the sun is written as follows: 

∫∞

Qsun = A.αg.

I(λ)dλ.

0

(178) 

(179)  

4.8. Conclusions and future research directions 

A sound understanding of the theory and fundamentals that govern 
the performance of ePCM systems can be realized through a variety of 
tools. As inherently multi-phase and multi-scale systems, it is unfortu-
nate that the majority of published research on ePCM slurries and dis-
persions  is  based  on  continuum,  single-phase  models.  In  continuum 
models, intraparticle, interparticle, particles-wall, and particle-fluid in-
teractions  are  inaccurately  or  incompletely  captured.  Furthermore,  if 
friction or gravity forces are important, the assumption of no-slip ve-
locity clearly fails. Discrete approaches, on the other hand, where the 

The degree of success of any solar conversion and storage system is 
dependent  on  the  solar  photothermal  capture,  transfer,  and  storage 
processes.  By  employing  ePCM  slurries/dispersions  in  volumetric  ab-
sorption systems, the processes of radiation extinction, thermal storage, 
and  heat  transport  are  seamlessly  and  synergistically  combined.  The 
majority of research advances in the field of solar TES systems based on 
ePCMs have focused on the storage process, which has been extensively 
discussed  in  the  preceding  sections.  As  such,  the  current  section  will 
highlight  some  of  the  most  interesting  advancements  in  the  field  of 
ePCMs that have been made to optimize the integration of the processes 
of solar capture, conversion, and storage, with a particular emphasis on 
capsule shell optimization. 

The shell encapsulating a PCM plays a critical and multi-functional 
role  that  determines  the  efficiency  and  longevity  of  a  photothermal 
conversion  and  storage  system.  This  is  particularly  true  for  direct 
volumetric  absorption  systems  with  the  dual  functionality  of  solar 
photothermal absorption and storage. As shown in Fig. 61, the shell has 
multi-functional roles in a direct-absorption system, including optical, 
thermal, and structural roles. The optical role of the shell entails solar 
energy absorption and conversion to cause the PCM cores to melt and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103769S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Fig. 61. The multi-functional roles of the shell encapsulating a PCM in a direct-absorption photothermal conversion and storage system.  

retain  thermal  energy.  The  broadband or  selective  extinction  of  solar 
radiation is a critical function assumed by the shell in volumetric ab-
sorption systems. To improve heat transfer in both the PCM core and the 
carrying fluid, the thermal role of the shell entails having high thermal 
conductivity. Structurally, the shell is responsible for preventing leakage 
and  degradation  of  the  PCM  core  during  charging  and  discharging 
processes. Traditionally, shell materials are synthesized from polymer, 
organic,  or  inorganic  materials  such  as  polymethyl  methacrylate 
(PMMA) [525], melamine formaldehyde resin [526], polystyrene (PS) 
[527], polyurethane [528], urea formaldehyde [160], silica [529], ti-
tanium dioxide [386], calcium carbonate (CaCO3) [379], cuprous oxide 
(Cu2O)  [530],  zirconia  (ZrO2)  [531],  and  aluminum  hydroxide  oxide 
Al2O3•xH2O [532]. 

The infinite potential of solar  radiation in direct-absorption ePCM 
slurries and dispersions is limited mainly by the inability of conventional 
shell materials to harvest a significant portion of sunlight. This is despite 
the  PCM  core and  carrying  fluid being able to  absorb a small  part of 
incident radiation, mainly in the infrared range. As shown in Fig. 62, 
infrared radiation accounts for 49% of the solar spectrum, visible light 

Fig. 62. Extraterrestrial (yellow) and terrestrial (red) solar spectra. Also shown 
is the spectrum of blackbody radiation (black). 

accounts for 44%, and UV light accounts for about 7% of the spectrum. 
However, the majority of the aforementioned shell materials are strong 
absorbers only in the UV band. This indicates that the majority of solar 
radiation would be unused by the shell and slurry/dispersion as a whole. 
In light of these considerations, extensive research is being conducted 
along a variety of pathways to design and synthesize new PCM shells 
that  maximize  solar  radiation  absorption  while  simultaneously  main-
taining the aforementioned structural and thermal functionalities. 

For instance, TiO2 is a popular inorganic shell material since it out-
performs polymer materials in terms of mechanical strength and thermal 
conductivity,  which  improves  the  operational  reliability  of  the  ePCM 
and the heat transfer performance of the slurry/dispersion as a whole. 
However, because of its poor optical absorption properties in the visible 
light  range  (TiO2  is  in  the  form  of  a  white  powder),  it  is  unable  to 
effectively  absorb  solar  radiation.  Nonetheless,  in  a  recent  important 
development, Zhao et al. [533] reported that by reducing the oxygen 
content of TiO2  to form TiO2-x, the ability to absorb visible light was 
enhanced as a result of narrowing the bandgap. Thus, by modification of 
conventional shell materials for ePCM particles, it is possible to meet 
their multifunctional needs by combining the intrinsic properties of the 
component materials to boost their light-harvesting capacity. 

Pornea and Kim [382] designed an innovative ePCM with a hierar-
chical SiO2/TiO2/polydopamine (PDA) compound shell and n-eicosane 
as  the  core.  The  traditional  interfacial  polycondensation  method  was 
used to prepare silica-coated n-eicosane. The TiO2 white particles were 
then deposited in varying amounts on the SiO2 layer to create different 
samples, and then a PDA surface modifier was deposited on top of the 
TiO2  layer. SiO2  functions as a refracting channel that extends the op-
tical  path  of  incoming  light  by  exciting  electrons,  thereby  increasing 
localized surface heating at the outer surface of n-eicosane without the 
need of a thermal conductivity initiator. The deposition of the PDA film 
on  the  TiO2  surface  was  dictated  by  how  PDA,  due  to  its  π-system, 
mimics  organic  semiconductors,  which  was  previously  exploited  as  a 
photosensitizer  for  visible  light  absorption  [534].  Because  of  the 
increased localized surface photothermal heating at the outer surface of 
the  core,  an  absorption  shift  was  induced  over  a  wider  wavelength 
range,  allowing  for  more  photon  usage.  The  proposed  triple-layer 
structure was shown to surpass existing shell designs in terms of latent 
heat, mechanical strength, thermal conductivity, capsule leakage, and 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103770S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

solar energy absorption. 

Modification efforts of conventional TiO2 shells were not limited to 
absorption  augmentation  in  the  visible  light  range  but  included  the 
entire  light  spectrum.  For  example,  Fan  et  al.  [535]  synthesized 
n-eicosane/TiO2/CuS-GO  microcapsules  capable  of  capturing  and 
absorbing radiation across the entire solar spectrum. The combination of 
CuS and GO was used as a photothermal filler, where CuS nanoparticles 
were loaded into GO nanosheets that acted as structural supports. CuS 
has a broad absorption band across the entire spectrum, with a strong 
near-infrared  (NIR)  absorption  peak,  as  shown  in  Fig.  63(a).  This  is 
mostly due to the influence of the surface plasmon resonance of CuS, 
which occurs when a collective oscillation of conduction electrons on 
the surface of nanoparticles is excited by light with a wavelength longer 
than the size of the particle, resulting in unusual absorption and scat-
tering properties. GO, on the other hand, operated synergistically with 
CuS due to its high surface area, mechanical strength, and abundance of 
oxygen-containing groups, avoiding severe aggregation of GO flakes and 
CuS  nanoparticles.  This  uniformly  localized  CuS  nanoparticles  on  the 
flakes, leading to hot-carrier transfer and easier electron transport. The 
photothermal storage efficiency was up to 97.1% under simulated sun-
light irradiation, outperforming existing solar-driven microcapsules by 
91.8% [536]. The absorbance spectra of the microcapsule samples are 
shown  in  Fig.  63  (b).  Because  of  the  brookite-phase  TiO2  shells  with 
wide bandgaps, all of the microcapsule samples were strongly respon-
sive  to  UV  light.  The  n-eicosane/TiO2/CuS-GO  microcapsules  were 
found to display significant broadened absorption across the full solar 
spectrum. 

SiO2 is another inorganic shell material that is commonly chosen due 
to  its  non-toxicity,  structural  stability,  and  well-defined  surface  char-
acteristics. Unfortunately, in addition to having poor optical properties, 
SiO2 has low mechanical strength and can be easily damaged. To address 
these issues, Zhang et al. [537] developed and synthesized new paraf-
fin/SiO2/Ti4O7  microcapsules  with  paraffin  cores  and  Ti4O7 
nanoparticle-modified  SiO2  shells  through  the  sol-gel  technique.  The 
TES capacity of the synthesized microcapsules was high (122.4(cid:0) 169.5 
kJ/kg). The thermal conductivity of the new  microcapsules increased 
from 0.304 to 1.322 W/m•K as compared to paraffin due to the high 
thermal conductivity of the SiO2 shells enhanced by Ti4O7 nanoparticles. 
Additionally, as illustrated in Fig. 64, Ti4O7 nanoparticles exhibited an 
exceptional optical absorption capacity across the wavelength range of 
200(cid:0) 2500 nm, indicating that they are excellent photo-capturing ma-
terials.  As  a  result,  the  optical  absorption  of  paraffin/SiO2/Ti4O7 
increased as the Ti4O7  nanoparticle concentration increased. The pho-
tothermal storing efficiency of the paraffin/ SiO2/Ti4O7  microcapsules 

Fig.  64. Absorption  spectra  of  Ti4O7,  paraffin,  paraffin/SiO2  microcapsules, 
and  paraffin/SiO2/Ti4O7  microcapsules  with  different  percentages  of  Ti4O7 
[537]. (Reused with permission from Elsevier). 

reached  up  to  85.36%,  whereas  pure  paraffin  was  limited  to  only 
24.14%. 

Another  shell  enhancement  technique  to  simultaneously  increase 
solar-absorption  and  thermal  conductivity  is  based  on  using  graphite 
and  its  derivatives,  which  have  high  thermal  conductivity,  ultra-light 
weight,  and  intrinsic  blackbody-like  optical  absorption.  For  example, 
GO  nanosheets  have  the  advantage  of  being  extremely  thin,  with  a 
monolayer  thickness  of  around  1  nm  [538],  while  exhibiting  a  high 
degree  of  elasticity [539], making them  ideal for  barrier applications 
[540].  Furthermore,  the  presence  of  a  variety  of  hydrophilic  oxygen 
functional groups, such as epoxy, carboxylic, and carbonyl, on the hy-
drophobic  carbon  layers  results  in  the  formation  of  amphiphilic  GO, 
which facilitates its assembly at the oil-water interface [541]. Therefore, 
GO has been used to encapsulate PCMs and serve as a leak-proof seal 
[337,542]. 

Ma  et  al.  [352]  created  a  novel  heat  transfer  slurry  incorporating 
paraffin/TiO2/GO microcapsules to improve the receiver efficiency of a 
DASC system. By in-situ hydrolysis and polycondensation of tetrabutyl 
titanate, the microcapsule with paraffin as a core and TiO2 as a shell was 
developed. GO was self-assembled onto the TiO2 shell to improve visible 
light absorption and thermal transfer performance. The color of paraf-
fin/TiO2/GO was darker than that of paraffin/TiO2, indicating a greater 
capacity for visible light absorption. Furthermore, thermal conductivity 

Fig. 63. Absorption spectra of a) CuS and GO and b) different microcapsule samples (n-eicosane as a PCM core with different shells) [535]. (Reused with permission 
from Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103771S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

rose  from 0.25 to 0.95 W/m•K upon encapsulating paraffin  with this 
composite shell material. 

Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) is a modified version of GO in which 
the  oxygen  content  is  reduced  chemically,  thermally,  or  using  other 
reduction  techniques.  rGO  cannot  have  the  original  structure  of  gra-
phene because some oxygen functional groups remain within or on its 
surface.  Gao  et  al.  [366]  synthesized  magnetic  phase-change  micro-
capsules  modified  with  rGO.  The  core  material  was  octadecan  doped 
with oleic acid (OA) and covered with Fe3O4  magnetic nanoparticles, 
while  the  MF  shell  was  modified  with  rGO.  The  authors  produced 
GO-modified  micro-ePCMs,  which  were  darker  in  color  than  the 
micro-ePCMs without GO, and then converted them into rGO-modified 
micro-ePCMs  using  a  UV-assisted  reduction  method.  When  compared 
to  the  GO-modified  micro-ePCMs,  the  thermal  conductivity  of 
rGO-modified micro-ePCMs rose from 0.31 to 0.41 W/m•K. The increase 
in thermal conductivity was attributed to the reduction of oxygen con-
tent,  which  led  to  a  decrease  in  GO  defects.  In  turn,  this  limited  the 
scattering  of  phonons,  ultimately  resulting  in  an  increase  in  thermal 
conductivity.  During  the  UV-assisted  reduction  to  form  rGO,  several 
oxygen-containing functional groups were removed. These groups were 
the reason for destroying the π (cid:0) π conjugated structure of GO. Due to 
partial recovery of the conjugated network and the delocalized electron 
configuration in graphene, the rGO-modified ePCMs exhibited superior 
optical  absorbance  relative  to  the  GO-modified  ones.  By  effectively 
doping  magnetic  nanoparticles 
the 
rGO-modified  capsules  demonstrated  a  strong  magnetic  response, 
excellent controllability, and recyclability. Despite this, the latent heat 
of the GO-modified ePCM slurry decreased from 183.43 to 178.73 J/g 
due to the presence of a small number of faulty microcapsules after the 
addition  of  GO,  resulting  in  octadecane  leakage.  Furthermore,  a  few 
GO-modified capsules with inherent structural flaws were easily broken 
during the UV-assisted reduction process, leading to a minor decrease in 
latent heat capacity. 

the  microcapsules, 

into 

5.2. ePCMs or nanofluids in direct-absorption solar collectors 

Numerous studies on DASCs have been conducted using nanofluids 
[543]. Zain et al. [544] investigated the dispersion of different nano-
structured materials in water, such as CuO, GO, and ZnO, for a DASC 
application  under  the  weather  conditions  of  Lahore  over  a  year.  The 
outcomes revealed that, when compared to pure water, the GO, ZnO, 
and CuO nanofluids improved the rate of heat transfer by 23.5, 21.1, and 
15.1%,  respectively.  According  to  the  findings,  GO  nanofluids  have 
considerable potential for solar thermal applications. Sharaf et al. [545] 
proposed  a  novel  Eulerian-Lagrangian  hybrid  modeling  approach  to 
capture the discrete nature of dispersed nanoparticles in a DASC. Results 
showed that by increasing the loading of nanoparticles from 0.001 to 
0.05%, a significant increase in the nanofluid absorption efficiency was 
observed. 

Alternatively,  it  is  believed  that  by  employing  ePCM  slurries  and 
dispersions  into  DASCs,  the  efficiency  of  the  solar  collector  can  be 
further increased, building on the high latent TES capacity and nearly 
constant-temperature  characteristics  of  ePCMs  [546].  However, 
research into ePCM-based DASCs is still at its infancy. 

Ma  and  Zhang  [406]  numerically  investigated  the  heat  transfer 
properties  of  a  volumetric-absorption  solar  collector  based  on 
nano-ePCM  dispersions  using  a  two-dimensional  model  of  a  parallel 
plate. The results of the nano-ePCM dispersion were compared to those 
of a conventional nanofluid devoid of phase change. Due to the spatially 
uniform  slurry  temperature  caused  by  phase  change  in  the  cores,  the 
efficiency of the collector using nano-ePCM dispersions was found to be 
greater  than  that  based  on  conventional  nanofluids.  The  results  indi-
cated that the DASC based on nano-ePCM dispersions was sensitive to 
the  extinction  coefficient  of  the  particles.  The  collector  efficiency 
initially  increased  as  the  extinction  coefficient  increased,  but  then 
dropped as the extinction coefficient further increased. Heat loss from 

the top surface continually rose as the extinction coefficient grew and 
the temperature of the top layer of the collector increased. 

Ma and Zhang [6] extended their work to compare the performance 
of direct- and indirect-absorption solar collectors (IASCs) based on an 
ePCM slurry at a volume fraction of 10% and an absorption index of 1 ×
(cid:0) 4. The results indicated that the DASC had a higher photothermal 
10
conversion  efficiency  than  the  IASC  because  the  ePCM  slurry  could 
absorb incident radiation directly. Additionally, they demonstrated that 
the optical properties of a phase-change slurry with a fixed particle size 
are largely determined by the absorption index and solid volume frac-
tion of the capsules. 

The authors also studied the temperature distribution in DASCs and 
IASCs using a slurry without phase change (SWPC) and polyalphaolefin, 
respectively.  According  to  their findings  (shown in  Fig. 65),  the  tem-
perature  of  the  working  fluid  inside  the  DASC  was  higher  than  that 
within the IASC. On the other hand, the temperature of the working fluid 
near the top surface of the DASC was substantially lower than that of the 
IASC since incident radiation was absorbed by the top plate of the IASC. 
As a result, it was deemed almost unavoidable that the maximum tem-
perature of the solar collector appeared on the top surface of an IASC, 
causing  increased  heat  losses  to  the  environment  via  convection  and 
radiation. Furthermore, the temperature of the working fluid inside the 
DASC for both the PCM slurry and the SWPC was found to be higher than 
the top surface temperature. The temperature of the working fluid rose 
vertically from top to middle before gradually decreasing as the incident 
depth increases. The optical characteristics of the slurry, as well as heat 
loss  from  the  top  surface,  influenced  the  location  of  the  highest 
temperature. 

Wang et al. [334] experimentally investigated the transmittances of 
a micro-ePCM slurry, a water/ethanol MWCNT nanofluid, and a mixture 
of the slurry and nanofluid for DASCs. The results showed that adding 
MWCNTs to the base fluid dramatically enhanced absorption across the 
whole  wavelength  range.  Without  MWCNTs,  the  micro-ePCM  slurry 

Fig. 65. Temperature distribution in DASCs based on an ePCM slurry a) with 
and b) without phase change as opposed to IASCs operating with c) an ePCM 
slurry  with  phase  change  and  d)  a  pure  HTF  [6].  (Reused  with  permission 
from Elsevier). 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103772S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

exhibited  extremely  low  (near-zero)  transmittances  in  the  desired 
wavelength range. Mixing ePCMs with the nanofluid resulted in nearly 
the same transmittance as the nanofluid alone. As a result, it was pre-
dicted  that  combining  micro-ePCMs  with  MWCNTs  may  enable 
combining  their  photothermal  conversion  and  TES  capabilities  to  be 
employed in solar-thermal energy harvesting. 

Xu  et  al.  [353]  prepared  a  slurry  of  spherical  microcapsules  with 
paraffin cores and a shell layer of irregularly shaped copper and cuprous 
oxide (Cu2O) nanoparticles covered with a large number of CNTs for use 
in a DASC system. This combination was motivated by the high thermal 
conductivity of copper (401 W/m•K), the excellent absorption ability of 
Cu2O in the visible range, and the ability of CNTs to absorb 99.97% of 
incident sunlight. The results indicated that adding CNTs substantially 
increased  the  thermal  conductivity  of  the  paraffin/Cu-Cu2O/CNTs 
slurry, expedited heat transfer, and increased the rate of heat storage. As 
a  result,  the  slurry  of  paraffin/Cu-Cu2O/CNTs  displayed  considerable 
improvements  in  thermal  conductivity,  light  absorption  performance, 
specific heat capacity, and rate of heat storage. 

5.3. Optical filtration using ePCMs for direct-absorption PV/T collectors 

A PV/T collector can utilize the same solar input to simultaneously 
generate  both  electrical  and  thermal  outputs.  Additionally,  optical 
concentrators  may  be  used  to  reduce  the  required  area  of  PV  cells. 
However, increasing the optical concentration may cause the tempera-
ture of PV cells to rise, which is undesirable since it decreases the con-
version efficiency of the cells. To maintain reasonable efficiencies, PV 
cells must be cooled. At the same time, heat collected from the solar cells 
can be utilized. 

In general, the photothermal conversion process turns solar energy 
into heat with a very constant efficiency across the solar spectrum, with 
the only variable being the optical characteristics of the absorber ma-
terial  utilized.  The  PV  conversion  process,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
extremely wavelength-dependent and most efficient when photons with 
energies close to the bandgap energy of the PV cell are utilized. Because 
of these concerns, an efficient way to employ solar cells is to focus only 
the section of the solar spectrum that is most efficiently converted into 
electricity (typically, visible light) onto the cells and divert the rest of the 
solar spectrum to a thermal receiver (usually, UV and infrared lights). 
This  is  the  fundamental  concept  behind  spectral  splitting  or  optical 
filtration in hybrid PV/T systems, as illustrated in Fig. 66 in which the 

Fig.  66. Working  principle  of  an  ideal  concentrating  spectral-splitting  PVT 
collector.  Incident  radiation  is  concentrated  then  split  into  photoelectric  (PV 
cell) and photothermal (thermal absorber) spectral components. 

incident  beam  is  divided  into  PV  and  thermal  spectral  components 
[547]. 

Recently,  it  has  been  suggested  that  using  spectral  splitters/filters 
enhances the performance of a PV/T system by thermally decoupling the 
PV and thermal components, allowing them to operate at significantly 
different temperatures. As a result, the PV component can deliver high- 
quality  heat  without  significantly  increasing  the  PV  cell  temperature. 
Liquid absorptive filters, such as nanofluids, are frequently utilized as 
coolant fluids and spectral splitters. In the coolant case, the nanofluid 
flows  beneath  the  PV  cells  to collect  their heat  and  cool  them  down. 
While acting as a spectral filter, the nanofluid divides the light spectrum 
so that visible light is delivered to PV cells, while infrared and ultraviolet 
lights are absorbed to increase nanofluid temperature [548]. An et al. 
[549]  used  a  customized  experimental  system  to  investigate  the  per-
formance  of  a  concentrating  PV/T  collector  equipped  with  a  Cu9S5 
nanofluid as a spectral splitting filter. Their findings indicate that when 
Cu9S5  nanofluid was used as an optical filter, the efficiency of the PV 
module  increased  from  16.3  to  34.2%.  Crisostomo  et  al.  [550]  sus-
pended  core-shell  Ag-SiO2  nanoparticles  in  water  to  filter  out  the 
optimal spectrum for silicon PV cells. The results indicated that when 
exposed to the same illumination, the proposed PV/T prototype with the 
nanofluid produced 12% more energy than a stand-alone PV system. 

On the other hand, benefiting from their ability to store energy and 
work at an almost constant temperature, PCMs have been employed to 
regulate the temperature of PV panels. Su et al. [551] integrated a PCM 
layer  into  the  heat  transfer  tubes  of  an  air-based  PV/T  collector.  Ac-
cording to their findings, the overall PV/T efficiency with a 3-cm PCM 
layer above the PV panel was 10.7% higher than when no PCM was used. 
Sharma et al. [7] investigated the effect of using a micro-fin (surfaces 
that have been expanded in one or more micro-scaled dimensions) with 
a PCM enhanced with Cu nanoparticles on the thermal management of 
building-integrated photovoltaics. When compared to standard PCMs, 
the proposed micro-fins reduced the temperature of the PV panel, while 
the nano-enhanced PCM increased heat release, resulting in an overall 
lower PV temperature. 

Numerous studies have reported that PCMs in their liquid state may 
be  useful  for  solar  spectrum  transmission.  For  example,  Buddhi  and 
Sharma  [8]  measured  the  transmittance  of  commercial-grade  stearic 
acid and discovered that it has a higher transmittance than glass at the 
same  thickness.  Consequently,  they  recommended  using  it  as  trans-
parent  insulation  due  to  its  high  transmittance  and  low  thermal  con-
ductivity.  Goia  et  al.  [552]  found  that  paraffin  wax  exhibited  nearly 
constant  transmittance  in  the  visible  range  and  more  preferential 
selectivity in the NIR range when it is liquid. Additionally, Manz et al. 
[553]  investigated  the  transmittance  of  CaCl2.6H2O  in  a  solar  space 
heating and daylighting external wall system. The result indicated that 
visible light was primarily transmitted, whereas invisible radiation was 
primarily absorbed and converted to heat, resulting in a phase-change 
process. Based on these findings, it is possible to conclude that PCMs 
can be used as optical filters in concentrated PV/T systems. 

Motivated  by  this,  Yazdanifard  et  al.  [554]  developed  a  dynamic 
numerical model to examine the energetic and exergetic efficiencies of a 
concentrated  PV/T  collector  integrated  with  a  hybrid  PCM-nanofluid 
spectral  splitter.  As  spectral  filter  components,  they  used  two  PCMs 
(paraffin RT25 and salt hydrate S27) as well as an Ag/water nanofluid. 
In  their  investigation,  the  PCM  was  positioned  once  above  and  once 
below the nanofluid channel. In both situations, the salt hydrate pro-
duced a greater fluid temperature and a higher overall exergy efficiency 
than  paraffin,  suggesting  that  choosing  the  suitable  PCM  can  have  a 
substantial effect on system performance. However, when the PCM was 
placed  beneath  the  nanofluid  channel,  relatively  higher  temperatures 
and  higher  total  energy  and  exergy  efficiencies  were  obtained.  Addi-
tionally,  relative  to  the  nanofluid-based  PV/T  collector,  exergy  effi-
ciency was raised by 14.9% and fluid temperature was increased by 54% 
◦
to of 111
C. As a result of the greater absorptivity of PCMs of infrared 
radiation, they claimed that the suggested system may exploit a broader 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103773S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

area of the solar spectrum. 

Yazdanifard  et  al.  [512]  took  this  a  step  further  by  employing  a 
NE-PCM layer as the optical filter rather than bulk PCM. The researchers 
used 32-carbon paraffin (C32H66) as a base PCM and glycerol as a base 
fluid. Both the base PCM and fluid were doped with gold and/or silver 
nanoparticles. Five distinct configurations of the spectral splitter were 
examined in terms of energy, exergy, and energy storage. The results 
indicated that placing the nanofluid on top of the NE-PCM layer resulted 
in the maximum output temperature and energy and exergy efficiencies. 
However,  placing  the  NE-PCM  layer  at  the  bottom  of  the  nanofluid 
resulted in the highest energy storage performance. Overall, energy ef-
ficiency was more dependent on the Ag volume fraction, whereas exergy 
efficiency was found more sensitive to the Au volume fraction. 

The aforementioned studies pave the way for further research in this 
area, including enhancing the optical and thermal properties of PCMs. 
Therefore, utilizing micro/nano-ePCM slurries and dispersions as spec-
tral  filters  for  PV/T  collectors  is  an  unexplored  future  route.  Fig.  67 
shows a schematic of the proposed spectral-splitting PV/T system using 
an ePCM slurry for optical filtration. 

5.4. Encapsulation of molten salts for high-temperature solar applications 

A variety of organic PCMs have been used for TES. However, because 
organic  PCMs  operate  at  low  phase-change  temperatures,  they  are 
◦
limited to temperatures below 100
C in most cases. As a result, to sup-
plement  CSP  plants  with  suitable  high-energy-density  PCMs,  molten 
salts have been investigated. Molten salts outperform organic PCMs in 
terms of volumetric melting enthalpy and operating (melting) temper-
atures,  increasing  the  energy  density  for  storage  by  up  to  50%  and 
lowering  the  cost  by  more  than  40%  [155].  Unfortunately,  they  are 
corrosive  at  elevated  temperatures,  which  complicates  their  handling 
[555]. 

Encapsulation strategies have been proposed to address this concern 
by encapsulating core components within macro, micro, and nanoscale 
capsules  to avoid chemical interactions  between molten salts and the 
surrounding environment [556,190]. Micro-ePCMs offer the benefit of 
increasing the available surface area for heat transmission as compared 
to macro-ePCMs. Thus, effective thermal conductivity of the TES system 
may  be  enhanced  [557].  Nano-ePCMs,  on  the  other  hand,  are  more 
durable and have a lower breakage rate than micro-ePCMs [558]. As a 
result, micro and nanoscale applications of molten salt encapsulation are 
being considered. 

However,  due  to  the  high  water-solubility  of  molten  salts,  the 
encapsulation process is disturbed when using conventional techniques 
such as the sol-gel method. Therefore, a limited-water sol-gel method is 
surfactant-free 
required. 

[155]  proposed 

and 

Lee 

Jo 

a 

microencapsulation  method  in  which  sodium  nitrate  (NaNO3)  was 
enclosed  by  protective  silica.  The  results  revealed  the  suitability  of 
NaNO3/SiO2  microcapsules  for  storing  thermal  energy  in  various 
high-temperature applications with a high encapsulation efficiency of 
89%  on  average.  In  another  study,  Lee  and  Jo  [559]  devised  a 
surfactant-free  encapsulation  methodology  for  the  synthesis  of 
NaNO3/SiO2  microcapsules  for  solar-thermal  energy  storage.  They 
evaluated the influence of precursor and catalyst concentrations on the 
NaNO3/SiO2 microcapsules, as well as the synthesis time. Microcapsules 
can retain 2.1 times more thermal energy than solar salts, according to 
the study. The microcapsules retained their high performance after 50 
thermal cycles and 12 hours of high-temperature heating. 

Zhang et al. [560] synthesized microcapsules using a complex ma-
terial system composed of a binary salt of LiNa as the core and silica as 
the  shell.  Results  indicated  that  the  proposed  binary  carbonate  salts 
were suitable for CSP applications because they had a latent heat ca-
◦
pacity of over 220 J/g at 498 
C with a 134.4% increase in effective heat 
capacity  over  the  best-commercialized  product.  Additionally,  it  was 
◦
demonstrated that the micro-ePCMs were thermally stable up to 540 
C 
without any change to their latent heat capacity. 

◦

Li et al. [561] used sodium nitrate (NaNO3) as the core material and 
titanium  dioxide  as  the  shell  to  fabricate  a  micro-ePCM.  The 
◦
C and a solidification point of 
micro-ePCM had a melting point of 306.5
296.7
C, which indicated that it could be used in CSP TES systems. The 
resultant  micro-ePCM  maintained  thermal  stability  after  200  thermal 
cycles  with  a  latent  heat  of  135.3  J/g.  Furthermore,  when  the 
NaNO3/TiO2  micro-capsules  were  suspended  in  thermal  oil,  thermal 
conductivity  and  specific  heat  were  enhanced  by  18.4  and  131.7%, 
respectively, compared to thermal oil. 

On the other hand, to our best knowledge, there is only one study on 
the nanoencapsulation of molten salts published by Lee and Jo [294]. In 
this study, the authors developed the nanoencapsulation technique by 
taking  advantage  of  the  high  solubility  of  molten  salt  in  water  and 
employing  emulsification  and  sol-gel  processes.  The  results  revealed 
that nanoencapsulation in silica shells boosted thermal stability of the 
solar  salt,  with  the  breakdown  temperature  of  the  nano-encapsulated 
solar salt increasing to 596.5
C. Through the repetition of 50 thermal 
cycles, excellent thermal dependability was established as the morpho-
logical appearance and thermal performance of the nano-ePCM were not 
degraded. 

◦

5.5. New physical insights into ePCM slurries/dispersion using multi-scale 
modeling 

As mentioned earlier in Section 4.1.4, the phase-change rate inside 
spherical  capsules  is  reduced  nonlinearly  during  the  phase-change 

Fig. 67. Schematic of the proposed spectral-splitting concentrated PV/T system using an ePCM slurry/dispersion for optical filtration. The ePCM slurry/dispersion 
flowing through the upper channel functions as a spectrum splitter (optical filter) that absorbs specific wavelength bands while transmitting other bands. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103774S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

process, which naturally results in non-linear energy exchange between 
the capsule and the carrying fluid [422]. Additionally, due to existence 
of the shell, the phase-change process of each particle is independent. 
Consequently, the temperature distribution of the particles is discrete 
rather than continuous [383]. Nonetheless, using a purely continuum or 
discrete  approach  is  insufficient  to  fully  understand  the  heat  transfer 
phenomena  in  an  ePCM  slurry/dispersion.  To  gain  a  better  under-
standing  of  ePCM  slurries/dispersions,  multi-scale  approaches  are 
required that take into account the disparity of behaviors and the in-
teractions between different scales [426]. 

In micro/nano-ePCM slurries/dispersions, multi-scale modeling has 
not been extensively employed. However, multi-scale models have been 
utilized in different thermal and fluidic systems between the atomistic 
and continuum scales, which could be used to establish the groundwork 
for the multi-scale modeling of micro/nano-ePCM slurries/dispersions. 
Under the umbrella of multi-scale modeling, many coupling pairs have 
been  implemented,  including  MD/SPH  [562],  MD/FVM  [563,564], 
MD/FEM [565], and MD/LBM [566,556] (details are presented in Sec-
tion 4.4.1). 

To the best of the authors’ knowledge, only one recently published 
study employed a multi-scale approach for an ePCM slurry [383]. The 
authors  attempted  to  bring  a  new  perspective  on  understanding  the 
practical thermal energy transport of the ePCM slurry by implementing a 
hybrid  continuum-discrete  approach.  As  a  result,  they  created  a 
multi-scale mathematical model to predict the flow and heat transfer of 
the micro-ePCM slurry during phase transition. The macroscale flow and 
heat transfer model was coupled with heat transfer during phase change 
at  the  microscale.  Then,  in  the  confined  microscale  simulation,  a 
sequence of constrained simulations were performed at each point when 
macroscale data was required. The constraints included ambient tem-
perature of the microcapsule shell and the heat transfer coefficient. The 
results  indicated  that  when  nonlinear  latent  energy  release  was 
considered,  numerical  results  from  the  multi-scale  model  were  the 
closest to experimental data of any known model. Additionally, when 
the microcapsule size was decreased from 1000 to 100 µm, the average 
heat transfer coefficient rose from 97.03 to 102.11 W/m2•K. However, 
when the microcapsule size was smaller than 100 µm, the microcapsule 
size had a negligible effect on the heat transfer coefficient. 

6. Concluding remarks: Prospects and recommendations 

The  encapsulation  and  suspension  of  solid-liquid  PCMs  using 
custom-engineered shells for solar photothermal conversion and storage 
is  a  highly  promising  concept  that  paves  the  way  for  smart,  multi- 
functional  solar  fluids.  The  resulting  ePCM  slurries  and  dispersions 
elegantly  combine the functions  of solar absorbers, heat carriers, and 
storage  media,  thus  circumventing  the  need  for  absorber  plates  and 
separate  TES  systems.  This  promotes  ePCM-based  direct-absorption 
systems as the next-generation of solar-thermal collectors. 

Relative to nano-enhanced and shape-stabilized PCMs (considered, 
along with ePCMs, to be the most advanced and promising PCM-based 
solutions), ePCMs offer the often-overlooked advantage of continuous 
fluidity  regardless  of  the  working  temperature  and  phase-change  ac-
tivity  (charging  or  discharging,  solid  or  liquid).  This  translates  into 
seamless integration into active-cooling systems and solar-thermal col-
lectors that require a continuously flowing fluid. Other advantages of 
ePCMs over alternatives at the forefront of the PCM scene include leak- 
proof operation over numerous thermal cycles, complete prevention of 
chemical  interactions  between  the  PCM  and  its  surroundings,  and 
effective suppression of phase separation (incongruent melting). This is 
in addition to inherently overcoming the low-thermal-conductivity issue 
that long plagued PCMs by significantly increasing the available surface 
area for heat transfer. 

There has been a number of interesting developments in recent years 
in  the  field  of  solar  ePCMs,  including  the  synthesis  of  broadband- 
absorbing  composite  and  multi-layered  shells,  the  expansion  of 

polymerization  methods  to  nano-encapsulation,  and  reducing  the  de-
gree of supercooling in confinement by using nucleation additives. Yet, 
there remains a long road ahead for solar ePCMs to become an available 
and affordable industrial commodity. Throughout this work, a number 
of new research directions have been identified to lift the application 
limitations of ePCM systems. 

As  the  suspensions  of  PCM  capsules  simultaneously  perform  the 
functions  of  solar  absorption,  storage,  and  transport,  equal  attention 
must  be  given  to  their  optical,  thermal,  rheological,  and  structural 
properties at a wide range of working temperatures, particle loadings, 
and flow rates. Compared to thermal conductivity and optical proper-
ties, limited studies have been devoted to the measurement of heat ca-
pacity  and  rheological  properties  of  ePCMs  before,  during,  and  after 
phase  transition.  But  perhaps  more  pressingly,  the  introduction  of 
ePCMs to high-temperature applications has been disadvantaged. 

It was observed that the majority of studies have been limited to the 
use of water as the carrying fluid, paraffin as the core material, and/or 
polymers as the shell material. This has narrowly restricted the use of the 
resulting  ePCM  slurries  and  dispersions  to  low-temperature  applica-
tions. Therefore, it is important for future studies to focus on improving 
the encapsulation of non-paraffin core materials that possess high phase- 
change temperatures (e.g., salt hydrates and metal alloys) using inor-
ganic and solar-active shells (e.g., carbon-based and plasmonic metals), 
along with their suspension in carrier fluids with high boiling points (e. 
g., thermal oils) to open the room for high-temperature applications. 

Relative  to  conventional  micro-ePCMs,  nano-ePCMs  have  shown 
superior  structural  stability,  heat  transfer,  cyclic  reliability,  and  solar 
absorption characteristics. Moreover, nano-ePCMs incur a much lower 
penalty on viscosity (and pumping power) with no clogging or abrasion 
issues  in  the  pumping  and  piping  system.  These  characteristics  make 
nano-ePCMs  more promising  for  both  solar  and  thermal  applications, 
which  should  give  a  strong  thrust  for  future  research  efforts  to  be 
directed  on  investigating  nano-ePCMs  rather  than  micro-ePCMs.  For 
instance, one poorly understood area is the effect of nanoconfinement on 
the phase-change properties and behavior of PCMs relative to their bulk 
properties. Another area that requires special attention is the develop-
ment of non-invasive stability evaluation techniques for nano-ePCMs. 

From a system-level perspective, ePCM slurries and dispersions are a 
natural fit for PV/T collectors in which they can simultaneously perform 
the  functions  of  optical  filtration  and  thermal  regulation,  thus  maxi-
mizing thermal and electrical outputs from the same solar input. This is 
possible by using ePCMs to selectively absorb the non-PV-useful bands 
of the solar spectrum before reaching the PV receiver while removing 
excess  heat  from  below  the  PV  cells  at  a  semi-constant  temperature. 
Therefore,  a  huge  capacity  for  future  research,  on  the  material  and 
system  levels,  is  available  for  ePCM-based  PV/T  collectors.  Another 
completely  unexplored  and  highly  interesting  system-level  concept  is 
the mixing of PCM capsules with different core and/or shell materials in 
the  same  suspension.  This  is  expected  to  lead  to  significant  improve-
ments  in  the  thermal  (due  to  the  initiation  of  multiple  phase-change 
processes  that  can  span  a  wide  temperate  range)  and  optical  (due  to 
the possibility of maximizing broadband/selective solar absorption over 
multiple spectral bands) properties of the suspension as a whole. 

In parallel with experimental campaigns, a better understanding of 
the multi-scale and multi-phase nature of ePCM slurries and dispersions 
is pivotal. Adopting purely continuum or discrete approaches was found 
to be insufficient to completely comprehend the heat and mass transfer 
phenomena in an ePCM slurry or dispersion. Multi-scale models have the 
potential to overcome the limitations of continuum and discrete models 
by  effectively  representing an  ePCM  system  with coupled  analysis  on 
various scales. This enables multi-scale models to describe the nonlinear 
latent  heat  release  of  PCMs  in  agreement  with  experimental  results. 
Therefore, to capture the key physical phenomena in solar ePCMs, it is 
recommended that hybrid continuum-discrete methods (which do not 
rely  on  any  property  correlations)  be  used  in  conjunction  with  Mie’s 
theory for encapsulated spheres. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103775S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Building  on  the  maturity  of  PCMs  and  particulate  systems  as 
commercialized products, the industrial uptake of micro/nano-ePCMs is 
closer than ever. A niche market for suspensions of micro/nano-ePCMs is 
in synergizing the absorption, transfer, and storage of solar energy in a 
single  process.  By  critically  surveying  the  most  promising  advances, 
identifying the most pressing technical gaps, and sketching a research 
roadmap to address these issues, this work is a leap forward to establish 
a foothold for micro/nano-ePCM slurries and dispersions in the solar- 
thermal industry. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

References 

[1] Yang L, nan Huang J, Zhou F. Thermophysical properties and applications of 

nano-enhanced PCMs: an update review. Energy Convers. Manag. 2020;214 
(March):112876. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2020.112876. 
[2] Salunkhe PB, Shembekar PS. A review on effect of phase change material 

encapsulation on the thermal performance of a system. Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev. 2012;16(8):5603–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2012.05.037. 

[3] Cabeza LF, Castell´on C, Nogu´es M, Medrano M, Leppers R, Zubillaga O. Use of 
microencapsulated PCM in concrete walls for energy savings. Energy Build 2007; 
39(2):113–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2006.03.030. 

[4] Ran F, Chen Y, Cong R, Fang G. Flow and heat transfer characteristics of 

microencapsulated phase change slurry in thermal energy systems: a review. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020;134(August):110101. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2020.110101. 

[5] Iachachene F, Haddad Z, Arıcı M, Abu-Nada E, Sheremet MA. The effect of nano 
encapsulated phase change materials and nanoparticles on turbulent heat 
transport: a conical diffuser scenario. J. Energy Storage 2022;52(PA):104703. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.104703. 

[6] Ma F, Zhang P. Performance investigation of the direct absorption solar collector 

based on phase change slurry. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2019;162(January):114244. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.114244. 

[7] Sharma S, Micheli L, Chang W, Tahir AA, Reddy KS, Mallick TK. Nano-enhanced 

Phase Change Material for thermal management of BICPV. Appl. Energy 2017; 
208(September):719–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.09.076. 
[8] Buddhi D, Sharma SD. Measurements of transmittance of solar radiation through 
stearic acid: a latent heat storage material. Energy Convers. Manag. 1999;40(18): 
1979–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196-8904(99)00077-1. 

[9] Hassan F, et al. Recent advancements in latent heat phase change materials and 
their applications for thermal energy storage and buildings: a state of the art 
review. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assessments 2022;49(September 2021):101646. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2021.101646. 

[10] Jacob R, Bruno F. Review on shell materials used in the encapsulation of phase 
change materials for high temperature thermal energy storage. Renew. Sustain. 
Energy Rev. 2015;48:79–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.038. 
[11] Mili´an YE, Guti´errez A, Gr´ageda M, Ushak S. A review on encapsulation 

techniques for inorganic phase change materials and the influence on their 
thermophysical properties. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017;73(June 2016): 
983–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.159. 

[12] Singh P, Sharma RK, Ansu AK, Goyal R, Sarı A, Tyagi VV. A comprehensive 
review on development of eutectic organic phase change materials and their 
composites for low and medium range thermal energy storage applications. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2021;223(December 2020):110955. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solmat.2020.110955. 

[13] Mourad A, Aissa A, Said Z, Younis O, Iqbal M, Alazzam A. Recent advances on the 
applications of phase change materials for solar collectors, practical limitations, 
and challenges: a critical review. J. Energy Storage 2022;49(January):104186. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.104186. 

[14] Naveenkumar R, et al. Review on phase change materials for solar energy storage 

applications, 29. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 2022. 

[15] Tyagi PK, Kumar R, Said Z. Recent advances on the role of nanomaterials for 

improving the performance of photovoltaic thermal systems: Trends, challenges 
and prospective. Nano Energy 2022;93(August 2021):106834. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.nanoen.2021.106834. 

[16] Tyagi PK, Kumar R, Said Z. Recent advances on the role of nanomaterials for 

improving the performance of photovoltaic thermal systems: Trends, challenges 
and prospective. Nano Energy 2022;93(December 2021):106834. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2021.106834. 

[17] Qiu L, Ouyang Y, Feng Y, Zhang X. Review on micro/nano phase change materials 
for solar thermal applications. Renew. Energy 2019;140:513–38. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.renene.2019.03.088. 

[18] Ghasemi K, Tasnim S, Mahmud S. PCM, nano/microencapsulation and slurries: a 

review of fundamentals, categories, fabrication, numerical models and 
applications. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assessments 2022;52(PB):102084. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2022.102084. 

[19] Zayed ME, et al. Performance augmentation of flat plate solar water collector 

using phase change materials and nanocomposite phase change materials: a 
review. Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2019;128:135–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
psep.2019.06.002. 

[20] Delgado M, L´azaro A, Mazo J, Zalba B. Review on phase change material 

emulsions and microencapsulated phase change material slurries: materials, heat 
transfer studies and applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2012;16(1): 
253–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2011.07.152. 

[21] Qiu Z, Ma X, Li P, Zhao X, Wright A. Micro-encapsulated phase change material 

(MPCM) slurries: Characterization and building applications. Renew. Sustain. 
Energy Rev. 2017;77(June 2016):246–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2017.04.001. 

[22] Abutayeh M, Alazzam A, El-Khasawneh B. Optimizing thermal energy storage 

operation. Sol. Energy 2015;120:318–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2015.06.027. 

[23] Medrano M, Gil A, Martorell I, Potau X, Cabeza LF. State of the art on high- 

temperature thermal energy storage for power generation. Part 2-Case studies. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010;14(1):56–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2009.07.036. 

[24] J. D. Webb and R. W. Burrows, “Materials research for passive solar systems: 
solid-state phase-change materials,” SERI Rep. TR-255-1828, vol. No. DE8500, 
1985. 

[25] Wang K, Qin Z, Tong W, Ji C. Thermal energy storage for solar energy utilization: 
fundamentals and applications. Renew. Energy - Resour. Challenges Appl. 2020; 
(September). https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.91804. 

[26] Ghoneim AA. Comparison of theoretical models of phase-change and sensible 

heat storage for air and water-based solar heating systems. Sol. Energy 1989;42 
(3):209–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(89)90013-3. 

[27] Morrison DJ, Abdel-Khalik SI. Effects of phase-change energy storage on the 
performance of air-based and liquid-based solar heating systems. Sol. Energy 
1978;20(1):57–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(78)90141-X. 

[28] Mohamed SA, et al. A review on current status and challenges of inorganic phase 

change materials for thermal energy storage systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev. 2017;70(December 2016):1072–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2016.12.012. 

[29] Wang F, Maidment G, Missenden J, Tozer R. A review of research concerning the 
use of PCMS in air conditioning and refrigeration engineering. Adv. Build. 
Technol. 2002;2(Kulkami 1994):1273–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978- 
008044100-9/50158-3. 

[30] Kenisarin M, Mahkamov K. Passive thermal control in residential buildings using 
phase change materials. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016;55:371–98. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.128. 

[31] Kalidasan B, Pandey AK, Shahabuddin S, Samykano M, 

Thirugnanasambandam M, Saidur R. Phase change materials integrated solar 
thermal energy systems: global trends and current practices in experimental 
approaches. J. Energy Storage 2020;27(August 2019):101118. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.est.2019.101118. 

[32] Mahian O, Ghafarian S, Sarrafha H, Kasaeian A, Yousefi H, Yan W. Phase change 
materials in solar photovoltaics applied in buildings : an overview. Sol. Energy 
2021;224(May):569–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.06.010. 
[33] Lu Y, et al. Novel smart textile with phase change materials encapsulated core- 
sheath structure fabricated by coaxial electrospinning. Chem. Eng. J. 2019;355 
(July 2018):532–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.08.189. 

[34] Wang C, Hossain M, Ma L, Ma Z, Hickman JJ, Su M. Highly sensitive thermal 

detection of thrombin using aptamer-functionalized phase change nanoparticles. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2010;26(2):437–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bios.2010.07.097. 

[35] Du K, Calautit J, Eames P, Wu Y. A state-of-the-art review of the application of 
phase change materials (PCM) in Mobilized-Thermal Energy Storage (M-TES) for 
recovering low-temperature industrial waste heat (IWH) for distributed heat 
supply. Renew. Energy 2021;168:1040–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2020.12.057. 

[36] White SD, Yarrall MG, Cleland DJ, Hedley RA. Modelling the performance of a 
transcritical CO2 heat pump for high temperature heating. Int. J. Refrig. 2002;25 
(4):479–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-7007(01)00021-4. 

[37] Zhang X, Wang F, Fan X, Duan H, Zhu F. An investigation of a heat pump system 
using CO2/propane mixture as a working fluid. Int. J. Green Energy 2017;14(1): 
105–11. https://doi.org/10.1080/15435075.2016.1253577. 

[38] Fanney AH, Terlizzi CP. Testing of refrigerant-charged solar domestic hot water 

systems. Sol. Energy 1985;35(4):353–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X 
(85)90143-4. 

[39] Abhat A. Low temperature latent heat thermal energy storage: Heat storage 

materials. Sol. Energy 1983;30(4):313–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X 
(83)90186-X. 

[40] Fallahi A, Guldentops G, Tao M, Granados-Focil S, Van Dessel S. Review on solid- 
solid phase change materials for thermal energy storage: molecular structure and 
thermal properties. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2017;127:1427–41. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.08.161. 

[41] Guldentops G, Van Dessel S. Building envelope systems with transparent solid- 

solid phase changing material. In: AEI 2017 Resil. Integr. Build. - Proc. Archit. Eng. 
Natl. Conf. 2017; 2017. p. 247–65. https://doi.org/10.1061/ 
9780784480502.021. 

[42] Su W, Darkwa J, Kokogiannakis G. Review of solid-liquid phase change materials 
and their encapsulation technologies. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015;48: 
373–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.044. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103776S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[43] Jones BJ, Sun D, Krishnan S, Garimella SV. Experimental and numerical study of 
melting in a cylinder. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2006;49(15–16):2724–38. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2006.01.006. 

[44] H. M. Bele ́n Zalba, Jose ́ M, Mari  ́n, Luisa F. Cabeza, Review on thermal energy 

storage with phase change: materials, heat transfer analysis and applications, vol. 704. 
2003. 

[45] Pandey AK, Hossain MS, Tyagi VV, Abd Rahim N, Selvaraj JAL, Sari A. Novel 

approaches and recent developments on potential applications of phase change 
materials in solar energy. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018;82(July 2017): 
281–323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.043. 

[46] Kenisarin MM. High-temperature phase change materials for thermal energy 

storage. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010;14(3):955–70. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2009.11.011. 

[47] Pereira da Cunha J, Eames P. Thermal energy storage for low and medium 

temperature applications using phase change materials - A review. Appl. Energy 
2016;177:227–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.05.097. 

[48] Dimaano MNR, Watanabe T. Performance investigation of the capric and lauric 
acid mixture as latent heat energy storage for a cooling system. Sol. Energy 2002; 
72(3):205–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(01)00101-3. 

[49] Sari A, Kaygusuz K. Thermal performance of a eutectic mixture of lauric and 

stearic acids as PCM encapsulated in the annulus of two concentric pipes. Sol. 
Energy 2002;72(6):493–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(02)00026-9. 
[50] Chinnasamy V, Appukuttan S. Preparation and thermal properties of lauric acid/ 
myristyl alcohol as a novel binary eutectic phase change material for indoor 
thermal comfort. Energy Storage 2019;1(5):1–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
est2.80. 

[51] Tyagi VV, Buddhi D. PCM thermal storage in buildings: a state of art. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2007;11(6):1146–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2005.10.002. 

J. Energy Storage 2020;29(April):101266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2020.101266. 

[70] Huo X, et al. Chitosan composite microencapsulated comb-like polymeric phase 
change material via coacervation microencapsulation. Carbohydr. Polym. 2018; 
200(August):602–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.08.003. 
[71] Sheng N, Nomura T, Zhu C, Habazaki H, Akiyama T. Cotton-derived carbon 
sponge as support for form-stabilized composite phase change materials with 
enhanced thermal conductivity. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2019;192(October 
2018):8–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.12.018. 

[72] Zhao Q, et al. Graphene oxide Pickering phase change material emulsions with 

high thermal conductivity and photo-thermal performance for thermal energy 
management. Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 2019;575(January): 
42–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2019.05.007. 

[73] Hassabo AG, Mohamed AL. Enhancement the thermo-regulating property of 
cellulosic fabric using encapsulated paraffins in modified pectin. Carbohydr. 
Polym. 2017;165:421–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.02.074. 
[74] Yazdani MR, Etula J, Zimmerman JB, Sepp¨al¨a A. Ionic cross-linked polyvinyl 

alcohol tunes vitrification and cold-crystallization of sugar alcohol for long-term 
thermal energy storage. Green Chem 2020;22(16):5447–62. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/d0gc01427c. 

[75] Adesina A. Use of phase change materials in concrete: current challenges. Renew. 
Energy Environ. Sustain. 2019;4(9). https://doi.org/10.1051/rees/2019006. 

[76] Mahdi JM, Lohrasbi S, Nsofor EC. Hybrid heat transfer enhancement for latent- 
heat thermal energy storage systems: a review. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2019; 
137:630–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.03.111. 
[77] Xu M, Akhtar S, Zueter AF, Alzoubi MA, Sushama L, Sasmito AP. Asymptotic 

analysis of a two-phase Stefan problem in annulus: application to outward 
solidification in phase change materials. Appl. Math. Comput. 2021;408:126343. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2021.126343. 

[52] Baetens R, Jelle BP, Gustavsen A. Phase change materials for building 

[78] McLaggan MS, Hadden RM, Gillie M. Flammability assessment of phase change 

applications: a state-of-the-art review. Energy Build 2010;42(9):1361–8. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2010.03.026. 

[53] Huang WM, et al. Thermo/chemo-responsive shape memory effect in polymers: a 

sketch of working mechanisms, fundamentals and optimization. J. Polym. Res. 
2012;19(9). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10965-012-9952-z. 

[54] Cabeza L, Mehling H. Heat and cold storage with PCM. An up to date introduction 

into basics and applications - Publisher 2008. ISBN:978-3-540-68557-9. 

[55] Ouchi K, Gamache P, Acworth I, Watanabe S. Measurement of isoflavones using 

liquid chromatography with multi-channel coulometric electrochemical 
detection. BioFactors 2004;22(1–4):353–6. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
biof.5520220169. 

[56] Zayed ME, et al. Recent progress in phase change materials storage containers: 
geometries, design considerations and heat transfer improvement methods. 
J. Energy Storage 2020;30(January):101341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2020.101341. 

[57] Dutil Y, Rousse DR, Ben Salah N, Lassue S, Zalewski L. A review on phase-change 
materials: mathematical modeling and simulations. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 
2011;15(1):112–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2010.06.011. 

[58] Olivares RI, Edwards W. LiNO3-NaNO3-KNO3 salt for thermal energy storage: 

Thermal stability evaluation in different atmospheres. Thermochim. Acta 2013; 
560:34–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tca.2013.02.029. 

[59] Jankowski NR, McCluskey FP. A review of phase change materials for vehicle 

component thermal buffering. Appl. Energy 2014;113:1525–61. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.08.026. 

[60] Sharma A, Sharma SD, Buddhi D. Accelerated thermal cycle test of acetamide, 
stearic acid and paraffin wax for solar thermal latent heat storage applications. 
Energy Convers. Manag. 2002;43(14):1923–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196- 
8904(01)00131-5. 

[61] Sharma A, Tyagi VV, Chen CR, Buddhi D. Review on thermal energy storage with 
phase change materials and applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2009;13 
(2):318–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2007.10.005. 

[62] Veerakumar C, Sreekumar A. Phase change material based cold thermal energy 
storage: materials, techniques and applications - a review. Int. J. Refrig. 2016;67 
(June):271–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrefrig.2015.12.005. 

[63] Günther E, Schmid T, Mehling H, Hiebler S, Huang L. Subcooling in hexadecane 
emulsions. Int. J. Refrig. 2010;33(8):1605–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijrefrig.2010.07.022. 

[64] Adachi T, Daudah D, Tanaka G. Effects of supercooling degree and specimen size 
on supercooling duration of erythritol. ISIJ Int 2014;54(12):2790–5. https://doi. 
org/10.2355/isijinternational.54.2790. 

[65] Zahir MH, Mohamed SA, Saidur R, Al-Sulaiman FA. Supercooling of phase-change 

materials and the techniques used to mitigate the phenomenon. Appl. Energy 
2019;240(February):793–817. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.02.045. 
[66] Dutkowski K, Kruzel M, Zajączkowski B, Białko B. The experimental investigation 
of mPCM slurries density at phase change temperature. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 
2020;159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120083. 
[67] Nada SA, El-Nagar DH, Hussein HMS. Improving the thermal regulation and 
efficiency enhancement of PCM-Integrated PV modules using nano particles. 
Energy Convers. Manag. 2018;166(May):735–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2018.04.035. 

[68] Ansyah PR, Waluyo J, Suhanan MNajib, Anggara F. Thermal behavior of melting 
paraffin wax process in cylindrical capsule by experimental study. AIP Conf. Proc. 
2018;2001(August). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5049968. 

[69] Tan P, Lindberg P, Eichler K, L¨overyd P, Johansson P, Kalagasidis AS. Effect of 
phase separation and supercooling on the storage capacity in a commercial latent 
heat thermal energy storage: experimental cycling of a salt hydrate PCM. 

material wall lining and insulation materials with different weight fractions. 
Energy Build 2017;153:439–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.08.012. 
[79] da Cunha SRL, de Aguiar JLB. Phase change materials and energy efficiency of 
buildings: a review of knowledge. J. Energy Storage November 2019;27:2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2019.101083. 

[80] Agyenim F, Hewitt N, Eames P, Smyth M. A review of materials, heat transfer and 
phase change problem formulation for latent heat thermal energy storage systems 
(LHTESS). Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010;14(2):615–28. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2009.10.015. 

[81] Esen M, Durmus¸  A, Durmus¸  A. Geometric design of solar-aided latent heat store 
depending on various parameters and phase change materials. Sol. Energy 1998; 
62(1):19–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(97)00104-7. 
[82] Agyenim F, Eames P, Smyth M. Heat transfer enhancement in medium 

temperature thermal energy storage system using a multitube heat transfer array. 
Renew. Energy 2010;35(1):198–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2009.03.010. 

[83] Seddegh S, Wang X, Joybari MM, Haghighat F. Investigation of the effect of 

geometric and operating parameters on thermal behavior of vertical shell-and- 
tube latent heat energy storage systems. Energy 2017;137:69–82. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.07.014. 

[84] Zhao J, Zhai J, Lu Y, Liu N. Theory and experiment of contact melting of phase 
change materials in a rectangular cavity at different tilt angles. Int. J. Heat Mass 
Transf. 2018;120:241–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2017.12.006. 

[85] Nazzi Ehms JH, De C´esaro Oliveski R, Oliveira Rocha LA, Biserni C. Theoretical 

and numerical analysis on phase change materials (PCM): a case study of the 
solidification process of erythritol in spheres. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2018;119: 
523–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.11.124. 

[86] Dhaidan NS, Khodadadi JM. Melting and convection of phase change materials in 
different shape containers: a review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015;43: 
449–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.11.017. 

[87] Hajighafoori Boukani N, Dadvand A, Chamkha AJ. Melting of a Nano-enhanced 
Phase Change Material (NePCM) in partially-filled horizontal elliptical capsules 
with different aspect ratios. Int. J. Mech. Sci. 2018;149(June):164–77. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2018.09.056. 

[88] Tan FL. Constrained and unconstrained melting inside a sphere. Int. Commun. 

Heat Mass Transf. 2008;35(4):466–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
icheatmasstransfer.2007.09.008. 

[89] Sattari H, Mohebbi A, Afsahi MM, Azimi Yancheshme A. CFD simulation of 

melting process of phase change materials (PCMs) in a spherical capsule. Int. J. 
Refrig. 2017;73:209–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrefrig.2016.09.007. 

[90] Sparrow EM, Geiger GT. Melting in a horizontal tube with the solid either 

constrained or free to fall under gravity. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 1986;29(7): 
1007–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(86)90200-0. 

[91] Zhou J, Chen Z, Liu D, Li J. Experimental study on melting in a rectangular 

enclosure heated below with discrete heat sources. J. Therm. Sci. 2001;10(3): 
254–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11630-001-0028-3. 

[92] Wang Y, Amiri A, Vafai K. An experimental investigation of the melting process in 
a rectangular enclosure. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 1999;42(19):3659–72. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(99)00024-1. 

[93] Fukai J, Hamada Y, Morozumi Y, Miyatake O. Effect of carbon-fiber brushes on 

conductive heat transfer in phase change materials. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 
2002;45(24):4781–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(02)00179-5. 
[94] El-Dessouky H, Al-Juwayhel F. Effectiveness of a thermal energy storage system 
using phase-change materials. Energy Convers. Manag. 1997;38(6):601–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196-8904(96)00072-6. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103777S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[95] Hamada Y, Ohtsu W, Fukai J. Thermal response in thermal energy storage 

[123] Zhang M, Wang C, Luo A, Liu Z, Zhang X. Molecular dynamics simulation on 

material around heat transfer tubes: Effect of additives on heat transfer rates. Sol. 
Energy 2003;75(4):317–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2003.07.028. 

[96] Hirata T, Nishida K. An analysis of heat transfer using equivalent thermal 
conductivity of liquid phase during melting inside an isothermally heated 
horizontal cylinder. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 1989;32(9):1663–70. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0017-9310(89)90049-5. 

[97] Rathod Manish K, Jyotirmay B. Development of Correlation for Melting Time of 

Phase Change Material in Latent Heat Storage Unit. Energy Procedia 2015;75: 
2125–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.07.339. 

[98] Solomon AD. Melt time and heat flux for a simple PCM body. Sol. Energy 1979;22 

(3):251–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(79)90140-3. 

[99] Liu M, Saman W, Bruno F. Review on storage materials and thermal performance 

enhancement techniques for high temperature phase change thermal storage 
systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2012;16(4):2118–32. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2012.01.020. 

[100] Kalapala L, Devanuri JK. Influence of operational and design parameters on the 

performance of a PCM based heat exchanger for thermal energy storage – A 
review. J. Energy Storage 2018;20(July):497–519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2018.10.024. 

[101] Agyenim F, Eames P, Smyth M. A comparison of heat transfer enhancement in a 

medium temperature thermal energy storage heat exchanger using fins. Sol. 
Energy 2009;83(9):1509–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2009.04.007. 

[102] Yang X, Lu Z, Bai Q, Zhang Q, Jin L, Yan J. Thermal performance of a shell-and- 
tube latent heat thermal energy storage unit: role of annular fins. Appl. Energy 
2017;202:558–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.007. 

[103] Wang J, Chen G, Jiang H. Theoretical study on a novel phase change process. Int. 

J. Energy Res. 1999;23(4):287–94. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-114X 
(19990325)23:4<287::AID-ER476>3.0.CO;2-K. 

[104] Li YQ, He YL, Song HJ, Xu C, Wang WW. Numerical analysis and parameters 

optimization of shell-and-tube heat storage unit using three phase change 
materials. Renew. Energy 2013;59:92–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2013.03.022. 

thermophysics of paraffin/EVA/graphene nanocomposites as phase change 
materials. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2020;166(November 2019):114639. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.114639. 

[124] Leong KY, Abdul Rahman MR, Gurunathan BA. Nano-enhanced phase change 
materials: a review of thermo-physical properties, applications and challenges. 
J. Energy Storage 2019;21(October 2018):18–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2018.11.008. 

[125] Mingzheng Z, Guodong X, Jian L, Lei C, Lijun Z. Analysis of factors influencing 
thermal conductivity and viscosity in different kinds of surfactant solutions. Exp. 
Therm. Fluid Sci. 2012;36:22–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
expthermflusci.2011.07.014. 

[126] Asadi A, et al. Effect of sonication characteristics on stability, thermophysical 
properties, and heat transfer of nanofluids: a comprehensive review. Ultrason. 
Sonochem. 2019;58(February). https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ultsonch.2019.104701. 

[127] Sauter C, Schuchmann HP. High pressure for dispersing and deagglomerating 
nanoparticles in aqueous solutions. Chem. Eng. Technol. 2007;30(10):1401–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ceat.200700115. 

[128] Silambarasan M, Manikandan S, Rajan KS. Viscosity and thermal conductivity of 

dispersions of sub-micron TiO 2 particles in water prepared by stirred bead 
milling and ultrasonication. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2012;55(25–26): 
7991–8002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.08.030. 
[129] Piquot J, Nithiyanantham U, Grosu Y, Faik A. Spray-graphitization as a protection 
method against corrosion by molten nitrate salts and molten salts based 
nanofluids for thermal energy storage applications. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2019;200(January):110024. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.110024. 

[130] Timofeeva EV, Moravek MR, Singh D. Improving the heat transfer efficiency of 
synthetic oil with silica nanoparticles. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2011;364(1):71–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2011.08.004. 

[131] Sharaf OZ, Taylor RA, Abu-Nada E. On the colloidal and chemical stability of 

solar nanofluids: From nanoscale interactions to recent advances. Phys. Rep. 
2020;867:1–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2020.04.005. 

[105] Li YQ, He YL, Wang ZF, Xu C, Wang W. Exergy analysis of two phase change 

[132] Dsilva Winfred Rufuss D, Suganthi L, Iniyan S, Davies PA. Effects of nanoparticle- 

materials storage system for solar thermal power with finite-time 
thermodynamics. Renew. Energy 2012;39(1):447–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2011.08.026. 

enhanced phase change material (NPCM) on solar still productivity. J. Clean. 
Prod. 2018;192:9–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.04.201. 
[133] Li JF, Lu W, Zeng YB, Luo ZP. Simultaneous enhancement of latent heat and 

[106] Michels H, Pitz-Paal R. Cascaded latent heat storage for parabolic trough solar 
power plants. Sol. Energy 2007;81(6):829–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2006.09.008. 

thermal conductivity of docosane-based phase change material in the presence of 
spongy graphene. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2014;128:48–51. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solmat.2014.05.018. 

[107] Shao J, Darkwa J, Kokogiannakis G. Review of phase change emulsions (PCMEs) 
and their applications in HVAC systems. Energy Build 2015;94:200–17. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.03.003. 

[134] Zeng JL, et al. Effects of copper nanowires on the properties of an organic phase 
change material. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2012;105:174–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solmat.2012.06.013. 

[108] T. Coradin, Nanomaterials: a Danger or a Promise? A Chemical and Biological 

[135] Suresh Kumar KR, Parameshwaran R, Kalaiselvam S. Preparation and 

Perspective. 2012. 

[109] Huang L, Petermann M, Doetsch C. Evaluation of paraffin/water emulsion as a 
phase change slurry for cooling applications. Energy 2009;34(9):1145–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2009.03.016. 

[110] “Doug H. Everett basic principles of colloid science RSC paperbacks.pdf.” . 
[111] Applied Surfactants. T. T. F. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; 

2005. p. 2005. Print. 

characterization of hybrid nanocomposite embedded organic methyl ester as 
phase change material. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2017;171(January):148–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2017.06.031. 

[136] George M, Pandey AK, Abd Rahim N, Tyagi VV, Shahabuddin S, Saidur R. A novel 
polyaniline (PANI)/paraffin wax nano composite phase change material: Superior 
transition heat storage capacity, thermal conductivity and thermal reliability. Sol. 
Energy 2020;204(April):448–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.04.087. 

[112] Pathak M. Nanoemulsions and Their Stability for Enhancing Functional Properties 

[137] S¸ ahan N, Fois M, Paksoy H. Improving thermal conductivity phase change 

of Food Ingredients. Elsevier Inc.; 2017. 

[113] Jaiswal M, Dudhe R, Sharma PK. Nanoemulsion: an advanced mode of drug 

delivery system. 3 Biotech 2015;5(2):123–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205- 
014-0214-0. 

[114] Kumar A, Li S, Cheng CM, Lee D. Recent developments in phase inversion 

emulsification. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2015;54(34):8375–96. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.iecr.5b01122. 

[115] Yamashita Y, Miyahara R, Sakamoto K. Emulsion and emulsification technology. 

Elsevier Inc.; 2017. 

[116] Xiong T, Zheng L, Shah KW. Nano-enhanced phase change materials (NePCMs): a 
review of numerical simulations. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2020;178(February):115492. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.115492. 

[117] Zeng JL, et al. Effects of MWNTs on phase change enthalpy and thermal 

conductivity of a solid-liquid organic PCM. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2009;95(2): 
507–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973-008-9275-9. 

[118] Reji Kumar R, Samykano M, Pandey AK, Kadirgama K, Tyagi VV. Phase change 
materials and nano-enhanced phase change materials for thermal energy storage 
in photovoltaic thermal systems: a futuristic approach and its technical 
challenges. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020;133(April):110341. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110341. 

materials - A study of paraffin nanomagnetite composites. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. 
Cells 2015;137:61–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2015.01.027. 
[138] Chandrasekaran P, Cheralathan M, Kumaresan V, Velraj R. Enhanced heat 

transfer characteristics of water based copper oxide nanofluid PCM (phase change 
material) in a spherical capsule during solidification for energy efficient cool 
thermal storage system. Energy 2014;72:636–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2014.05.089. 

[139] V. K P Suresh S, Praveen B, Venugopal A, Nair SC. Pentaerythritol with alumina 
nano additives for thermal energy storage applications. J. Energy Storage 2017; 
13:359–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2017.08.002. 

[140] Parameshwaran R, Jayavel R, Kalaiselvam S. Study on thermal properties of 

organic ester phase-change material embedded with silver nanoparticles. 
J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2013;114(2):845–58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973- 
013-3064-9. 

[141] Elgafy A, Lafdi K. Effect of carbon nanofiber additives on thermal behavior of 
phase change materials. Carbon N. Y. 2005;43(15):3067–74. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.carbon.2005.06.042. 

[142] Fang G, Tang F, Cao L. Preparation, thermal properties and applications of shape- 
stabilized thermal energy storage materials. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014; 
40:237–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.179. 

[119] Jegadheeswaran S, Sundaramahalingam A, Pohekar SD. High-conductivity 

[143] Feng D, et al. Review on nanoporous composite phase change materials: 

nanomaterials for enhancing thermal performance of latent heat thermal energy 
storage systems. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2019;138(2):1137–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10973-019-08297-3. 

Fabrication, characterization, enhancement and molecular simulation. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2019;109(April):578–605. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2019.04.041. 

[120] Capek I. Nanocomposite Structures and Dispersions Science and Nanotechnology 

- Fundamental Principles and Colloidal Particles 2006;23(S1). 

[121] Kim P, Shi L, Majumdar A, McEuen PL. Thermal transport measurements of 

individual multiwalled nanotubes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001;87(21). https://doi.org/ 
10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.215502. 215502-1-215502–4. 

[122] Cui Y, Liu C, Hu S, Yu X. The experimental exploration of carbon nanofiber and 
carbon nanotube additives on thermal behavior of phase change materials. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2011;95(4):1208–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2011.01.021. 

[144] Zhang S, et al. A review of phase change heat transfer in shape-stabilized phase 
change materials (ss-PCMs) based on porous supports for thermal energy storage. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2021;135(January 2020):110127. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2020.110127. 

[145] Huang X, et al. Shape-stabilized phase change materials based on porous supports 

for thermal energy storage applications. Chem. Eng. J. 2019;356(June 2018): 
641–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.09.013. 

[146] Li WQ, Qu ZG, Zhang BL, Zhao K, Tao WQ. Thermal behavior of porous stainless- 

steel fiber felt saturated with phase change material. Energy 2013;55:846–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2013.02.064. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103778S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[147] Xiao X, Zhang P, Li M. Effective thermal conductivity of open-cell metal foams 

impregnated with pure paraffin for latent heat storage. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 2014;81 
(1):94–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2014.03.006. 

[148] Fleming E, Wen S, Shi L, Da Silva AK. Experimental and theoretical analysis of an 
aluminum foam enhanced phase change thermal storage unit. Int. J. Heat Mass 
Transf. 2015;82:273–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2014.11.022. 

[149] Diani A, Campanale M. Transient melting of paraffin waxes embedded in 

aluminum foams: Experimental results and modeling. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 2019;144 
(June):119–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2019.06.004. 

[150] Yang X, Feng S, Zhang Q, Chai Y, Jin L, Lu TJ. The role of porous metal foam on 
the unidirectional solidification of saturating fluid for cold storage. Appl. Energy 
2017;194:508–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.09.050. 

[151] Xiao X, Zhang P, Li M. Preparation and thermal characterization of paraffin/metal 
foam composite phase change material. Appl. Energy 2013;112:1357–66. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.04.050. 

[152] Arshad A, Jabbal M, Yan Y, Darkwa J. The micro-/nano-PCMs for thermal energy 
storage systems: a state of art review. Int. J. Energy Res. 2019;43(11):5572–620. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/er.4550. 

[153] S. K. Ghosh, Functional Coatings: By Polymer Microencapsulation. 2006. 
[154] C´ardenas-Ramírez C, Jaramillo F, G´omez M. Systematic review of encapsulation 
and shape-stabilization of phase change materials. J. Energy Storage 2020;30(52): 
101495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2020.101495. 

[155] Lee J, Jo B. Surfactant-free microencapsulation of sodium nitrate for high 

temperature thermal energy storage. Mater. Lett. 2020;268:127576. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matlet.2020.127576. 

[156] Jamekhorshid A, Sadrameli SM, Farid M. A review of microencapsulation 

methods of phase change materials (PCMs) as a thermal energy storage (TES) 
medium. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014;31:531–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.rser.2013.12.033. 

[157] Jurkowska M, Szczygieł I. Review on properties of microencapsulated phase 

change materials slurries (mPCMS. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2016;98:365–73. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.12.051. 

[158] Hawlader MNA, Uddin MS, Khin MM. Microencapsulated PCM thermal-energy 
storage system. Appl. Energy 2003;74(1–2):195–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0306-2619(02)00146-0. 

[159] Wei J, Li Z, Liu L, Liu X. Preparation and characterization of novel polyamide 
paraffin MEPCM by interfacial polymerization technique. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2013;127(6):4588–93. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.37681. 

[160] Jin Z, Wang Y, Liu J, Yang Z. Synthesis and properties of paraffin capsules as 

phase change materials. Polymer (Guildf) 2008;49(12):2903–10. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.polymer.2008.04.030. 

[161] Zhang H, Wang X, Wu D. Silica encapsulation of n-octadecane via sol-gel process: 
a novel microencapsulated phase-change material with enhanced thermal 
conductivity and performance. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2010;343(1):246–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2009.11.036. 

[162] Fang G, Chen Z, Li H. Synthesis and properties of microencapsulated paraffin 

composites with SiO2 shell as thermal energy storage materials. Chem. Eng. J. 
2010;163(1–2):154–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2010.07.054. 

[163] Zhang H, Wang X. Synthesis and properties of microencapsulated n-octadecane 
with polyurea shells containing different soft segments for heat energy storage 
and thermal regulation. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2009;93(8):1366–76. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2009.02.021. 

[164] Luo J, Zou D, Wang Y, Wang S, Huang L. Battery thermal management systems 
(BTMs) based on phase change material (PCM): a comprehensive review. Chem. 
Eng. J. 2022;430(P1):132741. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.132741. 
[165] Kumar S, Das MK, Rath P. Application of TCE-PCM based heat sinks for cooling of 

electronic components : a review, 59. Elsevier; 2016. 

[166] Pakrouh R, Hosseini MJ, Ranjbar AA. A parametric investigation of a PCM-based 
pin fin heat sink. Mech. Sci. 2015;6(1):65–73. https://doi.org/10.5194/ms-6-65- 
2015. 

[167] Nayak KC, Saha SK, Srinivasan K, Dutta P. A numerical model for heat sinks with 

phase change materials and thermal conductivity enhancers. Int. J. Heat Mass 
Transf. 2006;49(11):1833–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2005.10.039. 

[168] Tang Z, Qi C, Tian Z, Chen L. Thermal management of electronic components 
based on new wave bio-inspired structures and nanofluids. Int. Commun. Heat 
Mass Transf. 2022;131:105840. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
icheatmasstransfer.2021.105840. 

[169] Weinstein RD, Kopec TC, Fleischer AS, D’Addio E, Bessel CA. The Experimental 
Exploration of Embedding Phase Change Materials With Graphite Nanofibers for 
the Thermal Management of Electronics. J. Heat Transfer Mar. 2008;130(4). 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2818764. 

[170] Fan L-W, et al. Transient performance of a PCM-based heat sink with high aspect- 

ratio carbon nanofillers. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2015;75:532–40. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2014.10.050. 

[171] Kumar PManoj, et al. Experimental analysis of a heat sink for electronic chipset 

cooling using a nano improved PCM (NIPCM),”. Mater. Today Proc 2022;56: 
1527–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.01.178. 

[172] R. J. Warzoha and R. D. Weinstein, “Quantification of the Impact of Embedded 
Graphite Nanofibers on the Transient Thermal Response of Paraffin Phase Change 
Material Exposed to High Heat Fluxes,” vol. 134, no. JULY, pp. 1–10, 2012, doi: 
10.1115/1.4006008. 

[173] Nazari M, Karami M, Ashouri M. Comparing the thermal performance of water, 

Ethylene Glycol, Alumina and CNT nanofluids in CPU cooling: Experimental 

study. Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 2014;57(September):371–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2014.06.003. 

[174] Cao Y, et al. Designing a system for battery thermal management: Cooling LIBs by 

nano-encapsulated phase change material,” Case Stud. Therm. Eng. 2022;33: 
101943. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2022.101943. 

[175] Choi J, Jeon J, Kim Y. Performance characteristics of a MPCM slurry cooled unit 
designed for telecommunication equipment. J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 2008;22(3): 
575–82. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12206-007-1212-5. 

[176] Sharma CS, et al. Energy efficient hotspot-targeted embedded liquid cooling of 
electronics. Appl. Energy 2015;138:414–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2014.10.068. 

[177] Ye J, Mo S, Jia L, Chen Y. Experimental performance of a LED thermal 

management system with suspended microencapsulated phase change material. 
Appl. Therm. Eng. 2022;207:118155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2022.118155. 

[178] Yousef MS, Sharaf M, Huzayyin ASS. Energy, exergy, economic, and 

enviroeconomic assessment of a photovoltaic module incorporated with a 
paraffin-metal foam composite: an experimental study. Energy 2022;238:121807. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.121807. 

[179] Aramesh M, Shabani B. Metal foams application to enhance the thermal 

performance of phase change materials: a review of experimental studies to 
understand the mechanisms. J. Energy Storage 2022;50:104650. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.est.2022.104650. 

[180] NematpourKeshteli A, Iasiello M, Langella G, Bianco N. Enhancing PCMs thermal 
conductivity: a comparison among porous metal foams, nanoparticles and finned 
surfaces in triplex tube heat exchangers. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2022;212:118623. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2022.118623. 

[181] Al-Jethelah M, Ebadi S, Venkateshwar K, Tasnim SH, Mahmud S, Dutta A. 

Charging nanoparticle enhanced bio-based PCM in open cell metallic foams: an 
experimental investigation. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2019;148:1029–42. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.11.121. 

[182] Hu X, Zhu F, Gong X. Experimental and numerical study on the thermal behavior 
of phase change material infiltrated in low porosity metal foam. J. Energy Storage 
2019;26(October):101005. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2019.101005. 
[183] Li WQ, Qu ZG, He YL, Tao YB. Experimental study of a passive thermal 

management system for high-powered lithium ion batteries using porous metal 
foam saturated with phase change materials. J. Power Sources 2014;255:9–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.01.006. 

[184] K. Lafdi, O. Mesalhy, and S. Shaikh, “Experimental study on the influence of foam 
porosity and pore size on the melting of phase change materials,” vol. 083549, 
2007, doi: 10.1063/1.2802183. 

[185] Liu Y, Duan J, He X, Wang Y. Experimental investigation on the heat transfer 

enhancement in a novel latent heat thermal storage equipment. Appl. Therm. Eng. 
2018;142:361–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.07.009. 

[186] Li WQ, et al. Microencapsulated phase change material (MEPCM) saturated in 

metal foam as an efficient hybrid PCM for passive thermal management: a 
numerical and experimental study. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2019;146:413–21. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.10.006. 
[187] A. Clerici, “World Energy Resources 2013 Survey,” 2013. 
[188] Tian Y, Zhao CY. A review of solar collectors and thermal energy storage in solar 
thermal applications. Appl. Energy 2013;104:538–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2012.11.051. 

[189] Pal RK, Kumar KR. Investigations of Thermo-Hydrodynamics, Structural Stability, 

and Thermal Energy Storage for Direct Steam Generation in Parabolic Trough 
Solar Collector: a Comprehensive Review. J. Clean. Prod. 2021;311(May): 
127550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127550. 

[190] Bhalla V, Tyagi H. Parameters influencing the performance of nanoparticles-laden 
fluid-based solar thermal collectors: a review on optical properties. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018;84(March):12–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2017.12.007. 

[191] Serale G, Goia F, Perino M. Numerical model and simulation of a solar thermal 
collector with slurry Phase Change Material (PCM) as the heat transfer fluid. Sol. 
Energy 2016;134:429–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.04.030. 
[192] Deceased JAD, Beckman WA. Solar engineering of thermal processes 1982;3(3). 
[193] Evangelisti L, De Lieto Vollaro R, Asdrubali F. Latest advances on solar thermal 

collectors: a comprehensive review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2019;114 
(August):109318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109318. 

[194] Tyagi VV, Kaushik SC, Tyagi SK. Advancement in solar photovoltaic/thermal 
(PV/T) hybrid collector technology. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2012;16(3): 
1383–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2011.12.013. 

[195] Akbarzadeh S, Valipour MS. Heat transfer enhancement in parabolic trough 

collectors: a comprehensive review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018;92 
(February):198–218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.04.093. 

[196] Fan F, Qi C, Tang J, Liu Q, Wang X, Yan Y. A novel thermal efficiency analysis on 
the thermo-hydraulic performance of nanofluids in an improved heat exchange 
system under adjustable magnetic field. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2020;179(December 
2019):115688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.115688. 

[197] Vengadesan E, Senthil R. A review on recent developments in thermal 

performance enhancement methods of flat plate solar air collector. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020;134(August):110315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2020.110315. 

[198] Xu B, Li P, Chan C. Application of phase change materials for thermal energy 
storage in concentrated solar thermal power plants: a review to recent 
developments. Appl. Energy 2015;160:286–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2015.09.016. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103779S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[199] M. A. Al-hanaei, Sara, Sara Al-Shomali and Mechanic, “PERFORMANCE MODEL 
OF SHAMS I SOLAR POWER PLANT Sara,” no. July 2014, pp. 1–8, 2020. 
[200] Abutayeh M, Jeong K. Retrofitting solar power plants with thermal energy 

storage. Int. J. Renew. Energy Technol. 2020;11(2):165. https://doi.org/ 
10.1504/ijret.2020.108308. 

[201] He YL, et al. Perspective of concentrating solar power. Energy 2020;198:117373. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117373. 

[202] Mehos M, Jorgenson J, Denholm P, Turchi C. An Assessment of the Net Value of 
CSP Systems Integrated with Thermal Energy Storage. Energy Procedia 2015;69: 
2060–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.219. 

[203] Nisha S, Pal RK, Kumar KR. Direct steam generation in parabolic trough solar 
collector: analytical modelling for prediction of flow pattern. AIP Conf. Proc. 
2019;2091(April). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5096497. 

[204] Sand´a A, Moya SL, Valenzuela L. Modelling and simulation tools for direct steam 
generation in parabolic-trough solar collectors: a review. Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev. 2019;113(June):109226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.06.033. 
[205] Addad Y, Abutayeh M, Abu-Nada E. Effects of Nanofluids on the Performance of a 
PCM-Based Thermal Energy Storage System. J. Energy Eng. 2017;143(4): 
04017006. https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)ey.1943-7897.0000433. 

[206] Wong KV, De Leon O. Applications of nanofluids: Current and future. Adv. Mech. 
Eng. 2010;2010(January 2010). https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/519659. 
[207] Said Z, Hachicha AA, Aberoumand S, Yousef BAA, Sayed ET, Bellos E. Recent 

advances on nanofluids for low to medium temperature solar collectors: energy, 
exergy, economic analysis and environmental impact. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 
2021;84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2020.100898. 

[208] Baïri A. Natural convection between concentric and inclined hemispherical 

cavities filled with Cu-water nanofluid. J. Mol. Liq. 2018;249:1263–70. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2017.11.079. 

[209] Vijayakumaar SC, Shankar RLakshmi, Babu K. Effect of CNT-H2O nanofluid on 

the performance of solar flat plate collector-an experimental investigation. In: 
Proc. Int. Conf. "Advanced Nanomater. Emerg. Eng. Technol. ICANMEET 2013; 
2013. p. 197–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICANMEET.2013.6609275. 
[210] Anin Vincely D, Natarajan E. Experimental investigation of the solar FPC 

performance using graphene oxide nanofluid under forced circulation. Energy 
Convers. Manag. 2016;117:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2016.03.015. 

[211] Iranmanesh S, Ong HC, Ang BC, Sadeghinezhad E, Esmaeilzadeh A, Mehrali M. 

Thermal performance enhancement of an evacuated tube solar collector using 
graphene nanoplatelets nanofluid. J. Clean. Prod. 2017;162:121–9. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.05.175. 

[212] Fayaz H, Nasrin R, Rahim NA, Hasanuzzaman M. Energy and exergy analysis of 
the PVT system: Effect of nanofluid flow rate. Sol. Energy 2018;169(May): 
217–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.05.004. 

[213] Keblinski P, Prasher R, Eapen J. Thermal conductance of nanofluids: Is the 

controversy over? J. Nanoparticle Res. 2008;10(7):1089–97. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s11051-007-9352-1. 

[214] Gao JW, Zheng RT, Ohtani H, Zhu DS, Chen G. Experimental investigation of heat 
conduction mechanisms in nanofluids. Clue on clustering. Nano Lett 2009;9(12): 
4128–32. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl902358m. 

[226] Hossain MS, Pandey AK, Selvaraj J, Rahim NA, Islam MM, Tyagi VV. Two side 
serpentine flow based photovoltaic-thermal-phase change materials (PVT-PCM) 
system: Energy, exergy and economic analysis. Renew. Energy 2019;136: 
1320–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.10.097. 

[227] Javadi FS, Metselaar HSC, Ganesan P. Performance improvement of solar thermal 

systems integrated with phase change materials (PCM), a review. Sol. Energy 
2020;206(May):330–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.05.106. 
[228] Crespo A, Barreneche C, Ibarra M, Platzer W. Latent thermal energy storage for 

solar process heat applications at medium-high temperatures – A review. Sol. 
Energy 2019;192(July 2018):3–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2018.06.101. 

[229] Laing DLD, Bauer T, Steinmann W-D. Advanced high temperature latent heat 

storage system –design and test results. In: The 11th International Conference on 
Thermal Energy Storage; 2009. p. 1–8. 

[230] Galione PA, P´erez-Segarra CD, Rodríguez I, Oliva A, Rigola J. Multi-layered solid- 
PCM thermocline thermal storage concept for CSP plants. Numerical analysis and 
perspectives. Appl. Energy 2015;142:337–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2014.12.084. 

[231] Prieto C, Cabeza LF. Thermal energy storage (TES) with phase change materials 
(PCM) in solar power plants (CSP). Concept and plant performance. Appl. Energy 
2019;254(July):113646. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113646. 

[232] Agency IE. Modernising building energy codes. ASHRAE J 2013;55(August). 
[233] M. van der Hoeven, Transition to Sustainable Buildings. 2013. 
[234] Tyagi VV, et al. Phase change material based advance solar thermal energy 

storage systems for building heating and cooling applications : a prospective 
research approach. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assessments 2021;47(March): 
101318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2021.101318. 

[235] Memon SA. Phase change materials integrated in building walls: a state of the art 
review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014;31:870–906. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.rser.2013.12.042. 

[236] Wang Q, Wu R, Wu Y, Zhao CY. Parametric analysis of using PCM walls for 

heating loads reduction. Energy Build 2018;172:328–36. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.05.012. 

[237] Zhang Y, et al. Thermal Performance of New Hybrid Solar Energy-phase Change 

Storage-floor Radiant Heating System. Procedia Eng 2016;146:89–99. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2016.06.357. 

[238] Barzin R, Chen JJJ, Young BR, Farid MM. Application of PCM underfloor heating 
in combination with PCM wallboards for space heating using price based control 
system. Appl. Energy 2015;148:39–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2015.03.027. 

[239] Griffiths PW, Eames PC. Performance of chilled ceiling panels using phase change 
material slurries as the heat transport medium. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2007;27(10): 
1756–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2006.07.009. 

[240] Liu C, Wu Y, Zhu Y, Li D, Ma L. Experimental investigation of optical and thermal 
performance of a PCM-glazed unit for building applications. Energy Build 2018; 
158:794–800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.10.069. 

[241] De Falco M, Capocelli M, Giannattasio A. Performance analysis of an innovative 

PCM-based device for cold storage in the civil air conditioning. Energy Build 
2016;122:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.04.016. 

[215] Alawi OA, et al. Nanofluids for flat plate solar collectors: Fundamentals and 

[242] Kamali S. Review of free cooling system using phase change material for building. 

applications. J. Clean. Prod. 2021;291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2020.125725. 

Energy Build 2014;80:131–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.05.021. 

[243] De Gracia A, Cabeza LF. Phase change materials and thermal energy storage for 

[216] Abutayeh M, Addad Y, Abu-Nada E, Alazzam A. Doping solar field heat transfer 
fluid with nanoparticles. J. Sol. Energy Eng. Trans. ASME 2019;141(1). https:// 
doi.org/10.1115/1.4041157. 

[217] Rathod APS, Mittal P, Kumar B. Analysis of factors affecting the solar radiation 

received by any region. In: 2016 Int. Conf. Emerg. Trends Commun. Technol. 
ETCT 2016; 2017. p. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ETCT.2016.7882980. 
[218] Abutayeh M, Alazzam A. Adapting Steady-State Solar Power Models to Include 
Transients. J. Sol. Energy Eng. Trans. ASME 2017;139(2):1–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1115/1.4034928. 

[219] Kumar PManoj, et al. Investigating a single slope solar still with a nano-phase 
change material. Mater. Today Proc. 2021;45(xxxx):7922–5. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.matpr.2020.12.804. 

[220] Kabeel AE, Sathyamurthy R, Manokar AM, Sharshir SW, Essa FA, Elshiekh AH. 

Experimental study on tubular solar still using Graphene Oxide Nano particles in 
Phase Change Material (NPCM’s) for fresh water production. J. Energy Storage 
2020;28(December 2019):101204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2020.101204. 

[221] Skoplaki E, Palyvos JA. On the temperature dependence of photovoltaic module 

electrical performance: a review of efficiency/power correlations. Sol. Energy 
2009;83(5):614–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2008.10.008. 
[222] Zhang X, Zhao X, Smith S, Xu J, Yu X. Review of R&D progress and practical 

application of the solar photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) technologies. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2012;16(1):599–617. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2011.08.026. 

[223] Ho CJ, Chou WL, Lai CM. Thermal and electrical performance of a water-surface 

floating PV integrated with a water-saturated MEPCM layer. Energy Convers. 
Manag. 2015;89:862–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2014.10.039. 

[224] Maatallah T, Zachariah R, Al-Amri FG. Exergo-economic analysis of a serpentine 
flow type water based photovoltaic thermal system with phase change material 
(PVT-PCM/water. Sol. Energy 2019;193(September):195–204. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solener.2019.09.063. 

[225] Qiu Z, Ma X, Zhao X, Li P, Ali S. Experimental investigation of the energy 

performance of a novel Micro-encapsulated Phase Change Material (MPCM) 
slurry based PV/T system. Appl. Energy 2016;165:260–71. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.11.053. 

buildings. Energy Build 2015;103:414–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2015.06.007. 

[244] De Gracia A, Navarro L, Castell A, Ruiz-Pardo 

´
Alvarez S, Cabeza LF. Thermal 
analysis of a ventilated facade with PCM for cooling applications. Energy Build 
2013;65:508–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.06.032. 

´
A, 

[245] Kheradmand M, Azenha M, de Aguiar JLB, Castro-Gomes J. Experimental and 
numerical studies of hybrid PCM embedded in plastering mortar for enhanced 
thermal behaviour of buildings. Energy 2016;94:250–61. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.energy.2015.10.131. 

[246] Huang HJ, Chen XD, Yuan WK. Microencapsulation based on emulsification for 
producing pharmaceutical products: a literature review. Dev. Chem. Eng. Miner. 
Process. 2006;14(3–4):515–44. https://doi.org/10.1002/apj.5500140318. 
[247] Y Yeo PK, Baek N. Microencapsulation Methods for Delivery of Protein Drugs. 

Biochem. Bioprocess Eng. 2001;6:213–30. 

[248] Wurster DE. Air-suspension technique of coating drug particles. A preliminary 

report. J. Am. Pharm. Assoc. 1959;48(8):451–4. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
jps.3030480808 [Online]. Available:. 

[249] Werner SRL, Jones JR, Paterson AHJ, Archer RH, Pearce DL. Air-suspension 

particle coating in the food industry: Part I - state of the art. Powder Technol 
2007;171(1):25–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2006.08.014. 

[250] Billon A, Bataille B, Cassanas G, Jacob M. Development of spray-dried 

acetaminophen microparticles using experimental designs. Int. J. Pharm. 2000; 
203(1–2):159–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-5173(00)00448-8. 

[251] R´e MI. Microencapulsation of spray drying. Dry. Technol. 1998;16(6):1195–236. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/07373939808917460. 

[252] Li M, Rouaud O, Poncelet D. Microencapsulation by solvent evaporation: State of 
the art for process engineering approaches. Int. J. Pharm. 2008;363(1–2):26–39. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2008.07.018. 

[253] International Energy Agency. Renewables in Global Energy Supply. Renew. 
Energy 2007;(January):30 [Online]. Available: http://www.iea.org/papers 
/2006/renewable_factsheet.pdf. 

[254] Alva G, Lin Y, Liu L, Fang G. Synthesis, characterization and applications of 

microencapsulated phase change materials in thermal energy storage: a review. 
Energy Build 2017;144:276–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.03.063. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103780S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[255] Lu S, et al. Preparation and characterization of cross-linked polyurethane shell 

microencapsulated phase change materials by interfacial polymerization. Mater. 
Lett. 2018;211:36–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2017.09.074. 
[256] and Siddhan AKAP, Jassal M. Core content and stability of n-octadecane 

containing polyurea microencapsules produced by interfacial polymerization. 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2007;106(5):786–92. https://doi.org/10.1002/app. 
[257] Kim J, Cho G. Thermal Storage/Release, Durability, and Temperature Sensing 
Properties of Thermostatic Fabrics Treated with Octadecane-Containing 
Microcapsules. Text. Res. J. 2002;72(12):1093–8. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
004051750207201209. 

[258] Cho JS, Kwon A, Cho CG. Microencapsulation of octadecane as a phase-change 
material by interfacial polymerization in an emulsion system. Colloid Polym. Sci. 
2002;280(3):260–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00396-001-0603-x. 

[259] Su JF, Wang LX, Ren L, Huang Z, Meng XW. Preparation and characterization of 
polyurethane microcapsules containing n-octadecane with styrene-maleic 
anhydride as a surfactant by interfacial polycondensation. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2006;102(5):4996–5006. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.25001. 

[260] Lan X-Z ZT, Tan Z-C, Zou G-L, Sun L-X. Microencapsulation of n-eicosane as 

energy storage material. Chin J Chem 2004;22(20373072):411–4. 
[261] Lone S, Lee HM, Kim GM, Koh WG, Cheong IW. Facile and highly efficient 
microencapsulation of a phase change material using tubular microfluidics. 
Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 2013;422:61–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.colsurfa.2013.01.035. 

[262] Shi J, Wu X, Sun R, Ban B, Li J, Chen J. Nano-encapsulated phase change 

materials prepared by one-step interfacial polymerization for thermal energy 
storage. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2019;231(April):244–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matchemphys.2019.04.032. 

[263] Nikpourian H, Bahramian AR, Abdollahi M. On the thermal performance of a 

novel PCM nanocapsule: The effect of core/shell. Renew. Energy 2020;151(xxxx): 
322–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.11.027. 

[264] Borreguero AM, Valverde JL, Rodríguez JF, Barber AH, Cubillo JJ, Carmona M. 

Synthesis and characterization of microcapsules containing Rubitherm®RT27 
obtained by spray drying. Chem. Eng. J. 2011;166(1):384–90. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cej.2010.10.055. 

[265] Zuo DZCJD, Zhan J, Luo CY, Dong BQ, Xing FX. Characteristics and release 

property of polylactic acid/sodium monofluorophosphate microcapsules prepared 
by spray drying. Adv. Powder. Technol 2017;28(8):2805–11. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/PR8080889. 

[266] Baek KH, Lee JY, Kim JH. Core/shell structured PCM nanocapsules obtained by 

resin fortified emulsion process. J. Dispers. Sci. Technol. 2007;28(7):1059–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01932690701524281. 

[267] Fang Y, Yu H, Wan W, Gao X, Zhang Z. Preparation and thermal performance of 

polystyrene/n-tetradecane composite nanoencapsulated cold energy storage 
phase change materials. Energy Convers. Manag. 2013;76:430–6. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.enconman.2013.07.060. 

[268] Fang Y, Kuang S, Gao X, Zhang Z. Preparation and characterization of novel 

nanoencapsulated phase change materials. Energy Convers. Manag. 2008;49(12): 
3704–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2008.06.027. 

[269] Fuensanta M, Paiphansiri U, Romero-S´anchez MD, Guillem C, L´opez-Buendía 
Landfester K. Thermal properties of a novel nanoencapsulated phase change 
material for thermal energy storage. Thermochim. Acta 2013;565:95–101. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tca.2013.04.028. 

´
AM, 

fiber additive for thermal energy storage. Fibers Polym 2010;11(8):1089–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-010-1089-2. 

[282]

[281] Deveci SS, Basal G. Preparation of PCM microcapsules by complex coacervation of 
silk fibroin and chitosan. Colloid Polym. Sci. 2009;287(12):1455–67. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00396-009-2115-z. 
¨
¨
Ozonur Y, Mazman M, Paksoy H
O, Evliya H. Microencapsulation of coco fatty 
acid mixture for thermal energy storage with phase change material. Int. J. 
Energy Res. 2006;30(10):741–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.1177. 

[283] Bay´es-García L, Ventol`a L, Cordobilla R, Benages R, Calvet T, Cuevas-Diarte MA. 
Phase Change Materials (PCM) microcapsules with different shell compositions: 
Preparation, characterization and thermal stability. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2010;94(7):1235–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2010.03.014. 

[284] Li W, Zhang XX, Wang XC, Niu JJ. Preparation and characterization of 

microencapsulated phase change material with low remnant formaldehyde 
content. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2007;106(2–3):437–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matchemphys.2007.06.030. 

[285] G. D. Ram MK, Jotshi ChK, Stefanakos EK, “Method of encapsulating a phase 

change material with a metal oxide,” 2014. 

[286] Wang LY, Tsai PS, Yang YM. Preparation of silica microspheres encapsulating 
phase-change material by sol-gel method in O/W emulsion. J. Microencapsul. 
2006;23(1):3–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/02652040500286045. 
[287] Chen Z, Cao L, Shan F, Fang G. Preparation and characteristics of 

microencapsulated stearic acid as composite thermal energy storage material in 
buildings. Energy Build 2013;62:469–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2013.03.025. 

[288] Li M, Wu Z, Tan J. Properties of form-stable paraffin/silicon dioxide/expanded 

graphite phase change composites prepared by sol-gel method. Appl. Energy 
2012;92:456–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.11.018. 
[289] Cao L, Tang F, Fang G. Synthesis and characterization of microencapsulated 

paraffin with titanium dioxide shell as shape-stabilized thermal energy storage 
materials in buildings. Energy Build 2014;72:31–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2013.12.028. 

[290] Chai L, Wang X, Wu D. Development of bifunctional microencapsulated phase 
change materials with crystalline titanium dioxide shell for latent-heat storage 
and photocatalytic effectiveness. Appl. Energy 2015;138:661–74. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.11.006. 

[291] S. Tahan Latibari, M. M. Mehrali, M. M. Mehrali, T. M. Indra Mahlia, and H. S. 
Cornelis Metselaar, “Synthesis, characterization and thermal properties of 
nanoencapsulated phase change materials via sol-gel method,” Energy, vol. 61, pp. 
664–672, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2013.09.012. 

[292] Latibari STahan, et al. Facile synthesis and thermal performances of stearic acid/ 
titania core/shell nanocapsules by sol-gel method. Energy 2015;85:635–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.04.008. 

[293] Yuan H, Bai H, Wang Y. Preparation and characterization of stearic acid/SiO2 
nano-encapsulated phase change materials via Sol-gel Method,” Energy Technol. 
2016 Carbon Dioxide Manag. Other Technol. 2016:99–106. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-319-48182-1_12. 

[294] Lee J, Jo B. Nanoencapsulation of binary nitrate molten salts for thermal energy 

storage: Synthesis, thermal performance, and thermal reliability. Sol. Energy 
Mater. Sol. Cells 2021;230(July):111284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2021.111284. 

[295] C. Shaw and D. Ph, Essential Chemistry for Formulators of Semisolid and Liquid 

[270] Wang Y, Zhang Y, Xia T, Zhao W, Yang W. Effects of fabricated technology on 

Dosages. 2016. 

particle size distribution and thermal properties of stearic-eicosanoic acid/ 
polymethylmethacrylate nanocapsules. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2014;120 
(PART B):481–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2013.09.028. 

[271] Graham M, Shchukina E, De Castro PF, Shchukin D. Nanocapsules containing salt 

hydrate phase change materials for thermal energy storage. J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016;4(43):16906–12. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ta06189c. 

[272] Alkan C, Sari A, Karaipekli A, Uzun O. Preparation, characterization, and thermal 
properties of microencapsulated phase change material for thermal energy 
storage. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2009;93(1):143–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solmat.2008.09.009. 

[273] Hu X, Huang Z, Zhang Y. Preparation of CMC-modified melamine resin spherical 

nano-phase change energy storage materials. Carbohydr. Polym. 2014;101(1): 
83–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.08.091. 

[274] Hu X, Huang Z, Yu X, Li B. Preparation and Thermal Energy Storage of 

Carboxymethyl Cellulose-Modified Nanocapsules. Bioenergy Res 2013;6(4): 
1135–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12155-013-9299-2. 

[275] Niu X, Xu Q, Zhang Y, Zhang Y, Yan Y, Liu T. Fabrication and properties of micro- 
nanoencapsulated phase change materials for internally-cooled liquid desiccant 
dehumidification. Nanomaterials 2017;7(5). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
nano7050096. 

[276] Karthikeyan M, Ramachandran T, Sundaram OLS. Nanoencapsulated phase 

change materials based on polyethylene glycol for creating thermoregulating 
cotton. J. Ind. Text. 2014;44(1):130–46. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1528083713480378. 

[296] Zhu S, Zou D, Bao J, Ma Q, Wang Y, Hu Y. Synthesis and characterization of a 

novel high durability alloy microcapsule for thermal energy storage. Sol. Energy 
Mater. Sol. Cells 2021;230(July):111262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2021.111262. 

[297] Lan W, Shang B, Wu R, Yu X, Hu R, Luo X. Thermally-enhanced nanoencapsulated 

phase change materials for latent functionally thermal fluid. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 
2021;159(September 2020):106619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijthermalsci.2020.106619. 

[298] SN M. Visualization of polymers at surfaces and interfaces with atomic force 

microscopy. Handbook of Surfaces and Interfaces of Materials, 2. Academic Press; 
2001. 

[299] Huang YT, et al. Carbon nanotube-enhanced double-walled phase-change 
microcapsules for thermal energy storage. J. Mater. Chem. A 2017;5(16): 
7482–93. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ta09712j. 

[300] Kaliva M, Vamvakaki M. Materials Characterization. Elsevier Inc.; 2010. vol. 

1242. 

[301] Lin Y, Zhu C, Alva G, Fang G. Microencapsulation and thermal properties of 

myristic acid with ethyl cellulose shell for thermal energy storage. Appl. Energy 
2018;231(September):494–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2018.09.154. 

[302] Wang H, Ma W, Zhang J, Yang Z, Zong D. Novel synthesis of silica coated palmitic 
acid nanocapsules for thermal energy storage. J. Energy Storage 2020;30(March): 
101402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2020.101402. 

[303] Yesilkir-Baydar S, Oztel ON, Cakir-Koc R, Candayan A. Evaluation techniques. 

[277] HG Yuan RW, Kalfas G. Suspension polymerization. J Macromol Sci C 1991;31 

Elsevier Ltd; 2017. 

(2–3):215–99. 

[278] Scale-up in suspension polymerization. J Appl Polym Sci 1976;20:2299–303. 
[279] Arshady R. Suspension, emulsion, and dispersion polymerization: a 

methodological survey. Colloid Polym. Sci. 1992;270(8):717–32. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/BF00776142. 

[280] Alay S, G¨ode F, Alkan C. Preparation and characterization of poly 

(methylmethacrylate-coglycidyl methacrylate)/n-hexadecane nanocapsules as a 

[304] Mahoney J, Monroe C, Swartley AM, Ucak-Astarlioglu MG, Zoto CA. Surface 

analysis using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Spectrosc. Lett. 2020;53(10): 
726–36. https://doi.org/10.1080/00387010.2020.1824197. 

[305] J. Bergstr¨om, Mechanics of Solid Polymers: Theory and Computational Modeling. 

2015. 

[306] Li Y, Yu S, Chen P, Rojas R, Hajian A, Berglund L. Cellulose nanofibers enable 
paraffin encapsulation and the formation of stable thermal regulation 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103781S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

nanocomposites. Nano Energy 2017;34(December 2016):541–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.03.010. 

[307] He F, Wang X, Wu D. New approach for sol-gel synthesis of microencapsulated n- 
octadecane phase change material with silica wall using sodium silicate 
precursor. Energy 2014;67:223–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2013.11.088. 

[308] S. Wen, J. Liu, and J. Deng, Fluid inclusion effect in flotation of sulfide minerals. 

2019. 

[309] Zhang K, Wang J, Xu L, Xie H, Guo Z. Preparation and thermal characterization of 
n-octadecane/pentafluorostyrene nanocapsules for phase-change energy storage. 
J. Energy Storage December 2020;35:2021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2021.102327. 

[310] A. Synetos DT. Invasive Imaging Techniques Coronary Artery Disease: From 

Biology to Clinical Practice 2017;9(2):359. 

[311] Yuan K, Wang H, Liu J, Fang X, Zhang Z. Novel slurry containing graphene oxide- 
grafted microencapsulated phase change material with enhanced thermo-physical 
properties and photo-thermal performance. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2015; 
143:29–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2015.06.034. 

stability. Energy Convers. Manag. 2021;245(June):114637. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2021.114637. 

[332] Qiu Z, et al. Physical instability suppression of microencapsulated phase change 
material(Mpcm) suspensions. J. Therm. Sci. Technol. 2018;13(2):1–13. https:// 
doi.org/10.1299/jtst.2018jtst0033. 

[333] Wang L, et al. Stability and thermophysical properties of binary propanol-water 

mixtures-based microencapsulated phase change material suspensions. J. Heat 
Transfer 2015;137(9):1–5. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4030235. 

[334] Wang Z, Qu J, Zhang R, Han X, Wu J. Photo-thermal performance evaluation on 

MWCNTs-dispersed microencapsulated PCM slurries for direct absorption solar 
collectors. J. Energy Storage 2019;26(March):100793. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2019.100793. 

[335] Fu Z, et al. Experimental investigation on the enhanced performance of a solar 
PVT system using micro-encapsulated PCMs. Energy 2021;228:120509. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.120509. 

[336] Drissi S, Eddhahak A, Car´e S, Neji J. Thermal analysis by DSC of Phase Change 
Materials, study of the damage effect. J. Build. Eng. 2015;1:13–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jobe.2015.01.001. 

[312] Huang H, Shi T, He R, Wang J, Chu PK, Yu XF. Phase-Changing Microcapsules 

[337] Zhang L, et al. Graphene oxide-modified microencapsulated phase change 

Incorporated with Black Phosphorus for Efficient Solar Energy Storage. Adv. Sci. 
2020;7(23):1–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202000602. 

[313] Koshy O, Subramanian L, Thomas S. Differential Scanning Calorimetry in 

materials with high encapsulation capacity and enhanced leakage-prevention 
performance. Appl. Energy 2017;197:354–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2017.04.041. 

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. Elsevier Inc.; 2017. vol. 3. 

[338] Shi X, Yazdani MR, Ajdary R, Rojas OJ. Leakage-proof microencapsulation of 

[314] Methaapanon R, Kornbongkotmas S, Ataboonwongse C, Soottitantawat A. 

Microencapsulation of n-octadecane and methyl palmitate phase change 
materials in silica by spray drying process. Powder Technol 2020;361:910–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2019.10.114. 

[315] Ma Y, Chu X, Tang G, Yao Y. The effect of different soft segments on the formation 

and properties of binary core microencapsulated phase change materials with 
polyurea/polyurethane double shell. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2013;392(1): 
407–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2012.10.052. 

[316] Su J, Ren L, Wang L. Preparation and mechanical properties of thermal energy 
storage microcapsules. Colloid Polym. Sci. 2005;284(2):224–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00396-005-1368-4. 

phase change materials by emulsification with acetylated cellulose nanofibrils. 
Carbohydr. Polym. 2021;254(August 2020):117279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbpol.2020.117279. 

[339] Chen F, Wolcott M. Polyethylene/paraffin binary composites for phase change 

material energy storage in building: a morphology, thermal properties, and 
paraffin leakage study. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2015;137:79–85. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.solmat.2015.01.010. 

[340] Karaipekli A, Erdo˘gan T, Barlak S. The stability and thermophysical properties of 
a thermal fluid containing surface-functionalized nanoencapsulated PCM. 
Thermochim. Acta 2019;682(May):1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tca.2019.178406. 

[317] Su JF, Wang SB, Zhang YY, Huang Z. Physicochemical properties and mechanical 

[341] Fu W, et al. Thermophysical properties of n-tetradecane@polystyrene-silica 

characters of methanol-modified melamine-formaldehyde (MMF) shell 
microPCMs containing paraffin. Colloid Polym. Sci. 2011;289(2):111–9. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00396-010-2328-1. 

[318] Giro-Paloma J, Konuklu Y, Fern´andez AI. Preparation and exhaustive 

characterization of paraffin or palmitic acid microcapsules as novel phase change 
material. Sol. Energy 2015;112:300–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2014.12.008. 

[319] Giro-Paloma J, Alkan C, Chimenos JM, Fern´andez AI. Comparison of 

Microencapsulated Phase Change Materials prepared at laboratory containing the 
same core and different shell material. Appl. Sci. 2017;7(7). https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/app7070723. 

composite nanoencapsulated phase change material slurry for cold energy 
storage. Energy Build 2017;136:26–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2016.12.001. 

[342] Joseph M, Sajith V. An investigation on heat transfer performance of polystyrene 
encapsulated n-octadecane based nanofluid in square channel. Appl. Therm. Eng. 
2019;147(August 2018):756–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2018.10.120. 

[343] Liu C, Ma Z, Wang J, Li Y, Rao Z. Experimental research on flow and heat transfer 

characteristics of latent functional thermal fluid with microencapsulated phase 
change materials. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2017;115:737–42. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.07.107. 

[320] Hu J, Chen HQ, Zhang Z. Mechanical properties of melamine formaldehyde 

[344] Cingarapu S MM, Singh D, Timofeeva EV. Nanofluids with encapsulated tin 

microcapsules for self-healing materials. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2009;118(1):63–70. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2009.07.004. 

[321] Yin D, Ma L, Liu J, Zhang Q. Pickering emulsion: a novel template for 

microencapsulated phase change materials with polymer-silica hybrid shell. 
Energy 2014;64:575–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2013.10.004. 
[322] Qiu X, Lu L, Wang J, Tang G, Song G. Fabrication, thermal properties and thermal 
stabilities of microencapsulated n-alkane with poly(lauryl methacrylate) as shell. 
Thermochim. Acta 2015;620:10–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tca.2015.10.001. 

[323] Song XQ, Li YX, Wang JW. Preparation and characterization of Hexadecane 

microcapsule phase change materials by in-situ polymerization. Adv. Mater. Res. 
2013;815:367–70. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.815.367. 

[324] Su JF, Wang LX, Ren L. Synthesis of polyurethane microPCMs containing n- 

octadecane by interfacial polycondensation: Influence of styrene-maleic 
anhydride as a surfactant. Colloids Surfaces A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 2007;299 
(1–3):268–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2006.11.051. 

[325] Konuklu Y, Unal M, Paksoy HO. Microencapsulation of caprylic acid with 

different wall materials as phase change material for thermal energy storage. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2014;120:536–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2013.09.035. PART B. 

[326] Zhang XX, Fan YF, Tao XM, Yick KL. Fabrication and properties of microcapsules 

and nanocapsules containing n-octadecane. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2004;88(2–3): 
300–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2004.06.043. 

[327] Fang G, Li H, Yang F, Liu X, Wu S. Preparation and characterization of nano- 

encapsulated n-tetradecane as phase change material for thermal energy storage. 
Chem. Eng. J. 2009;153(1–3):217–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cej.2009.06.019. 

[328] Dechao Hu WM, Wang Zhiqiang. Fabrication and characterization of a novel 
polyurethane microencapsulated phase change materials for thermal energy 
storage. Prog. Org. Coatings 2021;151(1):1–5 [Online]. Available: www.pnas.org 
/cgi/content/short/1415439112. 

[329] Wu X, Fan M, Cui S, Tan G, Shen X. Novel Na2SO4@SiO2 phase change material 

with core-shell structures for high temperature thermal storage. Sol. Energy 
Mater. Sol. Cells 2018;178(February):280–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2018.01.030. 

[330] Li J, Lu W, Luo Z, Zeng Y. Thermal stability of sodium nitrate microcapsules for 
high-temperature thermal energy storage. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2017;171 
(October 2016):106–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2017.06.028. 
[331] Ji W, Cheng X, Chen H, Li L, Li Y, Liu Z. Efficient synthesis of regular spherical 
GO/SiO2@Solar Salt microcapsules to enhance heat-storage capacity and cycle 

nanoparticles for advanced heat transfer and thermal energy storage. Int J Energy 
Res 2014;(4):23–40. https://doi.org/10.1002/er. 

[345] Lin Z, Wei Z, Shuang L, Xiangyu J. Experimental study on improving stability of 
PCM and MEPCM slurry with different surfactants. Int. J. Low-Carbon Technol. 
2018;13(3):272–6. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijlct/cty027. 

[346] Zheng L, Zhang W, Liang F, Lin S, Jin X. Experimental studies of phase change and 
microencapsulated phase change materials in a cold storage/transportation 
system with solar driven cooling cycle. Energies 2017;10(11). https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/en10111867. 

[347] Zhang GH, Zhao CY. Thermal and rheological properties of microencapsulated 
phase change materials. Renew. Energy 2011;36(11):2959–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.renene.2011.04.002. 

[348] Delgado M, L´azaro A, Pe˜nalosa C, Zalba B. Experimental analysis of the influence 
of microcapsule mass fraction on the thermal and rheological behavior of a PCM 
slurry. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2014;63(1):11–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2013.10.011. 

[349] Dutkowski K, Kruzel M. Experimental investigation of the apparent thermal 

conductivity of microencapsulated phase-change-material slurry at the phase- 
transition temperature. Materials (Basel) 2021;14(15). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ma14154124. 

[350] Ho CJ, Chang PC, Yan WM, Amani M. Microencapsulated n-eicosane PCM 

suspensions: Thermophysical properties measurement and modeling. Int. J. Heat 
Mass Transf. 2018;125:792–800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2018.04.147. 

[351] Barlak S, Sara ON, Karaipekli A, Yapıcı S. Thermal Conductivity and Viscosity of 
Nanofluids Having Nanoencapsulated Phase Change Material. Nanoscale 
Microscale Thermophys. Eng. 2016;20(2):85–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
15567265.2016.1174321. 

[352] Ma X, Liu Y, Liu H, Zhang L, Xu B, Xiao F. Fabrication of novel slurry containing 

graphene oxide-modified microencapsulated phase change material for direct 
absorption solar collector. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2018;188(September): 
73–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.08.021. 

[353] Xu B, Chen C, Zhou J, Ni Z, Ma X. Preparation of novel microencapsulated phase 
change material with Cu-Cu2O/CNTs as the shell and their dispersed slurry for 
direct absorption solar collectors. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2019;200(June): 
109980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109980. 

[354] Chen Y, Zhang Q, Wen X, Yin H, Liu J. A novel CNT encapsulated phase change 

material with enhanced thermal conductivity and photo-thermal conversion 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103782S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

performance. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2018;184(May):82–90. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.04.034. 

[355] Liu J, Chen L, Fang X, Zhang Z. Preparation of graphite nanoparticles-modified 
phase change microcapsules and their dispersed slurry for direct absorption solar 
collectors. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2017;159:159–66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solmat.2016.09.020. 

[356] Xiaochun Ma FX, Liu Han, Chen Chen, Liu Yanjun, Zhang Lin, Xu Bin. Synthesis of 
novel microencapsulated phase change material with SnO2/CNTs shell for solar 
energy storage and photo-thermal conversion. J. Phys. Energy 2020;2(1):0–31. 

[357] Dutkowski K, Kruzel M, Zajaczkowski˛ B. Determining the heat of fusion and 

specific heat of microencapsulated phase change material slurry by thermal delay 
method. Energies 2021;14(1). https://doi.org/10.3390/en14010179. 
[358] Yang R, Xu H, Zhang Y. Preparation, physical property and thermal physical 

property of phase change microcapsule slurry and phase change emulsion. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2003;80(4):405–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2003.08.005. 

[359] H. T. Yamagishi ATPY, Sugeno T, Ishige T. An evaluation of microencapsulated 
PCM for use in cold energy transportation medium IECEC 96. Proc. 31st Intersoc. 
Energy Convers. Eng. Conf. 1960;3(2):2077–83. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
01619566009536968. 

[360] Alvarado JL, Marsh C, Sohn C, Phetteplace G, Newell T. Thermal performance of 
microencapsulated phase change material slurry in turbulent flow under constant 
heat flux. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2007;50(9–10):1938–52. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2006.09.026. 

[361] Dutkowski K, Fiuk JJ. Experimental investigation of the effects of mass fraction 
and temperature on the viscosity of microencapsulated PCM slurry. Int. J. Heat 
Mass Transf. 2018;126:390–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2018.05.158. 

[362] Latibari ST, Eversdijk J, Cuypers R, Drosou V, Shahi M. Preparation of phase 

change microcapsules with the enhanced photothermal performance. Polymers 
(Basel) 2019;11(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11091507. 

[363] Yuan S, et al. Robust, double-layered phase-changing microcapsules with superior 
solar-thermal conversion capability and extremely high energy storage density for 
efficient solar energy storage. Renew. Energy 2021;180:725–33. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.renene.2021.08.128. 

[364] Carreau PJ. Rheological Equations From Molecular Network Theories. Trans Soc 

Rheol 1972;16(1):99–127. https://doi.org/10.1122/1.549276. 

[365] Dutkowski K, Fiuk JJ. Experimental research of viscosity of microencapsulated 

PCM slurry at the phase change temperature. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2019;134: 
1209–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.02.036. 

[366] Gao G, Zhang T, Jiao S, Guo C. Preparation of reduced graphene oxide modified 
magnetic phase change microcapsules and their application in direct absorption 
solar collector. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2020;216(February):110695. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2020.110695. 

[367] Khan MMA, Ibrahim NI, Mahbubul IM, Muhammad. Ali H, Saidur R, Al- 

Sulaiman FA. Evaluation of solar collector designs with integrated latent heat 
thermal energy storage: a review. Sol. Energy 2018;166(March 2017):334–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.03.014. 

[368] Thirugnanasambandam M, Iniyan S, Goic R. A review of solar thermal 

technologies. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010;14(1):312–22. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2009.07.014. 

[369] Gorji TB, Ranjbar AA. A review on optical properties and application of 

nanofluids in direct absorption solar collectors (DASCs. Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev. 2017;72(January):10–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.015. 

[370] Sharaf OZ, et al. Radiation stability and photothermal performance of surface- 

functionalized plasmonic nanofluids for direct-absorption solar applications. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2021;227(February):111115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2021.111115. 

[379] Yu S, Wang X, Wu D. Microencapsulation of n-octadecane phase change material 
with calcium carbonate shell for enhancement of thermal conductivity and 
serving durability: Synthesis, microstructure, and performance evaluation. Appl. 
Energy 2014;114:632–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.10.029. 

[380] Ma X, et al. Synthesis of novel microencapsulated phase change material with 

SnO2/CNTs shell for solar energy storage and photo-thermal conversion. Mater. 
Res. Express 2020;7(1). https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/ab657e. 

[381] Liu H, Wang X, Wu D. Tailoring of bifunctional microencapsulated phase change 
materials with CdS/SiO2 double-layered shell for solar photocatalysis and solar 
thermal energy storage. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2018;134(January 2017):603–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.02.027. 

[382] Pornea AM, Kim H. Design and synthesis of SiO2/TiO2/PDA functionalized phase 
change microcapsules for efficient solar-driven energy storage. Energy Convers. 
Manag. 2021;232(October 2020):113801. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2020.113801. 

[383] Lin Q, Wang S, Zhang L. Multi-scale modeling and investigation of thermo-fluidic 
performance of microencapsulated phase-change material slurry. J. Energy 
Storage 2021;37(November 2020):102502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2021.102502. 

[384] Xu L, Pu L, Zhang S, Ma Z. Thermo-fluidic performance of microencapsulated 

phase change material slurry in thermal energy storage. J. Energy Storage 2021; 
43(July):103247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2021.103247. 

[385] Ma F, Zhang P, Shi XJ. Investigation of thermo-fluidic performance of phase 

change material slurry and energy transport characteristics. Appl. Energy 2018; 
227(August 2017):643–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.08.146. 

[386] Liu H, Wang X, Wu D, Ji S. Morphology-controlled synthesis of microencapsulated 
phase change materials with TiO2 shell for thermal energy harvesting and 
temperature regulation. Energy 2019;172:599–617. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2019.01.151. 

[387] Roy SK, Sengupta S. An evaluation of phase change microcapsules for use in 

enhanced heat transfer fluids. Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transf. 1991;18(4): 
495–507. https://doi.org/10.1016/0735-1933(91)90064-B. 

[388] Ohtsubo T, Tsuda S, Tsuji K. A study of the physical strength of fenitrothion 

microcapsules. Polymer (Guildf) 1991;32(13):2395–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0032-3861(91)90080-3. 

[389] V´erez D, et al. Experimental study on two pcm macro-encapsulation designs in a 

thermal energy storage tank. Appl. Sci. 2021;11(13). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
app11136171. 

[390] Sari A, Alkan C, Karaipekli A, Uzun O. Microencapsulated n-octacosane as phase 
change material for thermal energy storage. Sol. Energy 2009;83(10):1757–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2009.05.008. 

[391] Sukhorukov G, Fery A, M¨ohwald H. Intelligent micro- and nanocapsules. Prog. 

Polym. Sci. 2005;30(8–9):885–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
progpolymsci.2005.06.008. 

[392] Tsien HS. Superaerodynamics, Mechanics of Rarefied Gases. Collect. Work. Hsue- 
Shen Tsien 2012:406–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-398277-3.50020- 
8. 

[393] Zhang Y, Faghri A. Analysis of forced convection heat transfer in 

microencapsulated phase change material suspensions. J. Thermophys. Heat 
Transf. 1995;9(4):727–32. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.731. 

[394] Chai L, Shaukat R, Wang L, Wang HS. A review on heat transfer and 

hydrodynamic characteristics of nano/microencapsulated phase change slurry 
(N/MPCS) in mini/microchannel heat sinks. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2018;135 
(February):334–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.02.068. 
[395] Qiu Z, Li L. Experimental and numerical investigation of laminar heat transfer of 
microencapsulated phase change material slurry (MPCMS) in a circular tube with 
constant heat flux. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2020;52(August 2019):101786. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2019.101786. 

[371] Sharaf OZ, et al. Thermal stability and plasmonic photothermal conversion of 

[396] Charunyakorn P, Sengupta S, Roy SK. Forced convection heat transfer in 

surface-modified solar nanofluids: Comparing prolonged and cyclic thermal 
treatments. Energy Convers. Manag. 2021;244(April):114463. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2021.114463. 

microencapsulated phase change material slurries: flow in circular ducts. Int. J. 
Heat Mass Transf. 1991;34(3):819–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(91) 
90128-2. 

[372] Taylor RA, et al. Applicability of nanofluids in high flux solar collectors. J. Renew. 

[397] Kuravi S, Kota KM, Du J, Chow LC. Numerical investigation of flow and heat 

Sustain. Energy 2011;3(2). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3571565. 

[373] He Q, Wang S, Zeng S, Zheng Z. Experimental investigation on photothermal 

properties of nanofluids for direct absorption solar thermal energy systems. 
Energy Convers. Manag. 2013;73:150–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2013.04.019. 

[374] Tyagi H, Phelan P, Prasher R. Predicted efficiency of a Low-temperature 

Nanofluid-based direct absorption solar collector. J. Sol. Energy Eng. Trans. 
ASME 2009;131(4):0410041–7. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3197562. 
[375] Dutkowski T, Kruzel K, Bohdal M. Experimental Studies of the Influence of 

Microencapsulated Phase Change Material on Thermal Parameters of a Flat Liquid 
Solar Collector. Energies 2021;14:1–14. 

[376] Huang MJ, Eames PC, McCormack S, Griffiths P, Hewitt NJ. Microencapsulated 

phase change slurries for thermal energy storage in a residential solar energy 
system. Renew. Energy 2011;36(11):2932–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2011.04.004. 

[377] Minardi JE, Chuang HN. Performance of a ‘black’ liquid flat-plate solar collector. 
Sol. Energy 1975;17(3):179–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(75)90057- 
2. 

[378] Li F, Wang X, Wu D. Fabrication of multifunctional microcapsules containing n- 
eicosane core and zinc oxide shell for low-temperature energy storage, 
photocatalysis, and antibiosis. Energy Convers. Manag. 2015;106:873–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.10.026. 

transfer performance of nano-encapsulated phase change material slurry in 
microchannels. J. Heat Transfer 2009;131(6):1–9. https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
1.3084123. 

[398] Ma ZW, Zhang P. Modeling the heat transfer characteristics of flow melting of 

phase change material slurries in the circular tubes. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 
2013;64:874–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2013.05.026. 
[399] Zhang Y, Du K, He JP, Yang L, Li YJ. Impact factors analysis of the enthalpy 

method and the effective heat capacity method on the transient nonlinear heat 
transfer in phase change materials (pcms. Numer. Heat Transf. Part A Appl. 2014; 
65(1):66–83. https://doi.org/10.1080/10407782.2013.811153. 

[400] Zeng R, et al. Heat transfer characteristics of microencapsulated phase change 
material slurry in laminar flow under constant heat flux. Appl. Energy 2009;86 
(12):2661–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.04.025. 

[401] Huang H, Xiao Y, Lin J, Zhou T, Liu Y, Zhao Q. Improvement of the efficiency of 
solar thermal energy storage systems by cascading a PCM unit with a water tank. 
J. Clean. Prod. 2020;245:118864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2019.118864. 

[402] Iten M, Liu S, Shukla A. Experimental validation of an air-PCM storage unit 

comparing the effective heat capacity and enthalpy methods through CFD 
simulations. Energy 2018;155:495–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2018.04.128. 

[403] Amidu MA, Addad Y, Riahi MK, Abu-Nada E. Numerical investigation of 

nanoparticles slip mechanisms impact on the natural convection heat transfer 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103783S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

characteristics of nanofluids in an enclosure. Sci. Rep. 2021;11(1):1–24. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-95269-z. 

[404] Bahiraei M. A Comprehensive Review on Different Numerical Approaches for 

Simulation in Nanofluids: Traditional and Novel Techniques. J. Dispers. Sci. 
Technol. 2014;35(7):984–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/01932691.2013.825210. 
[405] Pouraria H, Park KH, Seo Y. Numerical modelling of dispersed water in oil flows 
using eulerian-eulerian approach and population balance model. Processes 2021; 
9(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/pr9081345. 

[406] Ma F, Zhang P. Heat Transfer Characteristics of a Volumetric Absorption Solar 

Collector using Nano-Encapsulated Phase Change Slurry. Heat Transf. Eng. 2018; 
39(17–18):1487–97. https://doi.org/10.1080/01457632.2017.1369827. 

[407] Hao YL, Tao YX. A numerical model for phase-change suspension flow in 

microchannels. Numer. Heat Transf. Part A Appl. 2004;46(1):55–77. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/10407780490457545. 

[408] Xing KQ, Tao YX, Hao YL. Performance evaluation of liquid flow with PCM 

particles in Microchannels. J. Heat Transfer 2005;127(8):931–40. https://doi. 
org/10.1115/1.1929783. 

[409] Ge W, et al. Discrete simulation of granular and particle-fluid flows: From 

fundamental study to engineering application. Rev. Chem. Eng. 2017;33(6): 
551–623. https://doi.org/10.1515/revce-2015-0079. 

[410] Mahian O, et al. Recent advances in modeling and simulation of nanofluid 

flows—Part II: applications. Phys. Rep. 2019;791:1–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.physrep.2018.11.003. 

[411] Babaei H, Keblinski P, Khodadadi JM. Thermal conductivity enhancement of 

paraffins by increasing the alignment of molecules through adding CNT/ 
graphene. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2013;58(1–2):209–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.11.013. 

[412] Tafrishi H, Sadeghzadeh S, Ahmadi R, Molaei F, Yousefi F, Hassanloo H. 

Investigation of tetracosane thermal transport in presence of graphene and carbon 
nanotube fillers––A molecular dynamics study. J. Energy Storage 2020;29 
(March):101321. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2020.101321. 

[413] Yu Y, Tao Y, He YL. Molecular dynamics simulation of thermophysical properties 
of NaCl-SiO2 based molten salt composite phase change materials. Appl. Therm. 
Eng. 2020;166:114628. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.114628. 
[414] Rao Z, Wang S, Wu M, Zhang Y, Li F. Molecular dynamics simulations of melting 

behavior of alkane as phase change materials slurry. Energy Convers. Manag. 
2012;64:152–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2012.05.013. 

[415] Wang Y, Chen Z, Ling X. A molecular dynamics study of nano-encapsulated phase 

change material slurry. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2016;98:835–40. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.12.124. 

[416] Earl DJ, Deem MW. Monte Carlo simulations. Methods Mol. Biol. 2008;443: 

25–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-59745-177-2_2. 

[417] Shu C, Mao XH, Chew YT. Particle number per cell and scaling factor effect on 
accuracy of DSMC simulation of micro flows. Int. J. Numer. Methods Heat Fluid 
Flow 2005;15(8):827–41. https://doi.org/10.1108/09615530510625101. 
[418] Sun ZX, Tang Z, He YL, Tao WQ. Proper cell dimension and number of particles 

per cell for DSMC. Comput. Fluids 2011;50(1):1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compfluid.2011.04.013. 

[419] Lattuada M, Wu H, Morbidelli M. A simple model for the structure of fractal 

aggregates. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2003;268(1):106–20. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jcis.2003.07.027. 

[420] Bin Wang Z, Chen R, Wang H, Liao Q, Zhu X, Li SZ. An overview of smoothed 

particle hydrodynamics for simulating multiphase flow. Appl. Math. Model. 2016; 
40(23–24):9625–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2016.06.030. 

[421] Farrokhpanah A, Bussmann M, Mostaghimi J. New smoothed particle 
hydrodynamics (SPH) formulation for modeling heat conduction with 
solidification and melting. Numer. Heat Transf. Part B Fundam. 2017;71(4): 
299–312. https://doi.org/10.1080/10407790.2017.1293972. 

[422] Archibold AR, Rahman MM, Goswami DY, Stefanakos EK. Analysis of heat 

transfer and fluid flow during melting inside a spherical container for thermal 
energy storage. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2014;64(1–2):396–407. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2013.12.016. 

[423] Lin Q, Wang S, Ma Z, Wang J, Zhang T. Lattice Boltzmann simulation of flow and 
heat transfer evolution inside encapsulated phase change materials due to natural 
convection melting. Chem. Eng. Sci. 2018;189:154–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.ces.2018.05.052. 

[424] J. Li et al., “Meso-scale phenomena from compromise,” pp. 1–7. 
[425] He YL, Tao WQ. Multiscale simulations of heat transfer and fluid flow problems. 
J. Heat Transfer 2012;134(3):1–13. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4005154. 
[426] He YL, Tao WQ. Numerical solutions of nano/microphenomena coupled with 

macroscopic process of heat transfer and fluid flow: a brief review. J. Heat 
Transfer 2015;137(9). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4030239. 

[427] Saunders MG, Voth GA. Coarse-graining methods for computational biology. 

Annu. Rev. Biophys. 2013;42(1):73–93. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev- 
biophys-083012-130348. 

[428] Seiferth D, Sollich P, Klumpp S. Coarse graining of biochemical systems described 
by discrete stochastic dynamics. Phys. Rev. E 2020;102(6):1–42. https://doi.org/ 
10.1103/PhysRevE.102.062149. 

[431] Abu-Nada E. Heat transfer simulation using energy conservative dissipative 

particle dynamics. Mol. Simul. 2010;36(5):382–90. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
08927020903515337. 

[432] Abu-Nada E. Modeling of various heat transfer problems using dissipative particle 
dynamics. Numer. Heat Transf. Part A Appl. 2010;58(8):660–79. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/10407782.2010.516681. 

[433] Abu-Nada E. Application of dissipative particle dynamics to natural convection in 
differentially heated enclosures. Mol. Simul. 2011;37(2):135–52. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/08927022.2010.533272. 

[434] Abu-Nada E. Natural convection heat transfer simulation using energy 

conservative dissipative particle dynamics. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft 
Matter Phys. 2010;81(5):1–14. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.81.056704. 
[435] Abu-Nada E, Pop I, Mahian O. A dissipative particle dynamics two-component 

nanofluid heat transfer model: application to natural convection. Int. J. Heat Mass 
Transf. 2019;133:1086–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2018.12.151. 

[436] Ng KC, Sheu TWH. Refined energy-conserving dissipative particle dynamics 

model with temperature-dependent properties and its application in solidification 
problem. Phys. Rev. E 2017;96(4):1–12. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevE.96.043302. 

[437] F. Durst, D. Milojevic, and B. Schoenung, “Eulerian and Lagrangian predictions of 

particulate two-phase flows.,” vol. 8, pp. 101–115, 1983. 

[438] Apostolou K, Hrymak AN. Discrete element simulation of liquid-particle flows. 
Comput. Chem. Eng. 2008;32(4–5):841–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compchemeng.2007.03.018. 

[439] Garoosi F, Shakibaeinia A, Bagheri G. Eulerian-Lagrangian modeling of solid 
particle behavior in a square cavity with several pairs of heaters and coolers 
inside. Powder Technol 2015;280:239–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
powtec.2015.04.048. 

[440] Balakin B, Hoffmann AC, Kosinski P. The collision efficiency in a shear flow. 

Chem. Eng. Sci. 2012;68(1):305–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2011.09.042. 

[441] El-Askary WA, Eldesoky IM, Saleh O, El-Behery SM, Dawood AS. Behavior of 

downward turbulent gas-solid flow through sudden expansion pipe. Powder 
Technol 2016;291:351–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2016.01.002. 
[442] O. Z. Sharaf, “Modeling and Simulation Techniques of Nanofluid-Based Systems 

for Applications in Solar Energy PhD . Thesis,” no. March, 2020. 

[443] Mirzaei M, Saffar-Avval M, Naderan H. Heat transfer investigation of laminar 

developing flow of nanofluids in a microchannel based on Eulerian-Lagrangian 
approach. Can. J. Chem. Eng. 2014;92(6):1139–49. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
cjce.21962. 

[444] Dong S, Zheng L, Zhang X, Wu S, Shen B. A new model for Brownian force and the 
application to simulating nanofluid flow. Microfluid. Nanofluidics 2014;16(1–2): 
131–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10404-013-1213-x. 

[445] Deepak Selvakumar R, Dhinakaran S. Heat transfer and particle migration in 

nanofluid flow around a circular bluff body using a two-way coupled Eulerian- 
Lagrangian approach. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2017;115:282–93. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.07.103. 

[446] Ernst M, Sommerfeld M. On the volume fraction effects of inertial colliding 

particles in homogeneous isotropic turbulence. J. Fluids Eng. Trans. ASME 2012; 
134(3). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4005681. 

[447] Liu Z, Zhu Y, Clausen JR, Lechman JB, Rao RR, Aidun CK. Multiscale method 

based on coupled lattice-Boltzmann and Langevin-dynamics for direct simulation 
of nanoscale particle/polymer suspensions in complex flows. Int. J. Numer. 
Methods Fluids 2019;91(5):228–46. https://doi.org/10.1002/fld.4752. 
[448] Ermak DL, McCammon JA. Brownian dynamics with hydrodynamic interactions. 
J. Chem. Phys. 1978;69(4):1352–60. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.436761. 

[449] Brady J. Stokesian Dynamics. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 1988;20(1):111–57. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fluid.20.1.111. 

[450] Rostami J. Convective heat transfer by micro-encapsulated PCM in a mini-duct. 
Int. J. Therm. Sci. 2021;161(October 2020):106737. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijthermalsci.2020.106737. 

[451] Shabgard H, Hu H, Boettcher PA, McCarthy M, Sun Y. Heat transfer analysis of 

PCM slurry flow between parallel plates. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2016;99: 
895–903. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016.04.020. 
[452] Alisetti EL, Roy SK. Forced convection heat transfer to phase change material 

slurries in circular ducts. J. Thermophys. heat Transf. 2000;14(1):115–8. https:// 
doi.org/10.2514/2.6499. 

[453] Chen B, et al. An experimental study of convective heat transfer with 

microencapsulated phase change material suspension: Laminar flow in a circular 
tube under constant heat flux. Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 2008;32(8):1638–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2008.05.008. 

[454] Ghalambaz M, Chamkha AJ, Wen D. Natural convective flow and heat transfer of 

Nano-Encapsulated Phase Change Materials (NEPCMs) in a cavity. Int. J. Heat 
Mass Transf. 2019;138:738–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2019.04.037. 

[455] Haddad Z, Iachachene F, Abu-Nada E, Pop I. Investigation of the novelty of latent 

functionally thermal fluids as alternative to nanofluids in natural convective 
flows. Sci. Rep. 2020;10(1):1–16. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-77224-6. 

[429] Hoogerbrugge PJ, Koelman JMVA. Simulating microscopic hydrodynamic 

[456] Mohib Ur Rehman M, Qu ZG, Fu RP. Three-dimensional numerical study of 

phenomena with dissipative particle dynamics. Epl 1992;19(3):155–60. https:// 
doi.org/10.1209/0295-5075/19/3/001. 

[430] Abu-Nada E. Dissipative particle dynamics simulation of natural convection using 

variable thermal properties. Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transf. 2015;69:84–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icheatmasstransfer.2015.10.008. 

laminar confined slot jet impingement cooling using slurry of nano-encapsulated 
phase change material. J. Therm. Sci. 2016;25(5):431–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s11630-016-0881-8. 

[457] Seyf HR, Zhou Z, Ma HB, Zhang Y. Three dimensional numerical study of heat- 

transfer enhancement by nano-encapsulated phase change material slurry in 
microtube heat sinks with tangential impingement. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103784S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

2013;56(1–2):561–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2012.08.052. 

[458] Maxwell JC. A Treatise on Electricity & Magnetism. New York: Dover 

Publications, INC; 1954. p. 560. - Volume 1[Online]. Available: https://archive. 
org/stream/ATreatiseOnElectricityMagnetism-Volume1/Maxwell-ATreatiseOn 
ElectricityMagnetismVolume1#page/n15/mode/2up/search/electromagnetic+
radiation. 

[459] Hamilton RL. Thermal conductivity of heterogeneous two-component systems. 
Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam. 1962;1(3):187–91. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
i160003a005. 

[460] McMillen TJ, Leal LG. The effect of deformation on the effective conductivity of a 

dilute suspension of drops in the limit of low particle peclet number. Int. J. 
Multiph. Flow 1975;2(2):105–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/0301-9322(75) 
90002-6. 

[461] Nir A, Acrivos A. The effective thermal conductivity of sheared suspensions. 

J. Fluid Mech. 1976;78(1):33–48. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
S0022112076002310. 

[462] M. M. Chen, “MicroconvectiveThermal Conductiwity in Disperse Two-Phase 

Mixtures as Observed in a Low Velocity Couette Flow Experiment,” vol. 103, no. 
February 1981, pp. 47–51, 2016, [Online]. Available: http://heattransfer.as 
medigitalcollection.asme.org/. 

[463] Zhang Y, Hu X, Wang X. Theoretical analysis of convective heat transfer 

enhancement of microencapsulated phase change material slurries. Heat Mass 
Transf. und Stoffuebertragung 2003;40(1–2):59–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00231-003-0410-7. 

[464] Woolard EW, Einstein A, Furth R, Cowper AD. Investigations on the Theory of the 
Brownian Movement. Am. Math. Mon. 1928;35(6):318. https://doi.org/10.2307/ 
2298685. 

[465] BATCHELOR GK. The effect of Brownian motion on the bulk stress in a suspension 

of spherical particles. J. Fluid Mech. 1945;83(127):364–5. 

[466] V. VAND, “Theory of viscosity of concentrated suspensions,” 364-365, vol. 120, p. 

853, 1945. 

[467] Wang X, et al. Flow and heat transfer behaviors of phase change material slurries 
in a horizontal circular tube. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2007;50(13–14):2480–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2006.12.024. 

[468] Bock Choon Pak YIC. Hydrodynamic and Heat Transfer Study of Dispersed Fluids 

[487] E. Mclaughlin, “Thermal conductivity of simple molecules,” vol. 206, no. 1, pp. 

206–212, 1959. 

[488] P. Taylor, “MOLECULAR DYNAMICS SIMULATION IN NANOSCALE,” no. 

December 2014, pp. 37–41, 2010, doi: 10.1080/10893950390219047. 

[489] H. Search, C. Journals, A. Contact, M. Iopscience, and I. P. Address, “The 

fluctuation-dissipation theorem,” vol. 255, 1966. 

[490] Manjunatha L, Takamatsu H, Cannon JJ. Atomic-level breakdown of Green–Kubo 
relations provides new insight into the mechanisms of thermal conduction. Sci. 
Rep. 2021;11(1):1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84446-9. 
[491] Andritsos EI, et al. The heat capacity of matter beyond the Dulong-Petit value. 

J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2013;25(23). https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/25/ 
23/235401. 

[492] Qiu L, et al. A review of recent advances in thermophysical properties at the 

nanoscale: From solid state to colloids. Phys. Rep. 2020;843:1–81. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.physrep.2019.12.001. 

[493] Lilley D, Menon AK, Kaur S, Lubner S, Prasher RS. Phase change materials for 

thermal energy storage: a perspective on linking phonon physics to performance. 
J. Appl. Phys. 2021;130(22). https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0069342. 

[494] You A. Be, and I. In, “Normal-mode analysis of liquid-state dynamics 1998;5581 

(August). 

[495] Lin ST, Blanco M, Goddard WA. The two-phase model for calculating 

thermodynamic properties of liquids from molecular dynamics: Validation for the 
phase diagram of Lennard-Jones fluids. J. Chem. Phys. 2003;119(22):11792–805. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1624057. 

[496] Bolmatov D, Brazhkin VV, Trachenko K. The phonon theory of liquid 

thermodynamics. Sci. Rep. 2012;2:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00421. 

[497] M. F. Modest, RADIATIVE HEAT TRANSFER, no. January 2010. 2014. 
[498] Tapimo R, Kamdem HTT. A spherical harmonic formulation for radiative heat 
transfer analysis. Am. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2016;3(4):280–95. https://doi.org/ 
10.7726/ajhmt.2016.1016. 

[499] Thynell ST. Discrete-ordinates method in radiative heat transfer. Int. J. Eng. Sci. 

1998;36(12–14):1651–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0020-7225(98)00052-4. 

[500] Ebrahimi H, Zamaniyan A, Soltan Mohammadzadeh JS, Khalili AA. Zonal 

modeling of radiative heat transfer in industrial furnaces using simplified model 
for exchange area calculation. Appl. Math. Model. 2013;37(16–17):8004–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2013.02.053. 

With Submicron Metallic Oxide. Exp. Heat Transf. A J., Therm. Energy Transp., 
Storage, Convers 2013;(January 2013):37–41. 

[501] Howell JR. Application of Monte Carlo to Heat Transfer Problems. Adv. Heat 

Transf. 1969;5(C):1–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2717(08)70128-X. 

[469] Wu S, Yan T, Kuai Z, Pan W. Thermal conductivity enhancement on phase change 

materials for thermal energy storage: a review. Energy Storage Mater 2020;25 
(October 2019):251–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2019.10.010. 
[470] Mehra N, et al. Thermal transport in polymeric materials and across composite 

interfaces. Appl. Mater. Today 2018;12:92–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apmt.2018.04.004. 

[471] Lv W, Henry A. Examining the Validity of the Phonon Gas Model in Amorphous 

Materials. Sci. Rep. 2016;6:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep37675. 

[472] R. W. Clark, “Heat Conductivity of Non-Metallic Crystals,” Science (80-.)., vol. 36, 

no. 926, p. 415, 1912, doi: 10.1126/science.36.926.415. 

[473] W. C. Kim, “Thermal Transport in Nano structured Materials,” 2005. 
[474] Shanker A, Li C, Kim GH, Gidley D, Pipe KP, Kim J. High thermal conductivity in 

electrostatically engineered amorphous polymers. Sci. Adv. 2017;3(7). https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700342. 

[475] Zhao AZ, Wingert MC, Chen R, Garay JE. Phonon gas model for thermal 

conductivity of dense, strongly interacting liquids. J. Appl. Phys. 2021;129(23): 
1–18. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0040734. 

[476] S. Siegert, “Thermal properties of phase-change materials - From lattice dynamics 
to thermoelectricity,” PhD Thesis, vol. 125, no. October, pp. 1–5, 2011. 
[477] Cheng P, et al. Different dimensional nanoadditives for thermal conductivity 

enhancement of phase change materials: Fundamentals and applications. Nano 
Energy 2021;85(August 2020):105948. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nanoen.2021.105948. 

[478] Yang F, Dames C. Mean free path spectra as a tool to understand thermal 

conductivity in bulk and nanostructures. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 
Phys. 2013;87(3). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.87.035437. 

[479] Callaway J. Model for lattice thermal conductivity at low temperatures. Phys. 
Rev. 1959;113(4):1046–51. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.113.1046. 
[480] Holland MG. Analysis of lattice thermal conductivity. Phys. Rev. 1963;132(6): 

2461–71. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.132.2461. 

[481] Allen PB, Feldman JL, Fabian J, Wooten F. Diffusons, locons and propagons: 

[502] Radiative_Transfer(BookFi.org). 
[503] Oubre C, Nordlander P. Optical properties of metallodielectric nanostructures 

calculated using the finite difference time domain method. J. Phys. Chem. B 2004; 
108(46):17740–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0473164. 

[504] Duan H, Xuan Y. Enhanced optical absorption of the plasmonic nanoshell 

suspension based on the solar photocatalytic hydrogen production system. Appl. 
Energy 2014;114:22–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.09.035. 
[505] Z. Huang, J. Bai, and P. Luo, “Investigation on optical theoretical models of SiO2 
nanofluids,” vol. 134, no. Ismems 2017, pp. 108–113, 2018, doi: 10.2991/ 
ismems-17.2018.26. 

[506] G. Ellison, “Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer,” Thermal Computations for 

Electronics. pp. 219–262, 1992, doi: 10.1201/b12772-12. 

[507] Hottel HC, Sarofim AF, Dalzell WH, Vasalos IA. Optical properties of coatings. 
Effect of pigment concentration. AIAA J 1971;9(10):1895–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.2514/3.49999. 

[508] Brewster Q. Volume scattering of radiation in packed beds of large, opaque 

spheres. J. Heat Transfer 2004;126(6):1048–50. https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
1.1795247. 

[509] Jing D, Song D. Optical properties of nanofluids considering particle size 

distribution: Experimental and theoretical investigations. Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev. 2017;78(March):452–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.04.084. 

[510] M. Quinten, Optical Properties of Nanoparticle Systems: Mie and beyond. 2011. 
[511] Bohren CF. Absorption and scattering of light by small particles. Absorpt. Scatt. 
Light by small Part. 1983. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9112/35/3/025. 
[512] Yazdanifard F, Ameri M, Taylor R. Parametric investigation of a nanofluid- 

NEPCM based spectral splitting photovoltaic/thermal system. Energy Convers. 
Manag. 2021;240(May):114232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2021.114232. 

[513] Barber P, Yeh C. Scattering of electromagnetic waves by arbitrarily shaped 

dielectric bodies. Appl. Opt. 1975;14(12):2864. https://doi.org/10.1364/ 
ao.14.002864. 

Character of atomie yibrations in amorphous Si. Philos. Mag. B Phys. Condens. 
Matter; Stat. Mech. Electron. Opt. Magn. Prop. 1999;79(11–12):1715–31. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/13642819908223054. 

[514] Yee Kane. Numerical solution of initial boundary value problems involving 

maxwell’s equations in isotropic media. Theory Appl. Transp. Porous Media 1966; 
30:141–7. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61185-3_17. 

[482] Cahill DG, Watson SK, Pohl RO. Lower limit to the thermal conductivity of 

[515] Goodman JJ, Flatau PJ, Draine BT. Application of fast-Fourier-transform 

disordered crystals. Phys. Rev. B 1992;46(10):6131–40. https://doi.org/10.1103/ 
PhysRevB.46.6131. 

[483] Bridgeman Pw. The thermal conductivity of liquids under pressure. Physics 

(College. Park. Md). 1923;59(7):141–69. 

[484] Xi Q, et al. A Ubiquitous Thermal Conductivity Formula for Liquids, Polymer 

Glass, and Amorphous Solids. Chinese Phys. Lett. 2020;37(10). https://doi.org/ 
10.1088/0256-307X/37/10/104401. 

[485] and H. E. R. E. Powell, W. E. Roseveare, “Diffusion, Thermal Conductivity, and 

Viscous Flow of Liquids,” pp. 430–435, 1941. 

[486] Paredes X, Lourenço MJ, de Castro CN, Wakeham W. Thermal conductivity of 

ionic liquids and ionanofluids. Can molecular theory help? Fluids 2021;6(3). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/fluids6030116. 

techniques to the discrete-dipole approximation. Opt. Lett. 1991;16(15):1198. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/ol.16.001198. 

[516] Draine BT, Flatau PJ. Discrete-Dipole Approximation For Scattering Calculations. 
J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 1994;11(4):1491. https://doi.org/10.1364/josaa.11.001491. 
[517] B. T. Draine and P. J. Flatau, “User Guide for the Discrete Dipole Approximation 

Code DDSCAT 6.1,” 2004, [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph 
/0409262. 

[518] Donald JMc, Golden A, Jennings SG. Opendda: a novel high-performance 

computational framework for the discrete dipole approximation. Int. J. High 
Perform. Comput. Appl. 2009;23(1):42–61. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1094342008097914. 

[519] Du M, Tang GH. Optical property of nanofluids with particle agglomeration. Sol. 
Energy 2015;122:864–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.10.009. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103785S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

[520] lin Xu Y. Radiative scattering properties of an ensemble of variously shaped small 

particles. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Physics, Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 
2003;67(4):9. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.67.046620. 

[521] Egel A, Pattelli L, Mazzamuto G, Wiersma DS, Lemmer U. CELES: CUDA- 

accelerated simulation of electromagnetic scattering by large ensembles of 
spheres. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 2017;199:103–10. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jqsrt.2017.05.010. 

[522] Mosaffa AH, Garousi Farshi L, Infante Ferreira CA, Rosen MA. Energy and exergy 
evaluation of a multiple-PCM thermal storage unit for free cooling applications. 
Renew. Energy 2014;68:452–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.02.025. 

[523] Yu Q, et al. Numerical study on energy and exergy performances of a 

microencapsulated phase change material slurry based photovoltaic/thermal 
module. Energy Convers. Manag. 2019;183(February):708–20. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2019.01.029. 

[524] Eisapour M, Eisapour AH, Hosseini MJ, Talebizadehsardari P. Exergy and energy 

analysis of wavy tubes photovoltaic-thermal systems using microencapsulated 
PCM nano-slurry coolant fluid. Appl. Energy 2020;266(March):114849. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114849. 

[525] Du X, Wang S, Du Z, Cheng X, Wang H. Preparation and characterization of flame- 

retardant nanoencapsulated phase change materials with poly 
(methylmethacrylate) shells for thermal energy storage. J. Mater. Chem. A 2018;6 
(36):17519–29. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8ta07086e. 

[526] Zhang XX, Fan YF, Tao XM, Yick KL. Crystallization and prevention of 

supercooling of microencapsulated n-alkanes. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2005;281 
(2):299–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2004.08.046. 

[527] Sami S, Sadrameli SM, Etesami N. Thermal properties optimization of 

microencapsulated a renewable and non-toxic phase change material with a 
polystyrene shell for thermal energy storage systems. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2018; 
130:1416–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.11.119. 
[528] Ni J, Tai Q, Lu H, Hu Y, Song L. Microencapsulated ammonium polyphosphate 
with polyurethane shell: Preparation, characterization, and its flame retardance 
in polyurethane. Polym. Adv. Technol. 2010;21(6):392–400. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/pat.1441. 

[529] Sun K, Liu H, Wang X, Wu D. Innovative design of superhydrophobic thermal 

energy-storage materials by microencapsulation of n-docosane with 
nanostructured ZnO/SiO2 shell. Appl. Energy 2019;237(August 2018):549–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.01.043. 

[530] Gao F, Wang X, Wu D. Design and fabrication of bifunctional microcapsules for 
solar thermal energy storage and solar photocatalysis by encapsulating paraffin 
phase change material into cuprous oxide. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2017;168 
(October 2016):146–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2017.04.026. 
[531] Zhang Y, Wang X, Wu D. Microencapsulation of n-dodecane into zirconia shell 
doped with rare earth: Design and synthesis of bifunctional microcapsules for 
photoluminescence enhancement and thermal energy storage. Energy 2016;97: 
113–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.12.114. 

[532] Latibari ST, Mehrali M, Mehrali M, Mahlia TMI, Metselaar HSC. Fabrication and 
performances of microencapsulated palmitic acid with enhanced thermal 
properties. Energy and Fuels 2015;29(2):1010–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ef502840f. 

[533] Zhao D, et al. Rapid Preparation of TiO2- x and Its Photocatalytic Oxidation for 
Arsenic Adsorption under Visible Light. Langmuir 2020;36(14):3853–61. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b02444. 

[534] Wu X, Jiang Q, Ghim D, Singamaneni S, Jun YS. Localized heating with a 

photothermal polydopamine coating facilitates a novel membrane distillation 
process. J. Mater. Chem. A 2018;6(39):18799–807. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
c8ta05738a. 

[535] Fan X, Qiu X, Lu L, Zhou B. Full-spectrum light-driven phase change 

microcapsules modified by CuS-GO nanoconverter for enhancing solar energy 
conversion and storage capability. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2021;223 
(January):110937. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2020.110937. 

[536] Tang B, Wang Y, Qiu M, Zhang S. A full-band sunlight-driven carbon nanotube/ 
PEG/SiO2 composites for solar energy storage. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2014; 
123:7–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2013.12.022. 

[537] Zhang Y, Li X, Li J, Ma C, Guo L, Meng X. Solar-driven phase change 

microencapsulation with efficient Ti4O7 nanoconverter for latent heat storage. 
Nano Energy 2018;53(August):579–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nanoen.2018.09.018. 

[538] Stankovich S, et al. Synthesis of graphene-based nanosheets via chemical 
reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. Carbon N. Y. 2007;45(7):1558–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2007.02.034. 

[539] Peng Q, De S. Mechanical properties and instabilities of ordered graphene oxide C 
6O monolayers. RSC Adv 2013;3(46):24337–44. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
c3ra44949a. 

[540] Nair RR, Wu HA, Jayaram PN, Grigorieva IV, Geim AK. Unimpeded permeation of 
water through helium-leak-tight graphene-based membranes. Science 2012;335 
(6067):442–4. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1211694 (80-.). 

[541] Kim J, Cote LJ, Kim F, Yuan W, Shull KR, Huang J. Graphene oxide sheets at 
interfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010;132(23):8180–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ja102777p. 

[542] Maithya OM, et al. High-energy storage graphene oxide modified phase change 

microcapsules from regenerated chitin Pickering Emulsion for photothermal 
conversion. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2021;222(May 2020):110924. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2020.110924. 

[543] Goel N, Taylor RA, Otanicar T. A review of nanofluid-based direct absorption 

solar collectors: Design considerations and experiments with hybrid PV/Thermal 

and direct steam generation collectors. Renew. Energy 2020;145(2020):903–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.06.097. 

[544] Zain M, et al. Performance Investigation of a Solar Thermal Collector Based on 
Nanostructured Energy Materials. Front. Mater 2021;7(January):1–9. https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fmats.2020.617199. 

[545] Sharaf OZ, Al-Khateeb AN, Kyritsis DC, Abu-Nada E. Direct absorption solar 
collector (DASC) modeling and simulation using a novel Eulerian-Lagrangian 
hybrid approach: Optical, thermal, and hydrodynamic interactions. Appl. Energy 
2018;231(July):1132–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.09.191. 
[546] Kapsalis V, Karamanis D. Solar thermal energy storage and heat pumps with 

phase change materials. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2016;99:1212–24. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.01.071. 

[547] Imenes AG, Mills DR. Spectral beam splitting technology for increased conversion 
efficiency in solar concentrating systems: a review. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2004;84(1–4):19–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2004.01.038. 

[548] Yazdanifard F, Ameri M, Ebrahimnia-Bajestan E. Performance of nanofluid-based 

photovoltaic/thermal systems: a review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017;76 
(July):323–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.03.025. 

[549] An W, Wu J, Zhu T, Zhu Q. Experimental investigation of a concentrating PV/T 
collector with Cu9S5 nanofluid spectral splitting filter. Appl. Energy 2016;184: 
197–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.10.004. 

[550] Crisostomo F, Hjerrild N, Mesgari S, Li Q, Taylor RA. A hybrid PV/T collector 
using spectrally selective absorbing nanofluids. Appl. Energy 2017;193:1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.02.028. 

[551] Su D, Jia Y, Alva G, Liu L, Fang G. Comparative analyses on dynamic 

performances of photovoltaic–thermal solar collectors integrated with phase 
change materials. Energy Convers. Manag. 2017;131:79–89. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2016.11.002. 

[552] Goia F, Zinzi M, Carnielo E, Serra V. Spectral and angular solar properties of a 
PCM-filled double glazing unit. Energy Build 2015;87:302–12. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.11.019. 

[553] Manz H, Egolf PW, Suter P, Goetzberger A. TIM-PCM external wall system for 

solar space heating and daylighting. Sol. Energy 1997;61(6):369–79. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0038-092X(97)00086-8. 

[554] Yazdanifard F, Ameri M, Taylor RA. Numerical modeling of a concentrated 

photovoltaic/thermal system which utilizes a PCM and nanofluid spectral 
splitting. Energy Convers. Manag. 2020;215(May):112927. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enconman.2020.112927. 

[555] Bell S, Steinberg T, Will G. Corrosion mechanisms in molten salt thermal energy 

storage for concentrating solar power. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2019;114 
(July):109328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109328. 

[556] Zhou WJ, Luan HB, Sun J, He YL, Tao WQ. A molecular dynamics and lattice 

Boltzmann multiscale simulation for dense fluid flows. Numer. Heat Transf. Part B 
Fundam 2012;61(5):369–86. https://doi.org/10.1080/10407790.2012.666144. 
[557] Tao YB, He YL. A review of phase change material and performance enhancement 

method for latent heat storage system. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018;93 
(May):245–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.05.028. 

[558] Liu C, Rao Z, Zhao J, Huo Y, Li Y. Review on nanoencapsulated phase change 
materials: Preparation, characterization and heat transfer enhancement. Nano 
Energy 2015;13:814–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2015.02.016. 
[559] Lee J, Jo B. Surfactant-free synthesis protocol of robust and sustainable molten 
salt microcapsules for solar thermal energy storage. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2021;222(September 2020):110954. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solmat.2020.110954. 

[560] Zhang H, Shin D, Santhanagopalan S. Microencapsulated binary carbonate salt 

mixture in silica shell with enhanced effective heat capacity for high temperature 
latent heat storage. Renew. Energy 2019;134:1156–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.renene.2018.09.011. 

[561] Li J, Li L, Wang H, Zhu X, Chen Y, Jia L. Microencapsulation of Molten Salt in 
Titanium Shell for High-Temperature Latent Functional Thermal Fluid. Energy 
Technol 2020;8(12). https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.202000550. 

[562] Ganzenmüller GC, Hiermaier S, Steinhauser MO. Consistent Temperature 

Coupling with Thermal Fluctuations of Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics and 
Molecular Dynamics. PLoS One 2012;7(12). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0051989. 

[563] Werder T, Walther JH, Koumoutsakos P. Hybrid atomistic-continuum method for 
the simulation of dense fluid flows. J. Comput. Phys. 2005;205(1):373–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2004.11.019. 

[564] X. Y. Jie Sun HW, He Yaling, Tao Wenquan. Roughness effect on flow and thermal 
boundaries in microchannel/nanochannel flow using molecular dynamics- 
continuum hybrid simulation Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 2011;(February): 
1102–19. https://doi.org/10.1002/nme. 

[565] ABRAHAM FARID F. DYNAMICALLY SPANNING THE LENGTH SCALES FROM 

THE QUANTUM TO THE CONTINUUM. Int. J. Mod. Phys. 2000;11(6):1135–48. 

[566] Dupuis A, Kotsalis EM, Koumoutsakos P. Coupling lattice Boltzmann and 

molecular dynamics models for dense fluids. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft 
Matter Phys. 2007;75(4). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.75.046704. 

Ms. Samah Albdour is a PhD candidate in Mechanical Engineering at Khalifa University 
working  under  supervision  of  Dr.  Abu-Nada  and  Dr.  Alazzam.  She  got  her  MSc  from 
Kyungpook National University in South Korea. Her research topic in the PhD is in the area 
of phase change material and numerical simulation/modeling. 

Dr. Zoubida Haddad is an associate professor at the Superior National School of Marine 
Science  and  Coastal  Planning  (ENSSMAL)  in  Algeria.  She  is  an  alumna  of  Ecole 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103786S.A. Albdour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Polytechnique,  Universit´e  d’Aix-Marseille,  France.  Her  recent  research  interests  are  in 
phase change materials, energy storage, heat transfer, porous media, nanofluids and nu-
merical simulations. 

Dr.  Omar  Sharaf  is  a  Post-Doc  fellow  at  Khalifa  Univesity.  His  research  includes  solar 
photothermal  conversion,  colloidal  dispersions,  particle-laden  flow,  hybrid  continuum- 
discrete  modeling,  integrated  energy  systems,  CSP  and  solar  polygeneration  systems, 
concentrated  photovoltaic-thermal  (CPVT)  solar  collectors,  hydrogen  systems  and  fuel- 
cells, and thermoelectric generators. 

Dr. Anas Alazzam is an alumna of Concordia University –  Montreal. After a brief Post- 
Doctoral  Fellow  appointment  with  the  Canadian  Space  Agency,  he  joined  Khalifa  Uni-
versity in 2012. He is currently an associate professor of Mechanical Engineering and the 
head of the microfluidics lab at Khalifa University. In addition, he is a visiting associate 
professor in the department of electrical engineering at ´Ecole de technologie sup´erieure 
´ETS. Dr. Alazzam has more than one hundred peer-reviewed publications and a number of 

international  patents.  His  research  expertise  in  microfluidics,  nanofluids,  Dielectropho-
resis, graphene, and healthcare applications of microdevices. His research in the BioMEMS 
area has received substantial recognition in the form of awards and media appearance. He 
has been the Principal Investigator of numerous research projects with budgets exceeding 
$2 million. He has served as the advisor to numerous PhD and MSc students and post-
doctoral fellows. Dr. Alazzam is a member of the editorial board of Micromachines and 
PLOS ONE Journals. 

Dr. Eiyad Abu-Nada is a Full Professor of Mechanical Engineering in the Department of 
Mechanical  Engineering  at  Khalifa  University  in  Abu  Dhabi,  UAE.  He  joined  Khalifa 
University in 2013. Prior to that, he worked as a Full Professor at King Faisal University in 
Saudi Arabia and Associate Professor at Hashemite University in Jordan. Dr. Abu-Nada is 
an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow and a recipient of Abdul-Hameed Shoman Award in 
Jordan. Also, he received the Distinguished Scholar Award from the Arab Fund in Kuwait. 
His recent research interests are in nanofluid heat transport and microfluidics simulations. 

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10103787