Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Thermal state monitoring of lithium-ion batteries: Progress, challenges,
and opportunities

Yusheng Zheng a, Yunhong Che a, Xiaosong Hu b,**, Xin Sui a, Daniel-Ioan Stroe a,
Remus Teodorescu a, *
a Department of Energy, Aalborg University, Aalborg, 9220, Denmark
b College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, China

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Christof Schultz

Keywords:
Lithium-ion batteries
Electric mobility
Battery management
Thermal state monitoring
Temperature estimation

Transportation  electrification  is  a  promising  solution  to  meet  the  ever-rising  energy  demand  and  realize  sus-
tainable development. Lithium-ion batteries, being the most predominant energy storage devices, directly affect
the safety, comfort, driving range, and reliability of many electric mobilities. Nevertheless, thermal-related issues
of batteries such as potential thermal runaway, performance degradation at low temperatures, and accelerated
aging still hinder the wider adoption of electric mobilities. To ensure safe, efficient, and reliable operations of
lithium-ion batteries, monitoring their thermal states is critical to safety protection, performance optimization, as
well as prognostics, and health management. Given insufficient onboard temperature sensors and their inability
to measure battery internal temperature, accurate and timely temperature estimation is of particular importance
to  thermal  state  monitoring.  Toward  this  end,  this  paper  provides  a  comprehensive  review  of  temperature
estimation techniques in battery systems regarding their mechanism, framework, and representative studies. The
potential  metrics  used  to  characterize  battery  thermal  states  are  discussed  in  detail  at  first  considering  the
spatiotemporal attributes of battery temperature, and the strengths and weaknesses of applying such metrics in
battery  management  are  also  analyzed.  Afterward,  various  temperature  estimation  methods,  including
impedance/resistance-based, thermal model-based, and data-driven estimations, are elucidated, analyzed, and
compared  in  terms  of  their  strengths,  limitations,  and  potential  improvements.  Finally,  the  key  challenges  to
battery thermal state monitoring in real applications are identified, and future opportunities for removing these
barriers are presented and discussed.

1. Introduction

The  global  energy  demand  has  been  increasing  over  the  past  few
decades.  According  to  the  forecast  of  the  U.S.  Energy  Information
Administration,  global  energy  consumption  in  the  next  30  years  will
increase by about 50%, and fossil fuels will still dominate world energy
in 2050 [1]. However, the increase in greenhouse gas emissions and the
global climate change, caused by the excessive use of fossil fuels, urge
the transition of the world energy system from fossil fuel-based to a more
sustainable  one  [2–4].  Transportation  electrification  is  one  of  the
promising solutions to achieve such a transition and has become a strong
driving  force  for  the  rapid  development  of  electric  mobilities  such  as
electric vehicles (EVs) [5,6] and electric aircraft [7–9].

Lithium-ion  batteries  (LIBs),  owing  to  their  superiority  in  energy/

power density, efficiency, and cycle life, have been widely applied as the
primary energy storage and power component in electric mobilities [5,
10].  However,  technological  bottlenecks  related  to  thermal  issues  of
LIBs,  including  thermal  runaway  [11,12],  reduced  energy  and  power
densities  in  cold  climates  [13,14],  temperature-induced  accelerated
battery degradation [15,16], and extreme fast charging (XFC) [17–19],
still  hinder  the  wide  adoptions  of  electric  mobilities  despite  their
increasing market penetration in the past decade. In these aspects, the
temperature  has  a  non-negligible  impact  on  LIBs,  which  brings  great
challenges to the management of battery safety, performance, and life-
span.  For  instance,  when  the  battery  temperature  exceeds  the  safety
threshold  under  abuse  conditions,  thermal  runaway  can  be  triggered
and accompanied by an intense energy release, causing drastic battery
temperature rise and even safety accidents such as fire or explosion [11,
12]. Apart  from extreme cases, the  temperature effect  on LIBs is  also

* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: xiaosonghu@ieee.org (X. Hu), ret@energy.aau.dk (R. Teodorescu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101120
Received 17 March 2023; Received in revised form 31 July 2023; Accepted 26 August 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)101120Availableonline22September20230360-1285/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Y. Zheng et al.

Abbreviations

1D
2D
3D
AC
AI
BMS
BTMS
CC-CV
CNN
DC
DFOS
DKF
DPS
ECM
EIS
EKF
ESO
ETNN
EUKF
EV
FDM
FEM
FNN
FOM
FVM
GRU
KF
K-L
LCO
LFP
LIB

one dimensional
two dimensional
three dimensional
alternating current
artificial intelligence
battery management system
battery thermal management system
constant current-constant voltage
convolutional neural network
direct current
distributed fiber optic sensor
dual Kalman filter
distributed parameter systems
equivalent circuit model
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
extended Kalman filter
extended state observer
electrochemical-thermal-neural-network
extended unscented Kalman filter
electric vehicle
finite difference method
finite element method
feed-forward neural network
full-order model
finite volume method
gated recurrent unit
Kalman filter
Karhunen-Lo`eve
lithium cobalt oxide
lithium iron phosphate
lithium-ion battery

long short-term memory
LSTM
machine learning
ML
multiple model estimator
MME
mean relative error
MRE
nonlinear autoregressive network with exogenous input
NARX
lithium nickel cobalt aluminum oxide
NCA
nickel manganese cobalt oxide
NMC
non-zero-intercept frequency
NZIF
ordinary differential equation
ODE
partial differential equation
PDE
prognostics and health management
PHM
physics-informed machine learning
PIML
physics-informed neural network
PINN
quadratic assumption
QA
R&D
research and development
RBF-NN  radial basis function neural network
RMSE
RNN
SBF
SEI
SG
SOC
SOE
SOH
SOP
SOT
SP
TDL
TEC
UKF
XFC
ZIF

root mean square error
recurrent neural network
spatial basis functions
solid electrolyte interface
spectral-Galerkin
state of charge
state of energy
state of health
state of power
state of temperature
single particle
tapped delay line
thermal equivalent circuit
unscented Kalman filter
extreme fast charging
zero-intercept frequency

significant during normal operations. In cold climates, the performance
of LIBs is severely impaired due to sluggish electrochemistry inside the
cell  [14,20].  The  available  energy  and  power  of  the  cell  decline
dramatically with the decreasing battery temperature [21–23], leading
to  reduced  performance  and  range  anxiety  of  electric  mobilities  in
winter. Furthermore, improper  temperatures also give rise to acceler-
◦
ated battery aging. At low temperatures (e.g., below 0
C), the graphite
anode becomes susceptible to lithium plating during the charging pro-
cess and particles at the battery electrodes are also likely to experience
fractures  during  operations  [15,16].  At  elevated  temperatures  (e.g.,
above  35
C),  side  reactions  such  as  the  growth  of  solid  electrolyte
interface  (SEI)  layer  and  positive  electrode  structural  decomposition
become  dominant [16,19,24]. Temperature is  a critical barrier to the
XFC  of  batteries.  Specifically,  fast  charging  at  low  temperatures  in-
creases the risk of lithium plating, which results in accelerated battery
aging [16,18,19]. XFC at high temperatures is also challenging since the
rapid  increase  of  battery  temperature  as  a  result  of  intensified  heat
generation  during  XFC  could  make  batteries  reach  abuse  conditions,
even without the development of internal short circuits [17,18,25].

◦

To  remove  these  thermally  induced  technical  barriers,  effective
battery management is still the best solution at the operational level to
ensure safe, efficient, and long-lasting operations of LIBs [26], in addi-
tion to the battery material improvement with a long-term research and
development (R&D) process. One of the most important roles of a bat-
tery management system (BMS) is to ensure optimal battery operations
that are conducive to battery safety and performance enhancements, as
well  as  degradation  minimization.  Since  temperature  has  significant
impacts on LIBs in many aspects, considering the thermal state of bat-
teries  in  the  course  of  battery  management  is  indispensable.  In  this

context, it is of paramount importance for the BMS to obtain the thermal
state  of  LIBs  during  applications  such  as  battery  safety  management,
operation  control,  as  well  as  prognostics  and  health  management
(PHM). Acquiring the thermal state information about batteries benefits
battery management in several aspects. From the perspective of battery
safety, monitoring the battery’s thermal state helps to keep the battery
within  the  safety  threshold  and  realize  early  detection  of  potential
thermal faults which could lead to hazardous incidents such as thermal
runaways [11,27–30]. In particular, nowadays the LIBs in electric mo-
bilities are shifting towards larger cells with higher energy and power
densities, which inevitably increases the risk of thermal hazards. From
the  perspective  of  fast  charging,  effective  thermal  state  monitoring
makes
it  possible  to  regulate  the  battery  temperature  to  a
charging-favorable range through active thermal management so that
XFC  can  be  achieved  without  inducing  safety  issues  and  sacrificing
battery lifetime [18,31–36]. From the perspective of battery operation,
knowing the battery thermal state information allows the BMS to eval-
uate the power and energy capability of LIBs under different operating
conditions,  which  contributes  to  maximizing  battery  performance
[37–39]. From the perspective of battery health management, applying
the thermal states information enables better state of health (SOH) es-
timations  at  both  the  cell  level  [40–42]  and  pack  level  [43],  and
therefore promotes the prognostic and maintenance of battery systems.
Nevertheless, despite that significant efforts have been made in under-
standing  the  battery  thermal  process  during  the  design  stage  of  the
battery thermal management system (BTMS) [44–47], effective onboard
monitoring of battery thermal states during battery operations has not
received adequate attention, which is still one of the main challenges to
devising advanced BMS.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011202

Y. Zheng et al.

Efforts have been dedicated over the years to achieve effective on-
board battery thermal state monitoring. The most direct approach is to
measure the battery temperature via various measurement devices such
as thermistors and thermocouples [48–50]. These temperature sensors
can be placed at the battery surface to measure the surface temperature
during operations [48,51]. Nevertheless, in real-world applications, the
number of temperature sensors in a battery system is often limited as it is
not realistic to place a temperature sensor at the surface of each cell for
cost and complexity considerations, particularly when the battery sys-
tem consists of hundreds or even thousands of cells. It is reported that
the  average  sensor-to-cell  ratio  in  state-of-the-art  battery  systems  is
around  1/10  [52].  Moreover,  even  with  temperature  sensors  at  the
battery  surface,  these  surface-mounted  sensors  cannot  track  the
rapid-varying internal temperatures as a result of the heat transfer delay
from the battery core to the surface, especially at high charge/discharge
rates [51,53]. Embedding a temperature sensor inside the battery cell
can only be realized under lab conditions and is technically challenging
during  onboard  applications  [50,54,55].  Given  limited  onboard  tem-
perature sensors and their inability to measure internal temperatures,
the thermal state information of batteries that can be obtained through
conventional monitoring approaches is very limited. Without compre-
hensive  thermal  state  information  of  most  batteries,  managing  the
safety, performance, and reliability of the whole battery system becomes
a  formidable  task.  Temperature  estimation  techniques,  by  taking
advantage  of  measurable  signals  such  as  current,  voltage,  impe-
dance/resistance,  and  possibly  the  measured  surface  temperature  if
available, provide another alternative to monitor the thermal state of
LIBs [53,55,56]. Various strategies have been developed in recent de-
cades to estimate the temperature in different parts of LIBs [48–50,57,
58]. Although the technical maturity of these methods is different, the
ultimate purpose is to develop temperature estimation approaches that
can obtain comprehensive thermal state information for better battery
management under different applications.

The overarching goal of this article is to provide a timely and sys-
tematic review of the latest progress in temperature estimation of LIBs
for effective thermal state monitoring. Novel approaches recently pro-
posed and a comprehensive classification of existing methodologies, are
included to better reflect the technological status and trends of this ever-
evolving topic. Unlike existing reviews on battery temperature estima-
tion, this work starts with a detailed discussion about the metrics that
are used to characterize battery thermal states by considering battery
formats, battery thermal properties, and the spatiotemporal attribute of
battery  temperature.  Metrics  such  as  surface  temperature,  core  tem-
perature, bulk temperature, and temperature distribution, are discussed
in  terms  of  their  applicability  and  limitations  in  thermal  state  moni-
toring  under  different  battery  application  scenarios.  Afterward,  a
comprehensive  review  of  various  temperature  estimation  methods  is
presented. Three categories of temperature estimation methods, namely
impedance/resistance-based  estimation,  thermal  model-based  estima-
tion,  and  data-driven  estimation  are  reviewed  and  elucidated  with
respect to their principles, strengths, weaknesses, and technical matu-
rities.  Then  representative  studies  of  each  estimation  category  are
summarized  and  compared in  detail to  uncover the  common  features
and identify the main limitations. Key challenges to battery temperature
estimations, which originate from the battery thermal dynamics, oper-
ating conditions, sensing techniques, and the onboard applicability of
the  existing  methods,  have  also  been  identified  and  elaborated.  The
possible opportunities to address these challenges in future research are
provided and elucidated from different aspects.

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section  2,
metrics  used  to  characterize  the  battery  thermal  states  are  discussed.
Section  3  reviews  and  compares  the  existing  temperature  estimation
techniques in detail. The challenges and possible research directions for
battery temperature estimation are presented in Section 4 and Section 5
respectively, followed by key conclusions in Section 6.

2. Metrics for battery thermal state characterization

Until now, there is no rigorous definition regarding battery thermal
states in the existing literature [59]. Different from other battery states
such  as  state  of  charge  (SOC),  state  of  power  (SOP),  state  of  energy
(SOE), and SOH, which are often treated as lumped parameters in the
existing  BMS,  battery  temperature  not  only  varies  with  time  but  also
depend on the location inside the cell. During battery operations, the
temperature distribution inside the cell is usually non-uniform, and such
spatially non-uniform temperature affects the local material properties
of batteries to different extents. Due to such a spatiotemporal charac-
teristic, it is difficult to define a single and universal index similar to that
in SOC, SOP, and SOH to capture the complete information of battery
thermal  states.  Particularly,  for  different  battery  chemistries,  internal
structures,  formats,  cooling  conditions,  and  pack  arrangements,  the
spatial  temperature  distribution  inside  the  cell  and  the  pack  will  be
different.

Existing  literature  attempts  to  include  temperature  as  one  of  the
critical internal states of LIBs and referred to it as the state of temper-
ature (SOT) in order to reflect the thermal state of batteries [57,59,60].
However, there is no clear specification about which temperature value
should be used as the SOT. The surface temperature and the core tem-
perature of batteries have been commonly reported in the literature to
indicate the SOT of LIBs [56,61–63], yet the advantages and disadvan-
tages of applying these metrics to battery management have never been
discussed. Merely relying on simple metrics (e.g., surface temperature)
as the thermal state during battery management can hardly satisfy the
ever-changing application requirements of the battery system, as these
simple metrics are not able to provide comprehensive information about
battery thermal states. For instance, only monitoring the surface tem-
perature  cannot  meet  the  demand  of  safety  management,  where  the
highest battery temperature that typically occurs inside the cell should
be  tracked  and  maintained  below  a  threshold  [53].  Furthermore,  the
amount  of  battery  temperature  information  required  by  different  ap-
plications is also different. In this context, it is of great importance to use
proper  metrics  to  monitor  and  evaluate  battery  thermal  state  for
different application purposes under various operating scenarios.

This section summarizes the potential metrics that could be used as
indicators of the thermal state of LIBs and discusses their applicability
and  limitations  in  different  applications.  Four  possible  metrics,
including the surface temperature, core temperature, bulk temperature,
and  temperature  distribution,  are  illustrated  in  Fig.  1,  with  their  key
strengths and limitations summarized.

2.1. Surface temperature

The surface temperature of the cell is probably the most intuitive way
to  reflect  battery  thermal  states  since  it  can  be  measured  directly  by
temperature sensors mounted  on the battery  surface. Ideally, it is  ex-
pected that this simple metric could manifest all the thermal state in-
formation  under  different  battery  operations.  However,  since  the
temperature  gradient  is  quite  common  inside  batteries  during  opera-
tions, the surface temperature can only be used to indicate the thermal
state  under  some  specific  conditions  where  the  temperature  non-
uniformity  is  negligible.  If  the  Biot  number  of  the  cell  is  sufficiently
small (i.e., Bi = hL/k≪0.1, where h is the heat transfer coefficient, L is
the characteristic length of the cell, and k denotes the thermal conduc-
tivity of the cell), the heat conduction inside the cell is much faster than
the heat convection at the surface [44,64]. In this case, the temperature
distribution inside LIBs can be assumed uniform, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
To satisfy this prerequisite, either the thermal conductivity of the cell
should be significantly higher than the heat transfer coefficient or the
cell thickness must be small enough [44].

Generally, the thermal conductivity greatly affects the temperature
distribution  of  batteries  and  LIBs  are  typical  with  highly  anisotropic
thermal conductivity due to their layered structure. Such anisotropy can

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011203

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig.  1. Potential  metrics  for  the  characterization  of  battery  thermal  states  and  their  key features.  (a) Surface  temperature,  (b)  Core  temperature,  (c)  Bulk  tem-
perature, (d) Temperature distribution.

be  manifested  by  the  thermal  conductivities  in  the  direction  of  stack
layers and through them, which are also called in-plane conductivity k‖
and through-plane conductivity k⊥, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 2
(a).  The measured  values of  k‖ and k⊥ exhibit significant  differences,
with  k‖ basically  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  k‖ regardless  of

battery chemistries, as summarized in Fig. 2(b), which gives rise to a
large temperature gradient in the through-plane direction. The thermal
conductivities  of  the  cell, particularly  k⊥,  can be  varied  notably with
temperature, SOC, and SOH (with variation up to 33%), as illustrated in
Fig.  2(c),  causing  different  temperature  distributions  under  various

Fig. 2. In-plane  and through-plane  thermal  conduc-
tivities  of  LIBs  as  well  as  their  properties  [45].  (a)
Definition of the in-plane and through-plane thermal
conductivities for different stack patterns in different
battery formats. Note that the through-plane thermal
conductivity is determined by both the thermal con-
ductivity  of  the  stack  layers  as  well  as  the  thermal
contact resistance between them. (b) Statistical plots
of  measured  values  of  in-plane  and  through-plane
thermal  conductivities  in  the  existing  literature.
NCA-G,  NMC-G,  and  LFP-G  refer  to  lithium  nickel
cobalt  aluminum  oxide-graphite,  nickel  manganese
cobalt
iron
phosphate-graphite,  respectively.  (c)  Dependency  of
in-plane and through-plane thermal conductivities on
cell temperature, SOC, and SOH.

oxide-graphite,

lithium

and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011204

Y. Zheng et al.

conditions.

Whether  the  surface  temperature  can  indicate  a  battery’s  thermal
state or not also depends on the format and the internal structure of LIBs,
as the temperature characteristics of different cells would be different.
As for cylindrical cells, since wound stack is often applied to them (as
shown in Fig. 2(a)), the in-plane direction and through-plane direction
correspond  to  the  axial  direction  and  radial  direction  of  the  cell,
respectively. As such, the temperature distribution in the axial direction
can be assumed uniform, and temperature gradients mainly exist in the
radial direction owing to the much lower thermal conductivity in the
radial direction, as shown in Fig. 3(a) [65–67]. For cylindrical cells with
a small radius (e.g., 18650 cell), the Biot number is usually less than 0.1
(cid:0)
)
under  natural  convection  cooling  conditions  (e.g.,  h < 25 W/
)
and the temperature difference between the battery core and the surface
◦
can be less than 5
C even at high operating rates, as presented in Fig. 3
(b)  [68–71].  In  such  cases,  merely  using  the  surface  temperature  is
enough  to  indicate the  thermal  state of  the  battery. However,  for  cy-
lindrical batteries under forced convection cooling conditions or with a
larger radius (e.g., 26650 cells, 21700 cells, and 46800 cells), the Biot
number could be larger than 0.1 so that the temperature at the battery
center  could  be  significantly  higher  than  that  at  the  surface,  as  illus-
trated  in  Fig.  3(c)  [51,72,73].  Under  such  circumstances,  the  surface
temperature only provides limited information about the battery ther-
mal state, while information about temperature gradients as well as the
maximum temperature inside the cell is lacking. Regarding large-format
LIBs such as prismatic cells, the Biot number can easily be larger than 0.1
owing to the large cell thickness and low through-plane thermal con-
ductivity [64]. Hence, it is typical for these large-format cells to have a
significant  temperature  gradient  inside  so  that  assuming  uniform  in-
ternal temperature distribution becomes unreasonable [74,75]. In this
way, the surface temperature only provides very limited thermal state

m2K

information about prismatic cells, particularly at high operating rates.
Important information such as the temperature gradient and potential
hot  spots,  can  be  ignored  when  merely  using  surface  temperature  to
indicate the thermal states of large-format cells.

When managing LIBs, purely using surface temperature to indicate
the thermal state of batteries may lead to inferior battery management
as some important thermal state information that plays a decisive role in
battery safety and performance will be neglected. For  demanding ap-
plications such as XFC and the take-off of electric aircraft where batte-
ries undergo high charging/discharging rates, temperature information
with a high spatial resolution is needed in order to detect hazardous and
volatile local hot spots, which helps to implement active thermal man-
agement strategies to minimize the temperature gradient and eliminate
those hot spots [18,76]. If only surface temperature is considered, the
neglection of internal temperature will make the BMS unconscious of
thermal safety hazards that occur inside the cell, or lead to conservative
estimation of battery energy and power capabilities that are determined
by the temperature of the jelly roll. However, despite the poor charac-
terization of the battery thermal state in high-rate operations, the sur-
face  temperature  can  still  provide  valuable  information  in  other
applications such as PHM of batteries, where the easily obtainable sur-
face  temperature  can  be  used  to  extract  health  indicators  for  battery
health diagnosis [41,77–79].

In summary, the surface temperature can indicate battery thermal
states only when the temperature gradient inside the cell is negligible.
This prerequisite can be achieved with the Biot number of batteries less
than 0.1 or when the battery is operating at sufficiently small rates so
that the temperature gradient induced by heat dissipation is not evident.
Simply relying on the surface temperature will probably lead to unsat-
isfactory battery management performance due to the neglect of some
important  thermal  state  information  such  as  internal  temperature,

Fig.  3. Temperature  characteristics  of  LIBs  with
different  formats  under  convective  cooling  condi-
tions. (a) Temperature distribution of 18650 cells at
the end of 1C discharge [66]. (b) Radial temperature
distribution  of  a  18650  cell  at  the  end  of  discharge
under different discharge rates [72]. (c) Temperature
distribution of a large cylindrical cell (diameter of 32
mm  and  length  of  113  mm)  at  the  end  of  a  70-A
SOC-neutral  pulse  cycle  [73].  (d)-(e)  Simulated  and
measured  temperature  distribution  of  a  20-Ah  NMC
pouch cell under 5-C discharge when t = 250 and 667
s, respectively [89]. (f) Temperature distribution of a
prismatic cell at the end of 1C discharge [66]. (g) 3D
visualization of the temperature distribution inside a
prismatic cell [85].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011205

Y. Zheng et al.

particularly during high-rate operations.

2.2. Core temperature

Core temperature is another important metric that has been widely
used  in  the  literature  to  indicate  the  thermal  state.  Compared  with
surface temperature, the core temperature of the cell is difficult to be
measured directly unless a temperature sensor is intruded inside the cell,
as depicted in Fig. 1(b) [51,53,55,80,81]. Therefore, in many real-world
applications, the core temperature of batteries can only be estimated.
Since  the  internal  temperature  of  batteries  is  higher  than  the  surface
temperature during operations [51,54], the core temperature can be an
excellent  indicator  of  the  internal  temperature.  In  addition,  the  core
temperature has a greater impact on the safety, performance, and aging
of  LIBs  than  the  surface  temperature  does  as  it  directly  affects  the
properties of the lumped electrode assembly. When the Biot number of
the cell is less than 0.1, using core temperature to represent the thermal
state is similar to that of using the surface temperature. When the Biot
number is larger than 0.1 and the current rate is high, the temperature
gradient inside the cell becomes significant [51,53,55] so that the core
temperature is necessary for capturing the internal temperature infor-
mation of the cell.

◦

◦

(cid:0)

m2K

C  [51,53]  or  even  20

Despite that the core temperature refers to the temperature at the
geometric center of the battery, it is not equivalent to the highest tem-
perature of the cell for all battery formats and cooling conditions. For
cylindrical cells under convective cooling conditions, the temperature
non-uniformity exists in the radial direction and the highest temperature
typically occurs at the battery core, as shown in Fig. 3(a)-(c) [51,53].
Under high-rate operations or forced convective cooling conditions (e.
)
g., h > 25 W/
), the temperature difference between the battery
core and the surface in some cylindrical cells with a large radius could be
larger  than  10
C,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3(c)  [73].
However,  when  cylindrical  cells  are  subjected  to  asymmetric  cooling
such as plate cooling from one tab, the maximum temperature appears
not at the battery core but close the tab away from the cooling plate
[82].  As  for  prismatic  cells  under  convective  cooling  conditions,  the
huge heat generation rate and the increased heat transfer path from the
battery core to the surface exacerbate the temperature gradients inside
the cell compared to the case in cylindrical cells [83–85]. Experiments
also observed that the temperature difference between the battery core
◦
and the surface of a prismatic cell can be greater than 10
C [62]. Under
these  circumstances,  the  core  temperature  becomes  the  highest  tem-
perature  inside  the  cell,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3(f)-(g).  Nevertheless,  for
pouch-type batteries, the temperature distribution is different from that
in  the  prismatic  cell.  Many  studies  have  indicated  that  the  highest
temperature location appears not at the center of the battery body but
close to the positive tab due to the combined effect of the non-negligible
heat generation of the positive tab as well as the non-uniform current
density and the electrochemical reactions, as shown in Fig. 3(d)-(e) [54,
86–89].  For  some  batteries  under  high-rate  discharging,  the  highest
temperature occurs near the positive tab at the beginning and then shifts
towards the bottom side near the end of the discharge [90,91]. There-
fore, for pouch-type batteries, purely monitoring the core temperature
suffers from the underestimation of the highest cell temperature.

In general, the core temperature can be a good metric for the internal
temperature of cylindrical and prismatic cells under convective cooling
conditions since it represents the highest temperature of the cell. In such
cases, monitoring the core temperature allows the BMS to control the
maximum  temperature  of  batteries  within  the  safety  threshold.
Furthermore, there is also a trend to combine the core temperature and
the surface temperature to characterize the thermal state comprehen-
sively  [61,92–95].  Consequently,  thermal  constraints  regarding  these
metrics  will  be  imposed  to  achieve  high-performance  charging  and
thermal management performance while maintaining battery safety [37,
96,97].  However,  the  core  temperature  is  usually  higher  than  the

average temperature of the jelly roll [98], and thus when applying the
core  temperature  to  estimate  the  SOP  and  SOE  may  lead  to  over-
estimation in battery utilization management. Moreover, the core tem-
perature cannot indicate the highest temperature of batteries when the
cell is subjected to asymmetric cooling, since the temperature distribu-
tion will change radically and the highest temperature location will shift
from the cell center to other locations, as investigated in Ref. [82].

2.3. Bulk temperature

The  bulk  temperature,  which  can  also  be  called  volume-averaged
temperature, reflects the average value of the temperature inside LIBs,
as shown in Fig. 1(c) [99,100]. Although it is not able to provide spatial
temperature information, the bulk temperature can be used to represent
the average temperature of the jelly roll [101] and thus directly relates
to the electrical/electrochemical behavior of batteries [102–104]. In this
regard, the bulk temperature is often used to evaluate the energy and
power capabilities of batteries [37,105]. However, the reference value
of  bulk  temperature  cannot  be  measured  directly.  There  exist  several
ways to approximate the bulk temperature of LIBs. For cylindrical and
prismatic cells, the bulk temperature can be reasonably approximated
by using the linear average of surface temperature and core temperature
[106–108]. As for pouch-type batteries, the temperature distribution is
evident mainly in the in-plane direction so that the bulk temperature of
the cell can be approximated through the average of multiple surface
temperature measurements [109].

Since bulk temperature is the average value of internal temperature
distribution,  it  can  also  be  a  good  indicator  of  the  battery’s  internal
temperature (which is similar to the role of core temperature). However,
in the presence of a large temperature gradient under high-rate opera-
tions, merely using the bulk temperature cannot provide comprehensive
information about battery thermal state since the internal temperature
gradient cannot be captured and the maximum temperature is likely to
be  underestimated  [99,100,106,110].  In  this  regard,  simply  applying
the  bulk  temperature  for  thermal  state  monitoring  may  neglect  some
potential thermal safety hazards. However, since it can better reflect the
temperature status of the jelly roll, the estimated bulk temperature can
be used to access the SOP and SOE for battery performance optimization.
Furthermore,  the  bulk  temperature  can  be  used  as  supplementary  in-
formation in addition to surface temperature and core temperature to
indicate the thermal state of LIBs more comprehensively [53,81].

2.4. Temperature distribution

Apart  from  surface  temperature,  core  temperature,  and  bulk  tem-
perature, the temperature distribution of the cell is another important
metric to characterize battery thermal state since it not only captures the
temperature values at different locations but also describes the severity
of temperature non-uniformity inside the cell, as illustrated in Fig. 1(d).
Many  studies  have  pointed  out  that  the  temperature  gradient  has  a
significant impact on the safety, performance, and aging of LIBs [111].
For  instance,  the  temperature  gradient  inside  the  cell  will  cause
non-uniform current distribution, which gives rise to local failure due to
overcharge  or  over-discharge  [73,91].  The  inhomogeneous  current
distribution in turn aggravates the temperature gradient inside the cell
by  producing  uneven  heat  generation  [18,25].  Both  the  non-uniform
temperature  and  the  local  current  lead  to  different  rates  of  side  re-
actions and local degradation rates [73,91]. Such an effect intensifies
during the high-rate operations of large-format cells, especially during
XFC [18,25]. The temperature gradient is quite common in large-format
cells such as pouch-type and prismatic cells, as shown in Fig. 3(d)-(g).
Nowadays, with the increase in battery energy density, the adoption of
thicker  electrodes  could  lead  to  increased  cell  resistance  and  greater
volumetric heat generation, rendering larger temperature gradients in-
side  the  cell.  At  the  battery  pack  level,  the  battery  system  might  be
subjected  to  varying  cooling  conditions,  causing  the  temperature

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011206

Y. Zheng et al.

distribution within the cell and the pack to change radically [82,103,
112].  To  this  end,  it  is  of  vital  importance  to  track  the  temperature
gradients within the cell and the pack in demanding applications where
uneven temperature distribution and volatile local hot spots often occur,
which  lead  to  unbalanced  charge/discharge  and  aging,  or  even  local
failure [113–115].

Conventional  thermal  state  characterization  metrics,  such  as  the
surface temperature, core temperature, or bulk temperature, can only
provide limited thermal state information about the cell and the pack
since only the temperature values at certain locations are available. To
better manage the battery system in high-rate operations, it is essential
to provide spatially resolved temperature information for BMS in order
to suppress the temperature gradient and avoid detrimental hot spots for
a longer lifetime and improved safety. Generally, the temperature dis-
tribution of LIBs can be represented in two ways. One of the mainstream
approaches is the discrete representation by using the temperatures at
multiple  key  locations  inside  the  cell  [51,56,62,116–118].  For  each
location,  the  temperature  value  and  its  variation  with  time  can  be
available. In this way, the temperature distribution of the cell consists of
temperature  information  at  all  these  key  locations.  The  other  way  is
continuous  representation  by  approximating  the  whole  temperature
field  analytically  through  continuous  functions,  such  as  polynomials
approximation  [53,98],  quadratic  assumption  [55],  and  Galerkin
approximation  [82,119].  In  this  way,  the  battery  temperature  infor-
mation in the whole battery domain becomes available rather than the
temperature values at several locations.

The temperature distribution is the most accurate and comprehen-
sive  way  to  characterize  the  battery  thermal  state  since  it  not  only
provides temporal information but also spatial information about bat-
tery temperature. Such a metric can be applied to various battery for-
mats  and  application  scenarios  to  monitor  the  thermal  states,  which
contributes  to  better  battery  management  and  thermal  control.  For
instance,  by  obtaining  the  temperature  gradient  via  temperature  dis-
tribution,  better  PHM  of  LIBs  might  be  achieved  since  battery  degra-
dation is highly related to the temperature gradient [16,120]. During
fast charging, monitoring the temperature distribution helps to imple-
ment active thermal management to improve charging safety and per-
formance  [18].  Both  discrete  and  continuous  representation  methods
have advantages and disadvantages. For discrete characterization, it can
be simple and succinct to implement by merely providing temperature
information at key nodes to describe the battery thermal state. However,
in  this  approach,  only  the  temperature  information  at  those  nodes  is
available,  while  information  regarding  the  whole  domain  is  lacking.
Therefore,  how  to  choose  the  representing  nodes  while  preserving
adequate  spatial  temperature  information  is  the  key  to  the  discrete
representation of battery thermal states. For continuous representation,
although information about the full temperature field is available, the
accuracy and complexity of this characterization approach are depen-
dent  on  the  approximation  methods.  Such  a  characterization  method
might  become  intractable  when  the  temperature  field  is  complicated
and  irregular  (e.g.,  the  temperature  field  inside  battery  packs)  [112,
121].

3. SOT estimation

3.1. Classification of SOT estimation methods

In  recent  years,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  developing
battery  thermal  state  monitoring  techniques.  Several  articles  have
summarized common monitoring methods in battery systems and clas-
sified them into various categories [49,50,58]. For instance, tempera-
ture monitoring approaches are divided into contact measurement and
contactless  measurement  by  Ma  et  al.  [49],  based  on  the  criterion  of
whether  the  temperature  sensor  is  intruded  into  batteries  or  not.
Another  classification  categorizes  the  temperature  monitoring  tech-
niques  into  hard  sensors  and  soft  sensors,  according  to  whether

hardware-based  sensors,  measurements,  or  data  acquisitions  are
involved or not [50]. Generally, hard sensors involve the use of tem-
perature sensors (e.g., thermistors and thermocouples) as well as mea-
surements  indicating  the  battery  temperature  (e.g.,  electrochemical
impedance  and  thermal  imaging)  while  soft  sensors  include  estima-
tors/observers  which  apply  models  to  infer  battery  temperature.  To
date, a comprehensive review of battery thermal state monitoring based
on SOT estimation is still lacking. Toward this end, we have developed a
systematic classification for existing battery SOT estimations, as shown
in Fig. 4. This classification categorizes the existing estimation methods
into three groups, (1) impedance and resistance-based estimation, (2)
thermal  model-based  estimation,  and  (3)  data-driven  estimation.  In
impedance  and  resistance-based  estimation,  the  relationship  between
battery  temperature  and  electrochemical  impedance  or  direct  current
(DC)  resistance is  constructed at  first and  then  leveraged  to  infer  the
battery  temperature  according  to  online  impedance/resistance  mea-
surements. Thermal model-based estimation depends on physics-based
models that describe the thermal dynamics (i.e., heat generation, heat
accumulation,  and  heat  dissipation)  of  batteries.  The  model  typically
consists of a set of algebraic or differential equations. Thermal models
used for temperature estimations can be further categorized as full-order
models  (FOMs),  reduced-order  lumped  models,  and  reduced-order
distributed  models.  In  data-driven estimation,  machine  learning  (ML)
algorithms  are  applied  to  derive  an  estimation  model  to  map  the
nonlinear relationship between the measured data and battery temper-
ature. Both pure data-driven methods and hybrid methods are included
in data-driven estimations. The former method  merely applies ML al-
gorithms  without  considering  battery  thermal  dynamics,  whereas  the
latter  combines  ML  algorithms  with  domain  knowledge  of  battery
thermal dynamics.

3.2. Impedance and resistance-based estimation

3.2.1. Electrochemical impedance

Impedance spectroscopy is an effective tool to analyze the electro-
chemical  properties  of  LIBs.  The  impedance  of  LIB  can  be  measured
according  to  the  battery  response  to  a  sinusoidal  excitation  current
signal i = I sin(ωt + φ) (galvanostatic approach) or voltage signal u =
Usin(ωt + φ) (potentiostatic  approach).  Then  the  impedance  can  be
calculated based on the voltage and current responses. By sweeping the
frequency of sinusoidal excitations over a wide range and calculating the
corresponding impedance, the impedance spectrum of the cell can be
obtained. Typically, the impedance spectrum is illustrated in the Nyquist
plane/plot,  where  the  real  part  of  the  impedance  (horizontal  axis)  is
plotted against the inverse of the imaginary part (vertical axis), as shown
in  Fig.  5(a).  Alternatively,  the  impedance  spectrum  can  also  be  illus-
trated in the Bode plot, where the amplitude and the phase are plotted
against frequencies. The electrochemical impedance can be used as an
indicator of the battery’s internal electrochemistry as different parts of
the spectrum are related to different electrochemical processes [122].
Since temperature affects electrochemical reactions inside batteries, the
electrochemical  impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS)  will  inevitably  shift
when battery temperature changes, as shown in Fig. 5(b) [80,123]. It is
worth noting that the battery EIS also varies with SOC and SOH since
these two factors will also affect internal electrochemistry to different
extents [122,124].

The electrochemical impedance-based SOT estimation generally re-
lies on the aforementioned temperature dependency of battery imped-
ance.  The  framework  of  electrochemical  impedance-based  SOT
estimation can be illustrated in Fig. 5(c). During the offline calibration
stage, the battery EIS at different temperatures, SOCs, and SOHs will be
measured in the first place. Since battery impedance depends not only
on the temperature but also on SOC and SOH, the uncertainties in SOC
and  SOH  are  likely  to  interfere  with  the  SOT  estimation  and  lead  to
increased  estimation  error  [123–125].  Therefore,  it  is  extremely
important to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the EIS results and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011207

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 4. Classification of the existing SOT estimation approaches.

Fig. 5. Typical EIS of LIBs and the framework of electrochemical impedance-based SOT estimation. (a) Typical EIS of a LIB, where different parts of the spectrum
represent different electrochemical processes under the corresponding frequency range. (b) The change of battery impedance with temperature will make the EIS
shift in the Nyquist plot. Other factors such as SOC and SOH also lead to the change of EIS. (c) A general framework of impedance-based SOT estimations, including
the offline calibration stage and online implementation stage.

find  an  optimal  frequency  range  under  which  certain  impedance  pa-
rameters, such as the real part, imaginary part, phase, and the intercept
point  of  the  impedance  spectrum  with  the  real  axis,  are  sensitive  to
battery temperature but remain independent of battery SOC and SOH. In
this way, the interference of SOC and SOH on temperature estimation
can be eliminated. Afterward, a mapping relationship between battery
temperature  and  the  impedance  parameters  under  the  optimal  fre-
quency will be constructed through linear fit, polynomial fit, or Arrhe-
nius equation [55,126,127]. This mapping relationship will serve as the
basis  for  online  temperature  estimation.  During  the  online  imple-
mentation  stage,  the  battery  impedance  under  the  selected  optimal
frequency will be measured periodically and the impedance parameter
will  be  extracted  according  to  the  measurement.  Then,  based  on  the
constructed  mapping  relationship,  the  battery  temperature  can  be
inferred without the involvement of temperature sensors [122,128].

Finding the optimal frequency and appropriate impedance parame-
ters is the key to impedance-based SOT estimations since the impedance
parameters exhibit different sensitivities to temperature and other fac-
tors  such  as  SOC  and  SOH  under  different  frequencies.  A  sensitivity
analysis of the impedance parameters based on a 90-Ah LFP cell can be
illustrated in Fig. 6. For this LFP cell, the real part, the imaginary part,
and the magnitude at low frequencies (i.e., below 100 Hz) show high

sensitivities  to  temperature  in  a  wide  temperature  range,  while  the
phase only has high sensitivity to temperature in a narrow temperature
range. At low-frequency and low-SOC regions, both the real part and the
imaginary part have high sensitivities to battery SOC, as shown in Fig. 6
(e)-(f),  meaning  that  applying  the  impedance  parameters  at  low-
frequency  region  to  estimate  SOT  is  susceptible  to  SOC  interference.
Generally,  for  batteries  with  different  chemistries,  the  suitable
temperature-sensitive impedance parameters and the optimal frequency
used for SOT estimation will be different. For instance, the real part of
the impedance at 10.3 kHz is sensitive to temperature and insensitive to
SOC for a 2-Ah pouch cell with a blend of lithium cobalt oxide (LCO) and
NCA as the cathode [127]. As for LCO batteries, the imaginary part of
the  electrochemical  impedance  at  300  Hz  was  found  to  vary  mono-
tonically with battery temperature and keep independent of SOC, based
on the EIS tests conducted by Spinner et al. [129]. A two-stage fitting
between  the  imaginary  part  at  300  Hz  and  battery  temperature  was
constructed and used to estimate the battery temperature up to 95
C,
which is of great significance to the safety monitoring of batteries close
to thermal abuse conditions [129]. Other studies on NMC cells and LCO
cells have indicated that the imaginary part of the impedance under 200
Hz, 263.03 Hz, and 524.81 Hz is sensitive to temperature while insen-
sitive to SOC and SOH [130,131]. Raijmakers et al. [123] observed that

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011208

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 6. Sensitivity of different impedance parameters to battery temperature and SOC [125]. (a)-(d) Sensitivity of the real part, imaginary part, phase, and magnitude
to battery temperature when SOC is kept at 40%, where the unit in (a), (b) and (d) is μΩ/K and in (c) is degree/K, (e)-(f) Sensitivity of the real part and imaginary part
to SOC when the battery temperature is 30

C.

◦

the intercept frequency, i.e., the frequency at which the imaginary part
of the impedance spectrum becomes zero, depends on the battery tem-
perature  while  was  independent  of  the  SOC  and  SOH  based  on  their
study  on  LFP  and  NCA  cells.  In  their  later  work,  they  applied
non-zero-intercept  frequency  (NZIF),  i.e.,  the  frequency  at  which  the
imaginary part of EIS is equal to a non-zero constant, to estimate the
temperature of 90-Ah prismatic LFP batteries and claimed that the NZIF
method could reduce the influence of interfering current on impedance
measurement  compared  to  zero-intercept  frequency  (ZIF)  [132].  In
addition to the impedance parameters in the Nyquist plot, parameters in
the Bode plot also have similar properties regarding their dependency on
temperature,  SOC,  and  SOH.  For  example,  the  study  from  Srinivasan
et al. [126,133] suggests that, in the frequency range between 40 and
100 Hz, the phase  of the cell is primarily dependent on the cell tem-
perature and is almost independent of SOC, when the cell temperature
◦
varied from (cid:0) 20 to 60
C. This conclusion is based on the EIS results of
three LIBs with different chemistries, including an LCO cell, an LFP cell,
and a cell with unknown cathode material. Similar conclusions can be
found in Refs. [124,134] based on the studies on LFP batteries and the
results further suggest that over a wide frequency range (from 0.01 Hz to
10 kHz), the phase of impedance was virtually not affected by battery
SOH.

Many impedance-based SOT estimation studies only rely on a single
impedance parameter to achieve estimation, which may limit the esti-
mation accuracy and robustness. Since different impedance parameters
have different sensitivities to battery SOC and temperature, the combi-
nation  of  different  impedance  parameters  can  make  the  impedance-
based  SOT  estimation  less  susceptible  to  the  uncertainties  of  battery
SOC and SOH, and therefore achieves higher estimation accuracy. For
instance, Beelen et al. [125,135] quantitatively analyzed and compared
the estimation accuracy based on different impedance parameter com-
binations. Using a linear combination of the real part and the imaginary
part at 50 Hz, their method achieved higher estimation accuracy, with
an  average  absolute  error  (MAE)  of  0.4
C,  compared  to  traditional
methods that are merely based on the real part or imaginary part.

◦

In  the  above-mentioned  impedance-based  SOT  estimation  studies,
the  impedance-temperature  relationship  is  constructed  based  on  an
optimal  excitation  frequency.  However,  estimation  based  on  a  single

frequency usually suffers from interference such as measurement noise
and  temperature  gradients  inside  batteries  [136].  Furthermore,  the
optimal  excitation  frequency  might  vary  with  battery  chemistries,
limiting the generality of the single-impedance methods. To address this
issue, a mapping relationship between the battery temperature and the
impedance under multiple frequencies can be established. For instance,
Du  et  al.  [80]  developed  a  least-square-based  estimator  based  on  the
battery impedance spectrum in the mid-high frequency range (i.e., 850
mHz to 3.15 kHz) to achieve SOT estimation. Instead of measuring the
impedance  at  a  single  frequency,  the  impedance  under  the  mid-high
frequency  range  was  measured  timely  during  the  online  implementa-
tion stage. Their results suggested that compared to the method with a
single  frequency,  impedance  spectrum-based  estimation  achieved
higher accuracy and robustness on a cylindrical cell of 1.5 Ah, with root
C under different operating
mean square errors (RMSEs) less than 0.6
conditions. Str ̈obel et al. applied the whole EIS spectrum consisting of 61
frequencies  to  estimate  the  battery  temperature  by  constructing  the
estimation function based on an artificial neural network, and the RMSE
◦
of the estimation can be less than 1

C [137].

◦

Despite  the  extensive  studies  at  the  cell  level,  the  application  of
impedance-based temperature estimation in a battery pack has seldom
been  investigated.  Challenges  exist  in  measuring  the  electrochemical
impedance  of  each  cell  in  a  battery  pack.  First,  the  impedance  mea-
surement in a battery pack suffers from crosstalk interference. That is,
the  measurement  of  one  cell  will  interfere  with  the  measurement  of
adjacent cells when the measurement of each cell is carried out simul-
taneously at the same frequency [138]. Crosstalk inference will lead to
inaccurate  impedance  measurement  in  the  battery  pack,  limiting  the
accuracy  of  temperature  estimation  [138].  Furthermore,  charge/di-
scharge currents flowing through the battery pack will interfere with the
impedance measurement of each cell [139]. Beelen et al. [139] inves-
tigated the impedance-based temperature estimation in a battery pack
with two 23-Ah lithium NMC cells by considering the above two dis-
turbances.  Using  the  optimal  frequency  of  133  Hz  and  630  Hz,  the
estimation bias was within ±1
C. In addition, parallel connections are
still  being  widely  used  in  existing  battery  packs.  Such  configurations
make  it  difficult  to  obtain  the  current  flowing  through  cells  in  each
branch since adding a current sensor in each branch is not possible in

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011209

Y. Zheng et al.

practical applications owing to the high cost of current sensors. Without
knowing  the  current  flowing  through  each  cell,  it  is  challenging  to
measure the impedance of each cell in a parallel module, and therefore
estimating the temperature of each cell becomes intractable.

Although  electrochemical  impedance  can  help  realize  sensorless
temperature estimation in battery systems, the onboard application is
still  the  main  concern.  The  biggest  issue  is  the  need  for  a  specially
designed  excitation  generator  for  onboard  impedance  measurement,
which would inevitably increase the hardware cost and complexity. To
solve this issue, Howey et al. [140] proposed an onboard measurement
technique by using the existing power electronics within the drivetrain
of EVs. A motor controller was used to generate current excitation. Du
et al. [80] measured the impedance spectrum of the battery through a
specifically designed pseudo-random sequence with finite signal levels
in the time domain. The length of the sequence was chosen to be 8192
bits  and  the  signal  generating  frequency  was  7  kHz  so  that  the  mea-
surement could be accomplished within 1.17 s during online measure-
including  square  wave  [141],
ment.  Other  excitation  signals,
pseudo-random  sequence  [142,143],  random  noise  [144],  and  chirp
signals  [145],  can  also  be  used  for  online  impedance  measurement.
Another issue that challenges the onboard impedance-based SOT esti-
mation is the long relaxation time for electrochemical impedance mea-
surement.  Generally,  the  electrochemical  impedance  of  the  battery
should be measured at the quasi-steady state, which requires batteries to
have sufficient relaxation before the measurement [122]. Otherwise, the
measured impedance will deviate from the one measured at the equi-
librium  state  and  thus  lead  to  large  SOT  estimation  errors  [146].  In
real-world  applications,
in  EVs  are  usually  at
the  batteries
non-equilibrium status for the majority of the time in a driving cycle,
making  it  difficult  for  the  BMS  to  carry  out  accurate  and  real-time
impedance measurement. Therefore, fast acquisition of cell impedance
under  dynamic  operations  also  becomes  essential.  Wang  et  al.  [147]
proposed  an  online  impedance  calculation  approach  by  performing
Morlet  wavelet  transform  on  the  current  and  voltage  signals  during
operation. This approach eliminated the need for an onboard alternating
current (AC) signal generator and avoided interrupting normal battery
operations. The phase of fast-calculated impedance was applied to es-
timate the temperature of an LFP pouch cell. However, complex signal
transformations  could  bring  extra  computational  burdens  to  onboard
BMS.

In addition to onboard application issues, there exist some inherent
limitations  when  applying  electrochemical  impedance  to  monitor  the
thermal state of a battery system. One of the main limitations is that the
thermal  state  information  obtained  through  impedance-based  estima-
tion is very limited since only the average temperature of the battery can
be obtained, which is demonstrated to be close to the bulk temperature
[53,127].  Therefore,  applying  electrochemical  impedance  to  monitor
the thermal states of batteries has the possibility of underestimating the
maximum internal temperature in high-rate operations [55]. To remove
such  limitations,  impedance-based  estimations  can  be  combined  with
thermal models to obtain detailed temperature information inside bat-
teries, including the core temperature and the temperature distribution
[53,55,81]. Furthermore, the existing impedance-based estimation ap-
proaches are still unable to track the battery temperature in real-time
during dynamic operations due to the difficulty of conducting imped-
ance  measurement  under  load.  Therefore,  how  to  acquire  battery
impedance in a fast and accurate way under dynamic load conditions is
critical to the online impedance-based SOT estimations.

In summary, the impedance-based estimation can realize sensorless
temperature  estimation  by  taking  advantage  of  the  impedance-
temperature  relationship.  It  is  important  to  find  readily-to-measure
impedance parameters sensitive to battery temperature while insensi-
tive to other battery states such as SOC and SOH. To promote real-world
applications,  appropriate  onboard  excitations  and  fast  acquisitions  of
impedance under load conditions still need to be further investigated.

3.2.2. Direct current resistance

◦

◦

In addition to electrochemical impedance, measuring the DC resis-
tance of batteries in the time domain is another approach for SOT esti-
mation.  The  naturally  occurring  load  changes  during  the  battery
operations  can  be  used  as  excitations  to  extract  the  DC  resistance  of
batteries [148]. In this way, DC resistance measurements eliminate the
need for additional AC signal generators and the transformation into the
frequency domain, which are required during impedance measurement.
The  framework  for  DC  resistance-based  SOT  estimation  can  be
illustrated  in  Fig. 7(a). Similar  to the  procedures  of  impedance-based
estimations,  the  DC  resistance  of  batteries  should  be  studied  at  first
under various temperatures and SOCs, as well as with different pulse
parameters  (i.e.,  the  pulse  directions,  amplitude,  rise/fall  time,  and
calculation periods). Afterward, the optimal pulse parameter combina-
tion should be determined with which the DC resistance is sensitive to
battery  temperature  for  accurate  SOT  estimation.  A  temperature-
resistance  relationship  will  then  be  constructed  and  parameterized
with the optimal pulse parameter combination for temperature estima-
tion and a typical estimation function (with the resistance calculation
period between 10 ms and 100 ms) can be shown in Fig. 7(b), where the
battery  SOC  should  also  be  known  during  estimation.  The  RMSE  of
temperature  estimation  using  DC  resistance  could  be  within  1
C  for
both the single-cell and the cells in a 6s1p module [148]. However, with
battery aging, the capacity and the internal resistance of the battery will
inevitably change. As battery aging progresses, the discharge capacity of
the cell decreases and the DC resistance increases, as shown in Fig. 7(c).
◦
At 25
C, the average DC resistance during the 200th cycle increases by
◦
about 20% compared to the initial DC resistance, while at 30
C the cell
resistance increase is only about 2% [149]. In fact, both capacity fade
and  resistance  increase  in  the  course  of  battery  aging  will  affect  the
temperature  estimation.  It  was  found  that  the  RMSE  of  temperature
estimation  could  be  up  to  15
C  if  no  adjustment  was  made  during
battery  aging  [149].  Therefore,  to  maintain  the  high  SOT  estimation
accuracy during the battery’s whole life cycle, the temperature estima-
tion function needs to be modified in order to be adaptive to different
battery aging statuses. Ludwig et al. corrected the offset of the battery
DC resistance when the battery became aged and by relying on accurate
SOC and SOH values, the RMSE of temperature estimation on each cell
◦
in a 6s1p module could be less than 2
C over the whole life cycle [149].
To  enable  accurate  and  robust  SOT  estimation  based  on  DC  resis-
tance  under  different  conditions,  other  factors  than  SOC,  SOH,  and
temperatures that would influence the value of DC resistance should also
be  considered. For  instance,  the current  dependency of  DC  resistance
becomes more significant when the battery temperature is lower than
◦
10
C as a result of the nonlinear behavior of the charge transfer reaction
[21,150,151]. At this low-temperature range, the battery DC resistance
will reduce dramatically when the current amplitude increases, while at
room  temperature  such  resistance  variation  with  current  becomes
◦
negligible, as shown in Fig. 7(d). At 0
C, the DC resistance could reduce
by  about  50%  under  high  current  amplitude  compared  to  the  value
obtained using 1C discharge [150]. This resistance change at low tem-
peratures will interfere with the SOT estimation at low temperatures,
causing increased estimation errors. Hence, to make DC resistance-based
temperature estimation applicable to a wide temperature range ((cid:0) 30 to
45
C),  the  current  dependency  of  battery  DC  resistance  at  low  tem-
peratures  cannot  be  neglected.  Another  issue  comes  from  the
path-dependent degradation of batteries. Since the battery degradation
trajectory is related to the usage patterns [24], different usage will lead
to different variations in the internal resistance, as suggested by Refs.
[152,153]. Therefore, the aging-adaptive temperature estimation func-
tion parameterized under one usage pattern may cause increased esti-
mation errors when estimating the SOT of batteries under other usage
patterns. In this regard, more studies are needed in the future to inves-
tigate  the  aging-adaptive  SOT  estimation  under  different  degradation
patterns based on DC resistance.

◦

To  summarize,  the  DC  resistance-based  SOT  estimation  exhibit

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112010

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 7. DC resistance-based SOT estimation. (a) The
working  principle  of  the  DC  resistance-based  SOT
estimation  [149].  (b)  Constructed  temperature  esti-
mation  function  based  on  the  DC  resistance  with  a
calculation period of 100 ms [148]. (c) DC resistance
of  the  cell  versus  discharged  capacity  in  different
cycle  numbers  (or  aging  status)  [149].  (d)  Current
dependency  of  the  battery  DC  resistance  under
different temperatures [150]. The left is the measured
value  at  different  temperatures  and  the  right  is  the
relative  value  to  the  resistance  obtained  using  1C
discharge current at respective temperatures.

advantages  in  simplicity  and  applicability  in  the  time  domain,  which
makes the onboard application possible. Such an estimation method can
be extended to batteries with different chemistry and formats [101], and
also  has  the  potential  to  be  applied  in  a  battery  module  [148,149].
However, similar to impedance-based estimation, the battery tempera-
ture estimated by DC resistance is close to the average temperature of
the jelly roll [101], which can be regarded as the bulk temperature. In
this  way,  the  core  temperature  of  the  battery  is  likely  to  be  under-
estimated, especially for large-format cells under high-rate operations.
Furthermore, the current pulses generated by load change may not al-
ways  be  the  same  under  real-world  dynamic  current  profiles,  and
therefore how to guarantee the optimal pulse parameters under varying
load  conditions  is  another  challenge  to  DC  resistance-based  SOT  esti-
mations. Until now, the DC resistance-based SOT estimation has only
been  applied  to  the  series-connected  battery  module.  Similar  to  the
challenges  faced  by  electrochemical  impedance-based  estimation  in  a
battery  pack  with  parallel  connections,  the  lack  of  current  sensors  in
parallel branches will make it difficult to extract the DC resistance of
each cell and thus hinders the temperature monitoring of each cell in a
battery system.

3.2.3. Summary of impedance and resistance-based estimation

The  summary  of  all  the  representative  studies  of  impedance  and

resistance-based  SOT  estimations  is  presented  in  Table  1.  Both  the
impedance-based and resistance-based methods can estimate the bulk
temperature of batteries without the use of temperature sensors based
on appropriate impedance/resistance parameters, which helps acquire
the  temperature  of  those  cells  without  surface-mounted  temperature
sensors in a battery system. However, the accuracy of both estimation
methods is typically not high enough, with deviations usually around
1
C. In addition, these two methods are not able to achieve real-time
estimations  (e.g.,  second-by-second  estimation)  of  battery  tempera-
ture, making their online applicability limited. Finally, the amount of
battery thermal state information obtained from impedance/resistance-
based estimations is very limited, with only the bulk temperature ob-
tained, which might lead to the underestimation of the maximum bat-
tery temperature.

◦

For impedance-based estimations, the battery impedance in the high-
mid frequency range (i.e., 1 to 1000 Hz) is usually used, where certain
impedance  parameters  are  sensitive  to  the  battery  temperature  while
insensitive to battery SOC and SOH. Most impedance-based methodol-
ogies have been verified against a wide temperature range (i.e., (cid:0) 20 to
50
C), suggesting their effectiveness in battery SOT estimation. More-
over,  the  impedance  characteristics  of  the  cell  might  change  with
chemistries  and  formats  such  that  the  optimal  frequency  for  the  SOT
estimation obtained through EIS results of one type of battery should be

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112011

Y. Zheng et al.

Table 1
Summary of studies related to impedance and resistance-based SOT estimation.

[127]

2-Ah KOKAM
SLPB834374H

Blend of LCO
and NCA

Real part

10.3 kHz

[129]

2.6-Ah 18650

[130]

2.8-Ah

LCO

LCO

Imaginary part

300 Hz

Imaginary part

200 Hz

RMSE 1.41

◦

C

10 to 55

◦

C

[131]

2-Ah 18650

NMC

Imaginary part

Method

Reference

Battery specifications

Type

Chemistry

Electrochemical

impedance-based

[126,
133]

[124]

53-Ah GS Yuasa
LSE50002
2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
4.4-Ah Boston
Power Swing 4400
8-Ah prismatic

[134]

1.3-Ah 18650

LCO
LFP
–

LFP

LFP

[123]

[132]

[125,
135]

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
7.5-Ah cylindrical
90-Ah prismatic

LFP
NCA

LFP

90-Ah prismatic

LFP

[80]

1.5-Ah 18650

–

[137]

[139]

[147]

DC resistance-based

[148]

[149]

1.5-Ah Samsung
INR18650-15L1,
3-Ah Sony
US18650VTC6,
2.35-Ah Panasonic
NCA 103450
23-Ah prismatic

8-Ah prismatic
40-Ah pouch

3.5-Ah LG
INR18650-MJ1
3.5-Ah LG
INR18650-MJ1

NMC
NMC
NCA

NMC

LFP

NMC

NMC

Impedance/
resistance parameter

Frequency

Accuracy

Phase shift

40-100 Hz

–

Validation
temperature
range

(cid:0) 20 to 66

◦

C

Thermal state
information

Bulk
temperature

Phase shift

Phase shift

1, 5, 10, 50,
and 100 Hz
12 Hz

–

(cid:0) 10 to 28

◦

C

◦

◦

Average error
<1
C
±0.17
C (SOC
◦
known), ±2.5
C
(SOC unknown)
◦
Deviation <5.6

C

5 to 55

◦

C

0 to 30

◦

C

(cid:0) 10 to 95

◦

C

Intercept frequency

Non-zero intercept
frequency
Combination of the
real part and
imaginary part
Combination of the
real part and
imaginary part
Real part

524.81 Hz
263.03 Hz
200-6000 Hz
200-1800 Hz

RMSE 0.433
RMSE 0.225
–

◦

◦

C
C

10 to 55

◦

C

(cid:0) 20 to 50

◦

C

100-800 Hz

Bias: ±1

◦

C

20 to 40

◦

C

50 Hz

Deviation <0.4

◦

C

(cid:0) 20 to 50

◦

C

3.15 kHz to
850 mHz

1 Hz to 10
kHz

Deviation <0.6

◦

C

(cid:0) 20 to 20

◦

C

◦

C
◦

RMSE 1
RMSE 0.5
RMSE 0.7

◦

C
C

10 to 60

◦

C

Combination of the
real part and
imaginary part
Phase shift of
calculated
impedance spectrum
Calculated period:
100 ms
Calculated period:
120 ms

133 Hz and
630 Hz

Deviation <1

◦

C

(cid:0) 20 to 50

◦

C

10 Hz

Deviation <0.5

◦

C

15 to 30

◦

C

–

–

RMSE <1

◦

C

25 to 30

◦

C

RMSE <2

◦

C

25 to 30

◦

C

Bulk
temperature
Bulk
temperature
Bulk
temperature

Bulk
temperature
Bulk
temperature
Bulk
temperature
Bulk
temperature

Bulk
temperature
Bulk
temperature

Bulk
temperature

Bulk
temperature

Bulk
temperature

Bulk
temperature

Bulk
temperature
Bulk
temperature

meticulously  applied  to  other  batteries  with  different  formats  and
chemistries.  As  for  DC  resistance-based  estimations,  despite  easy
implementations, the number of related studies is still limited, and the
methods are only validated in a narrow temperature range. More studies
are expected to be carried out in the future to investigate this method
systematically in terms of different battery formats and operating con-
ditions (e.g., cold environment). In addition, this method is also faced
with challenges caused by path-dependent battery degradation, as the
internal  resistance  of  batteries  changes  distinctively  under  different
usage patterns.

3.3. Thermal model-based estimation

Until now, thermal model-based estimation is still the mainstream
approach  in  the  existing  literature  to  estimate  battery  SOT.  Thermal
models provide insights into the thermal processes such as heat gener-
ation, heat accumulation, and heat dissipation that occur inside LIBs,
and are therefore more generalizable than other methodologies. Basi-
cally, accurate thermal models are indispensable for model-based SOT
estimations.

There are various ways to model battery thermal dynamics and the

existing  thermal  models  vary  in  fidelity  and  complexity.  The existing
thermal models can be classified into three categories, namely FOMs,
reduced-order lumped models, and reduced-order distributed models. In
this section, these three types of thermal models and the corresponding
SOT estimation methods will be introduced in detail.

3.3.1. Full-order model

A battery can be viewed as an independent thermodynamic system
during operations. The battery thermal process is known as distributed
parameter systems (DPS), where the input, output, or even parameters
vary  in  both  time  and  space  [154].  The  thermal  process  and  the
spatiotemporal property of battery temperature can be described by the
full-order  thermal  model,  which  applies  partial  differential  equations
(PDEs) to describe the energy balance inside the cell as follows [155],

ρCp

dT
dt

=

∂
∂x

(

)

(

)

)

(

kz

∂T
∂z

+

∂
∂z

ky

∂T
∂y

+

∂
∂y

kx

∂T
∂x

+  ̇Q

(1)

in which ρ and Cp represent the density and the specific heat capacity of
the battery, respectively, kx, ky, and kz are the thermal conductivity in x,
 ̇
Q is the heat generation rate. The left
y, and z directions, respectively,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112012

Y. Zheng et al.

side of the equation describes the heat accumulated inside the cell while
the right-hand side of the equation denotes heat conduction in different
directions and heat generation inside the cell. The temperature T in Eq.
(1) not only varies with time but also changes in x, y, and z directions.
Under some reasonable assumptions, the 3D energy balance equation
can be simplified into 1D or 2D. For instance, 1D heat transfer PDE is
sufficient for cylindrical cells under convective cooling conditions due to
significantly higher thermal conductivity in the axial direction than that
in the radial direction, which gives the following equations,

ρCp

dT
dt

= kt

∂2T
∂r2

+

kt
r

∂T
∂r

+  ̇Q

(2)

where kt is the thermal conductivity in the radial direction. As for pouch
batteries, the heat transfer in the through-plane direction can be ignored
due  to  the small  thickness,  and  therefore  2D  PDE can be  obtained as
follows,

ρCp

dT
dt

=

∂
∂x

(

)

)

(

ky

∂T
∂y

+

∂
∂y

kx

∂T
∂x

+  ̇Q

(3)

The heat generation inside the battery is an intricate process, which
consists of ohmic heat, polarization heat, and electrochemical reaction
heat [44,156,157]. Bernardi et al. [100] derived a complete expression
of heat generation inside the battery, by considering the electrical power
produced by the battery, enthalpy of reaction, enthalpy of mixing, and
phase change. However, such a calculation method is quite complicated
and  requires  the  calibration  of  many  microscopic  parameters.  A
simplified equation with the neglection of enthalpy of mixing and phase
change can be expressed as follows [158],

 ̇Q = I(UOCV (cid:0) V) (cid:0)

IT

∂UOCV
∂T

(4)

where  I,  UOCV,  and  V  denote  current  (positive  for  discharging  and
negative  for  charging),  open  circuit  voltage,  and  terminal  voltage,
respectively.

The  energy  balance  equation  can  be  solved  after  specifying  the
boundary conditions, which represent the heat exchange between the
battery  body  and  the  surroundings.  The  heat  exchange  at  battery
boundaries includes heat conduction, heat convection, and heat radia-
tion. Numerical methods, such finite element method (FEM), finite dif-
ference method (FDM), and finite volume method (FVM), can be applied
to solve the full-order thermal model according to the measured current
and voltage based on initial and boundary conditions. Afterward, the
spatially  resolved  temperature  distribution  inside  the  cell  can  be
estimated.

Some researchers have investigated internal temperature estimations
based  on  FOMs.  For  instance,  Zhang  et  al.  proposed  an  online  PDE
boundary  observer  to  estimate  the  temperature  distribution  inside  a
cylindrical battery based on 1D heat transfer PDE, by merely using the
measured surface temperature as the feedback [159]. Dey et al. designed
a PDE observer to estimate the temperature distribution inside the cy-
lindrical batteries under both normal and faulty conditions [160,161].
Relying  on  the  temperature  estimations,  a  cascaded  observer  can  be
leveraged to provide the residual signal used for thermal fault detection
[160,161].  In  this  way,  the  heat  generation  fault  caused  by  the  local
internal short circuit can be detected in time and early warning signals
can be provided for BMS far before the occurrence of thermal runaway.
With the thermal fault detected, active thermal control can be imple-
mented by the BTMS to maintain the cell temperature in a safe operating
range [162]. Nevertheless, the above PDE observers are designed based
on  1D  FOM  which  is  only  applicable  to  cylindrical  cells.  As  for
large-format cells with complicated heat transfer and boundary condi-
tions, the design of the temperature observer will become intractable.

To sum up, although the full-order thermal model can provide high-
fidelity  information  about  internal  temperature  distribution,  solving
PDEs will inevitably consume great computational resources and takes a

lot of time, which brings challenges to onboard temperature monitoring.
In  addition,  deriving  PDE  observers  to  estimate  internal  temperature
distribution is  also challenging, particularly for  large-format batteries
with complicated heat transfer. Moreover, calibrating the thermal pa-
rameters  in  PDEs  could  be  difficult  and  time-consuming  due  to  the
complicated structure of the cell and the different thermal properties of
cell  components.  Therefore,  the  full-order  model  is  mainly  used  for
design and analysis purposes. For real-time estimation of battery SOT,
thermal  models  with  higher  computational  efficiency  are  required,
which  promotes  the  development  of  many  control-oriented  thermal
models that are suitable for online implementations.

3.3.2. Reduced-order lumped model

To  mitigate  the  computational  burdens  faced  by  FOM,  various
control-oriented thermal models have been derived by making reason-
able assumptions and model order reduction. For instance, the thermal
dynamics  of  the  battery  are  treated  as  an  unsteady-state  conduction
process with convective boundary conditions [163]. The inherent pa-
rameters of LIBs, such as thermal conductivity, density, and specific heat
capacity, are assumed to be constant under different temperatures and
aging  status  [56].  These  control-oriented  models  attempt  to  strike  a
balance  between  model  fidelity,  computational  complexity,  and
parameterization difficulty [106], and therefore they play a significant
role in onboard  temperature monitoring  and thermal control applica-
tions. Although some empirically fitted thermal models in the literature
may be even more computationally efficient than the control-oriented
thermal models during SOT estimation [164–167], they are unable to
provide  insights  into  battery  thermal  dynamics  and  therefore  are  not
introduced in detail in this section.

One  of  the  widely  used  control-oriented  thermal  models  is  the
reduced-order  lumped  model,  which  lumps  the  PDE  model  with  the
infinite-dimensional solution by discretizing the spatial domain of FOM
into finite sub-domains. A typical reduced-order lumped model is the
thermal  equivalent  circuit  (TEC)  model.  Similar  to  electrical  circuit
models used to characterize battery voltage response, TEC models apply
simple circuit components such as the current source, capacitors, and
resistors to mimic heat generation, heat accumulation, and heat transfer
[51,61,94,102].  In  TEC  models,  the  battery  domain  is  discretized  by
using a number of nodes and each node represents an isothermal volume
of the cell [94]. The adjacent nodes are connected by resistors and ca-
pacitors, as illustrated in Fig. 8. For each node, the energy balance is
governed by an ordinary differential equation (ODE) or finite difference
equation. In this way, the heat transfer inside the battery body as well as
from the battery body  to the ambient can be simplified  into the  heat
transport  between  the  nodes.  It  should  be  noted  that  some  PDE  dis-
cretization techniques can also achieve a similar result with TEC models,
namely  with  one  ODE  or  difference  equation  governing  the  thermal
dynamics  of  each  node [168,169].  Then  the  original PDE-based  FOM
can  be  approximated  by  a  set  of  ODEs  [51,61,168].  Compared  with
FOM, these lumped models can greatly reduce the computational bur-
dens and it is easy to be expressed in state-space form for control and
estimation  purposes.  The  temperature  value  at  key  locations  of  the
battery, such as the surface and the core temperatures, can be obtained
with low computational costs.

The simplest TEC model is the lumped-mass thermal model, which
regards the battery cell as a single node and uses the bulk temperature to
represent  the  thermal  states  [21,99,100,170,171].  The  lumped-mass
thermal  model  has  quite  high  computational  efficiency  and  has  been
widely applied  to control-oriented thermal modeling of battery  packs
[170–172].  Nevertheless,  the  oversimplification  makes  it  difficult  for
the lumped-mass thermal model to obtain comprehensive thermal state
information  such  as  internal  temperatures,  and  thus  could  result  in
inferior battery management such as the underestimation of maximum
temperature. To overcome such a limitation, more internal nodes can be
added  during  the  thermal  modeling  to  provide  detailed  information
about  internal  temperature  distributions.  For  instance,  Forgez  et  al.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112013

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig.  8. Typical  TEC  models  for  batteries  with
different  formats  and  integration  levels.  (a)  a  TEC
model with two nodes to capture the surface and the
core temperatures [51], (b) the two-state TEC model
considering  heat  accumulation  at  both  the  core  and
the  surface  [61],  (c)  the  three-node  TEC  model  to
obtain internal temperature information with higher
resolution  [173],  (d)  TEC  model  for  a  10-Ah  pouch
cell with nodes at the negative and positive tabs, the
surface center, and the bottom [177], (e) TEC model
for  a  10-Ah  pouch  cell  with  24  evenly  distributed
nodes, consisting of three node types [168], (f) TEC
model for a prismatic cell with a node at the center
and a node at each surface [94], (g) multi-node TEC
model for a prismatic cell with a higher resolution of
temperature distribution, consisting of 45 nodes and
three types of nodes [84], (h) Pack-level TEC model
which  considers  the  heat  exchange  between  two
adjacent cells, and between the cell and the coolant
[52].

developed a two-node TEC model for a cylindrical battery by assuming
uniform temperature distribution at the battery surface [51]. The bat-
tery core and surface were treated as two nodes in the TEC model, as
shown in Fig. 8(a). Both heat generation and heat accumulation were
assumed to occur at the battery core. The parameterized model was able
to estimate the core temperature based on the measured surface tem-
perature, even in the presence of a large temperature difference between
the  core  and  the  surface.  Similar  to  the  TEC  model  in  Ref.  [51],  a
two-state TEC model which considers the heat capacity of both the core
and the casing has also been proposed and widely used [56,61,71,102,
117], as shown in Fig. 8(b). In this TEC model, the temperature gradient
mainly exists in the radial direction and the heat accumulates at both the
battery  core  and  the  surface  [117].  In  order  to  obtain  detailed  infor-
mation  about  internal  temperature  distribution,  more  nodes  can  be
added  in  the  radial  direction.  For  instance,  Xie  et  al.  developed  a
three-node TEC model for a cylindrical cell [173], where the whole cell
was divided into three parts and the volume-averaged temperature of
each part is represented by a corresponding node, as shown in Fig. 8(c).
More examples of TEC models for temperature estimation of cylindrical
cells can be referred to Refs. [174–176].

As  for  large-format  LIBs  such  as  pouch-type  and  prismatic  cells,
similar modeling methods can be adopted to establish TEC models. The
two-state  TEC  model,  which  only  captures  the  core  and  the  surface
temperatures, can still be applied during the modeling of large-format
cells [62,63,95]. However, different from the thermal behavior of cy-
lindrical  cells,  where  the  temperature  gradients  mainly  occur  in  the
radial  direction,  the  temperature  non-uniformity  inside  large-format
cells  is  significant  in  multiple  directions.  Therefore,  to  achieve

high-fidelity characterization of temperature distribution, more nodes
are required in the TEC models to represent different parts of the cell,
which  will  inevitably  increase  the  complexity  of  TEC  models.  For
instance, Guo et al. built a TEC model for a pouch cell by considering the
heat  generation  of  both  tabs  and  the  battery  body  [177]. Four  nodes
were used to characterize the temperature at the negative and positive
tabs,  the  surface  center,  and  the  bottom,  as  shown  in  Fig.  8(d).  In
Ref. [168], 24 nodes were allocated to the surface of a pouch cell and
these  nodes  are  distributed  evenly.  Three  types  of  nodes,  including
corner  nodes,  boundary  nodes,  and  interior  nodes  were  used  and  the
heat transfer patterns at different types of nodes are different, as shown
in Fig. 8(e). For prismatic cells, the heat transfer in the through-plane
direction cannot be ignored due to the limited k⊥ and large thickness,
and therefore more nodes should be allocated in the through-plane di-
rection to capture the temperature distribution. As shown in Fig. 8(f), a
node  was  allocated  to  each  side  of  the  cell  to  represent  the  surface
temperature, and some of these surface nodes were also connected to the
node which  represents  the battery core to mimic  the  heat dissipation
from the core to the surface. Then thermal resistances were defined in
every  direction  to  account  for  the  heterogeneous  heat  transfer.  In
Ref. [84], a computationally efficient TEC model for a prismatic cell was
built by using three types of nodes, namely the core nodes, tab nodes,
and shell/verge/corner nodes, as shown in Fig. 8(g). With the increased
number of nodes inside the cell, the TEC model is able to provide in-
ternal temperature distribution with higher spatial resolution. However,
the computational burden and parameterization difficulty will also grow
with the increasing complexity of TEC models. More examples of TEC
models  in  large-format  cells  can  also  be  referred  to  Refs.  [108,118,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112014

Y. Zheng et al.

178–180].

At the battery pack level, the heat transfer becomes more compli-
cated because the heat exchange between the cell and ambient, as well
as  between  adjacent  cells  must  be  considered.  In  addition,  the  fluid
dynamics of the coolant which affect the heat dissipation of the cells are
also complex, bringing challenges to thermal modeling. Lumped thermal
models can simplify the complicated heat transfer problem in a pack by
using a set of lumped parameters. For instance, Lin et al. established a
TEC model for a series-connected battery string consisting of cylindrical
cells [52,181], as shown in Fig. 8(h). The two-state thermal model was
applied to capture the thermal dynamics of a single cell. The heat ex-
change between two adjacent cells through tab connections was repre-
sented by thermal resistance. In addition, the temperature variation of
the coolant caused by the heat released from the battery cell was also
considered in the pack-level TEC model, where the heat exchange be-
tween cells and the coolant was also modeled using thermal resistance.
Guo et al. developed a thermal model for a battery pack consisting of
pouch  cells  [182].  The  three-heat-source  TEC  model  proposed  in
Ref. [177] was stacked up to form the pack-level TEC model and a flow
resistance network was established to capture the coolant velocity and
the heat dissipation locally. More examples of pack-level TEC models
can be found in Refs. [183,184].

From modeling perspectives, the aforementioned TEC models allow
insights  into  temperatures  at  different  locations  of  the  battery  cell/
module/pack and therefore can be applied to obtain the comprehensive
thermal state information of LIBs. Since the model fidelity, complexity,
and parameterization difficulty vary with the model structure, the TEC
model  used  for  real-time  temperature  estimation  should  be  selected
meticulously. Nevertheless, merely relying on these thermal models to
monitor the battery thermal state according to the input measurements
(i.e., current, voltage, and ambient temperature) has limitations. One of
the  issues  is  that  such  open-loop  estimations  are  susceptible  to  un-
certainties  of  thermal  models,  measurements,  and  initial  conditions
[185].  To  address  these  issues,  closed-loop  observers  need  to  be

designed using measurements such as surface temperature as feedback
to  correct  the  estimations  [55,62,166].  In  this  way,  even  if  there  are
uncertainties, the estimation will still converge to the real value as the
estimation continues.

In order  to develop closed-loop observers, battery  thermal models
are usually combined with filtering techniques such as Kalman filters
(KF) [186], extended Kalman filters (EKF) [62], unscented Kalman fil-
ters (UKF) [71] to realize optimal estimation. A properly designed SOT
observer  should  converge  to  the  true  value  quickly  even  with  mea-
surement noise and inaccurate initializations. Debert et al. designed a
polytopic observer to estimate the temperature inside a prismatic bat-
tery  module  and  the  internal  resistance  based  on  the  lumped-mass
thermal model and the temperature measurement [172]. Zhang et al.
developed an observer to estimate the core temperature of a prismatic
cell based on EKF and an electro-thermal coupled model consisting of a
first-order  equivalent  circuit  model  (ECM)  and  a  two-state  thermal
model [62]. By considering the interaction between the electrical and
thermal  behaviors,  which  is  similar  to  the  coupling  relationship
described in Ref. [61], the coupled model is able to capture the battery
behaviors comprehensively. The internal temperature of the cell can be
estimated  according  to  the  measured  current,  voltage,  and  surface
temperature. As shown in Fig. 9 (a), even with inaccurate initialization
◦
of the internal temperature with an initial error of 25
C, it took less than
60 s for both the surface and core temperature estimations to converge
to the correct ones, and the RMSE for the core temperature estimation
was  1.01
C.  More  applications  of  TEC  model-based  closed-loop  ob-
servers in SOT estimations can be found in Refs. [108,178], where the
internal  temperature  distribution  of
large-format  batteries  was
estimated.

◦

For  closed-loop  SOT  observers,  their  performance  is  subjected  to
many uncertainties such as the change of model parameters, unknown
input,  and  measurement  error,  leading  to  inaccurate  and  unreliable
temperature  estimation.  To  address  the  change  in  model  parameters,
some  parameters  in  thermal  models should  also  be  identified  in  real-

Fig.  9. Closed-loop  observer  for  SOT  estimations
based on TEC  models. (a) Estimation of surface and
core temperatures for a prismatic cell with inaccurate
initializations  [62].  (b)  Structure  of  adaptive  SOT
observer  with  online  parameter  identification  [56].
(c)  Surface  and  core  temperature  estimations  based
on  the  adaptive  observer  with  inaccurate  initializa-
tion  [56].  (d) Online  identification  of  parameters in
the  two-state  thermal  model  [56].  (e)  Comparison
between  the  measured  temperatures  and  estimated
temperatures  based  on  UKF  and  EUKF  under  tem-
perature sensor bias [71].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112015

Y. Zheng et al.

the feedback in the closed-loop SOT observers. The comparison between
a battery pack with full sensing and with sparse sensing can be illus-
trated  in  Fig.  10(a).  Generally,  if  the  temperature  at  many  locations
needs to be obtained while the number of temperature sensors is very
limited,  the  temperature  at  some  locations  may  not  be  estimated
correctly with quick convergence according to the feedback of measured
temperature,  and  the  thermal  states  at  those  locations  become  unob-
servable.  Therefore,  to  guarantee  effective  SOT  estimation  of  a  cell/-
module/pack with quick convergence, the observability of the designed
closed-loop  SOT  observers  should  be  examined  in  the  first  place.  For
large-format  LIBs,  observability  issue  still  exists  when  estimating  the
detailed internal temperature distribution, even with temperature sen-
sors  attached  to  the  battery  surface  [168,180].  For  instance,  Xiao
pointed  out  that the  minimum  number of  temperature  measurements
should be 12 to guarantee full observability of the temperatures in a TEC
model of a 70-Ah prismatic cell with 48 nodes [180]. Sattarzadeh et al.
examined  the  observability  of  the  temperature  in  a  TEC  model  for  a
pouch cell with 24 nodes under both single-sensor and multiple-sensor
scenarios [168]. When a single sensor was placed at the optimal loca-
tion,  only  the  temperatures  at  13  nodes  of  the  TEC  model  were
observable.  For  multiple-sensor  scenarios,  at  least  three  sensors  are
required to ensure full observability of the temperatures at 24 nodes. At

time to capture their variation during battery operations [56,187–189].
For instance, Lin et al. designed an adaptive core temperature observer
for a cylindrical battery based on a two-state TEC model and KF [56,
187], as illustrated in Fig. 9(b). Parameters of the thermal model, such as
thermal resistances and time-varying internal resistance, were identified
online through the least square algorithm based on the input current,
coolant temperature, and the measured surface temperature. Then the
identified parameters were fed into the observer, and both the surface
and the core temperatures of the cell can be estimated timely with the
updated  parameters.  As  shown  in  Fig.  9(c)-(d),  even  with  inaccurate
model  parameters  and  initializations,  the  adaptive  observer  can  still
achieve accurate estimation and track the real model parameters as the
estimation  goes  on.  This  framework  deals  with  model  parameter  un-
certainties resulting from manufacturing, battery aging, and changes in
cooling conditions. Dai et al. designed an adaptive internal temperature
estimator for a prismatic battery based on KF and a two-state TEC model
by  considering  the  uncertainty  of  heat  dissipation  [63].  The  external
thermal resistance, which indicates the heat dissipation from the battery
surface to the ambient, can be time-varying in real applications due to
varying cooling conditions. The proposed KF-based estimator, by adding
the external thermal resistance into the model states, was able to achieve
the simultaneous estimation of internal temperature and external ther-
mal resistance. Similar work on adaptive estimation of battery temper-
ature by considering parameter uncertainties can be found in Ref. [190].
To address the issue of unknown model input, Zhu et al. developed an
extended state observer (ESO) by adding system disturbance caused by
uncertain  heat  generation  as  an  extended  system  state  [191].  Their
method can estimate the core temperature of 18650 batteries with an
estimation error of less than 1.3
C during the warm-up process under
high-frequency  AC,  where  the  information  about heating  current  and
battery
the
low-sampling-rate BMS [191]. In a battery system, the failure of sensors
may  also  occur  sometimes, which  will impede  effective  thermal  state
monitoring. Sun et al. investigated core temperature estimation under
the bias of current and temperature sensors [71]. Similar to the idea in
Ref.  [191],  the  sensor  bias  was  treated  as  an  extended  state  in  the
original  thermal  model,  and  the  extended  unscented  Kalman  filter
(EUKF) was leveraged to estimate this sensor bias together with other
states such as the surface and core temperatures. Even with the current
◦
sensor bias of 10 A or temperature sensor bias of 10
C, the observer can
still track the battery surface and core temperatures accurately with a
convergence time of less than 500 s, while the conventional UKF-based
observer is not able to estimate battery temperatures correctly, as shown
in Fig. 9(e).

cannot  be  obtained  accurately  by

resistance

◦

As for the pack-level estimation, the complicated heat transfer in the
pack  increases  the  difficulty  of  temperature  estimation.  Closed-loop
observers need to be designed to estimate the SOT of each cell based
on the inlet/outlet coolant temperature, current, and surface tempera-
ture  measurement. For instance, in Refs. [182,192,193], adaptive ob-
servers were proposed to estimate the SOT of each cell in a battery pack
subjected to forced cooling based on the pack-level TEC model. Similar
to the method in Ref. [56], the thermal parameters of each cell were
identified online at first and then fed into the observer for temperature
estimation. Nevertheless, existing SOT estimations at the module/pack
level assume that the surface temperature of each cell in the battery pack
can be measured by the temperature sensor mounted on the cell surface,
which is not practical in real-world applications.

In the existing literature, many closed-loop observers are based on
the  assumption  that  the  number  of  temperature  sensors  in  a  battery
system  is  sufficient,  with  at  least  one  or  more  temperature  sensors
mounted on the surface of each cell, which guarantees full observability
to the thermal states. However, in real-world applications, the number
of  temperature  sensors  in  a  battery  system  is  very  limited,  and  the
common  sensors-to-cells  ratio  in  the  state-of-the-art  battery  pack  is
about 1/10 (i.e., one sensor for every 10 cells) [52]. Observability issue
emerges when only limited measured temperature signals are used as

Fig. 10. Observability of battery temperature in a pack. (a) Battery pack with
full  sensing  versus  the  pack  with  sparse  sensing  [196].  (b)  Effect  of  sensor
location  on  the  temperature  observability  of  a  battery  string  with  5  cells  in
series connection [181]. The SOT of each cell includes the surface and the core
temperatures  and  therefore  there  are  10  temperature  states  for  this  system.
Only  when  the  observability  matrix  has  full  rank,  all  these  states  can  be
fully observable.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112016

Y. Zheng et al.

the battery pack level, the observability of the thermal states depends on
the  cell  arrangement,  the  number,  and  the  location  of  temperature
sensors. The sparsely allocated temperature sensors in a battery system
bring obstacles to the thermal state monitoring of each cell as the tem-
perature of some cells may not be observable in the closed-loop observer
based on the pack-level TEC model. For instance, Lin et al. investigated
the observability of a series-connected battery string consisting of cy-
lindrical cells based on a pack-level TEC model [181]. They concluded
that for a battery string with 12 cells, at least four temperature sensors
are required in order to ensure full observability of all the cell temper-
atures. With the same number of temperature sensors, the locations of
these  sensors  will  also affect  the  observability  of  cell temperature,  as
illustrated in Fig. 10(b) [181,194]. In their later work [52,195], the SOT
estimation  of  a  battery  string  was  further  investigated  under  sparse
sensing (ten series-connected cells and only one temperature sensor) and
uncertainties  of  internal  resistances,  where  robust  observers  were
designed for temperature estimation by minimizing the worst-case error.
For a given battery pack with a fixed number of temperature sensors,
the locations of these temperature sensors have a great impact on the
observability of the temperatures of all the cells, and therefore affect the
performance  of  the  closed-loop  SOT  observers  [52,181,195,197].  As
such, it is also of great significance to design the sensor placement in the
battery pack to maximize SOT estimation performance. In recent years,
there is also a growing research trend to optimize the sensor placement
in  a  battery  pack  [52,168,181,198–200].  For  example,  Lin  et  al.
concluded  that  for  a  battery  string  with  10  cells  and  one  sensor,  the
designed  observer  achieved  the  minimum  worst-case  error  when  the
sensor  is  placed  at  the  center  of  the  battery  string  [52].  Determining
optimal  sensor  locations  is  a  combinatorial  problem  and  could  be
intractable for large-scale battery systems if conventional optimization
approaches such as exhaustive search are applied. Bhattacharya et al.
leveraged a greedy algorithm to search for the best sensor placement for
a  40-cell  battery  string  with  four  sensors  based  on  the  H∞  observer
[198]. Although sub-optimal solutions were obtained, the greedy algo-
rithm could find the best sensor location with only dozens of iterations,
making it applicable to large-scale battery systems.

The observability issue which stems from limited temperature sen-
sors in a battery system brings great challenges to the SOT estimation,
which makes it difficult to obtain the comprehensive thermal state in-
formation of each cell and thus causes ineffective thermal state moni-
toring.  Some  existing  studies  have  provided  possible  solutions  to  this
issue. Instead of relying on surface temperature measurement to achieve
SOT  estimation,  some  researchers  also  seek  to  achieve  estimation via
only current and voltage signals by taking advantage of the interactions
between electrical and thermal behaviors [164,165,173,201,202]. For
example, Pang et al. developed a sensorless estimator to capture both the
surface  and  the  core  temperatures  by  merely  using  voltage  feedback,
based  on  an  electro-thermal  model  (second-order  ECM  + two-state
thermal model) and EKF [201]. Xie et al. developed a sensorless method
to  estimate  the  internal  temperature  distribution  of  a  cylindrical  cell
based on a three-node TEC model and a dual Kalman filter (DKF) [173].
The  temperature  estimation  was  conducted  after  online  resistance
identification  and  SOC  estimation.  Based  on  the  identified  internal
resistance and the estimated SOC, the temperature estimator can realize
SOT estimation by using the identified resistance as the measurement
feedback.  These  sensorless  SOT  estimation  methods  eliminate  the
requirement for a temperature sensor and thus can be applied to esti-
mate the temperature of those sensor-free cells in the system. Another
feasible  solution  is  to  design  cascade  observers  where  the  first
sub-observer estimates the observable temperatures and these estimated
results are fed into the cascaded sub-observers to obtain the full tem-
perature information using the estimated results of the first observer as
output  feedback  [168].  The  study  on  a  pouch  cell  suggests  that  the
steady-state SOT estimation error of the cascade observers on a pouch
cell can be within 1.3

C [168].

◦

TEC models also play an important role in the model-based thermal

fault diagnosis of LIBs. Particularly, for cylindrical cells, the two-state
thermal model is often applied and the core temperature estimated via
designed  observers  can  be  used  to  generate  the  residuals,  which  will
then be evaluated to perform fault diagnosis [203–205]. For instance,
the residuals generated by the estimated core temperature and measured
surface  temperature  can  be  evaluated  comprehensively  to  diagnose
different  thermal  faults,  including  the  convective  cooling  resistance
fault,  internal  thermal  resistance  fault,  and  heat  generation  fault,  as
illustrated  in  Fig.  11(a)  [203–205].  Lystianingrum  et  al.  developed  a
multiple  model  estimator  (MME)  to  detect  the  abnormal  thermal
behavior of a cell in a forced-cooled series-connected battery string with
6 cells [205]. The overheating cell caused by the internal short circuit
can  be  localized  by  the  MME  with  only  two  temperature  sensors  ar-
ranged  in  the  string.  The  detection  and  isolation  of  these  faults
contribute to better safety and reliability of the battery system as timely
warnings  can  be  provided.  As  for  large-format  cells,  the  significant
temperature non-uniformity makes it challenging to detect and localize
thermal faults. Sattarzadeh et al. investigated the sensor placement that
improves the detectability of local thermal faults, which are manifested
by  the  hot  spots  [206].  By  optimizing  the  sensor  placement  and
designing KF-based observers, thermal faults that occur at different parts
of the cell can be detected and localized, as shown in Fig. 11(b)-(c).

In  general,  TEC  models  are  simple  to  implement  and  have  been
widely  applied  in  the  control-oriented  thermal  modeling  of  battery
systems. By using the temperature at the nodes to characterize battery
thermal states, the state-space form of the thermal model can be derived
explicitly. The amount of thermal state information obtained through
estimation can be varied with the model complexity. TEC models with
more nodes can be applied if the thermal state information with a higher
spatial resolution is needed. Therefore, the space domain with compli-
cated geometry (e.g., the battery module/pack) can be handled with the
TEC model since the details of heat transfer and fluid dynamics can be
lumped into finite parameters. Nevertheless, TEC model-based SOT es-
timations also have limitations. Firstly, these models can only capture
the temperature at each node, which is the average temperature of the
corresponding sub-domain. Such a discrete characterization of battery
SOT makes the TEC models unable to obtain information about the full
temperature field. Secondly, the lack of physical meaning of model pa-
rameters  brings  difficulty  to  parameterization,  especially  when  the
number  of  nodes  increases  significantly  in  large-format  batteries.
Although  parameters  can  be  calculated  directly  from  the  physical
properties of the battery components, such calculations may not be ac-
curate  due  to  the  complex  structures  of  the  cell  [56].  Thirdly,  the
observability of SOT observers based on TEC models is still the biggest
challenge  to  effective  thermal  state  monitoring  owing  to  the  limited
temperature sensors in a battery system. Therefore, the structure of TEC
models and the arrangement of the temperature sensors, especially for
battery packs or large-format cells, should be meticulously designed in
order  to guarantee full observability  of the  thermal states so that the
temperature  information  at  each  node  inside  the  cell/pack  can  be
observable and estimated accurately with the feedback of sparse tem-
perature sensing.

3.3.3. Reduced-order distributed model

In  addition  to  reduced-order  lumped  models,  the  other  type  of
control-oriented battery thermal model is the reduced-order distributed
model. Instead of using temperatures at the discrete nodes in lumped
models to represent battery temperature distribution, this type of model
applies a set of global continuous functions which are also called spatial
basis functions (SBFs) to approximate the actual temperature distribu-
tion.  Model  order  reduction  techniques,  such  as  polynomial  approxi-
mations  and  spectral  methods,  are
the
computational  burdens  of  the  FOM.  Compared  with  lumped  thermal
models, these reduced-order distributed models are able to provide in-
formation about the full temperature field in the battery domain so that
the thermal state information at any point inside the domain becomes

to  reduce

leveraged

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112017

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig.  11. Thermal  fault  diagnosis  based  on  TEC
models.  (a)  Diagnostic  scheme  of  thermal  faults  for
cylindrical cells based on the residual generated via
surface  and  core  temperatures  [203].  (b)  Thermal
fault  detection  and  localization  scheme  for  a  10-Ah
pouch-type  cell  [206].  The  battery  space  is  divided
into  two  zones,  and  two  diagnostic  filters  are
designed, one for each zone, to realize fault detection
and  isolation.  (c)  Results  of  the  fault  detection  and
localization with the injection of heat generation fault
in  Zone 2  at  t  = 105  s [206].  Two  sensors  are  allo-
cated in Zone 1 and Zone 2, respectively.

available, and the physical meanings of the model parameters are well
preserved [82]. Owing to the global nature of SBFs, the full temperature
field can be approximated with only a few SBFs, which helps achieve a
lower-order model [82,154], while in lumped thermal models the model
order  increases  significantly  with  the  increase  of  spatial  temperature
resolution, as illustrated in Fig. 12(a).

There are many existing studies on deriving reduced-order distrib-
uted thermal models for LIBs. For cylindrical cells, since the temperature
gradient primarily exists in the radial direction under convective cooling
conditions, model order reductions are usually made based on 1D heat
transfer  PDE.  Muratori  et  al.  transformed  the  time-domain  1D  heat
transfer PDE into an equivalent ODE problem in the frequency domain
by  applying  Laplace  transform  [207].  Then  the  ODE  problem  can  be
solved  analytically  by  using  the  Bassel  functions  to  approximate  the
spatial temperature distribution and the solution was further approxi-
mated  by  a  set  of  simple  transfer  functions  to  reduce  the  model
complexity.  Richardson  et  al.  derived  a  quadratic  assumption  (QA)

thermal model of a cylindrical cell by assuming that the  temperature
profile  in  the  radial  direction  was  subjected  to  quadratic  distribution
[55]. The steady-state solution to the heat equation for an annulus with
uniform heat generation was used in combination with QA to develop a
reduced-order  thermal  model  [53].  Kim  et  al.  used  a  fourth-order
polynomial  to  approximate  the  temperature  distribution  along  the
radial direction. Then the 1D heat transfer PDE was converted into ODE
by  substituting  the  polynomial  approximations  into  the  PDE  [98].  In
their model, the surface and core temperatures, volume-averaged tem-
perature, and temperature gradient of the cell can be obtained, which
allows  better  characterization  of  the  battery’s  thermal  state.  Further-
more, spectral methods, as a weighted residual method to approximate
exact  solutions,  can  also  be  employed  to  achieve  the  model  order
reduction with high computational efficiency. The spectral method can
achieve  time-space  separation  of  the  DPS  where  the  spatiotemporal
variable  will  be  separated  into  a  set  of  SBFs  multiplied  by  the  corre-
sponding time coefficients, as can be expressed in Fig. 12(b)-(c) and Eq.

Fig.  12. Reduced-order  distributed  models  and  the
model order reduction framework. (a) Comparison of
the  temperature  distribution  between  the  reduced-
order  distributed  model  with  four  states  and  the
FOM  with  3750  states  [82].  The  reduced-order
distributed  model  can  well  approximate  the  FOM
with  a  very  low  model  order  owing  to  the  global
nature  of  SBFs.  (b)  Framework  for  the  time-space
separation  of  DPS  [154].  (c)  Geometric  interpreta-
tion  of  time-space  separation  via  weighted  residual
method when model order is 3 [154].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112018

Y. Zheng et al.

(5) [154],

yn(x, t) =

∑n

i=1

φi(x)yi(t)

(5)

in  which  yn(x, t) is  the  spatiotemporal  variable  in  the  DPS,  n  is  the
(x) is the SBF. Richardson et al. [82] presented an
number of orders, φi
example to simplify the 1D heat transfer problem by using Chebyshev
spectral-Galerkin  (SG)  method  and  Hu  et  al.  [106]  extended  the  SG
method to develop a control-oriented 1D thermal model for cylindrical
cells.  In  their  models,  Chebyshev  polynomials  are  used  as  the  SBF  to
approximate the solution of temperature distribution since they can be
defined  flexibly  to  satisfy  various  boundary  conditions  [208].  Apart
from Chebyshev polynomials, other SBFs learned through optimizations
can also be used for model order reduction of cylindrical cells [119,209].
The aforementioned thermal models are developed based on 1D heat
transfer problems where the cooling boundary conditions are symmet-
ric. In real-world applications, the cylindrical cells might be subjected to
different  cooling  configurations  such  as  plate  cooling  and  unequal
cooling with intercell heat transfer, as shown in Fig. 13, which gives rise
to the temperature gradients in the axial directions. Consequently, 2D
thermal models are necessary to estimate the temperature distribution in
both axial and radial directions. To this end, Richardson et al. applied
the Chebyshev SG method to develop a 2D thermal model for a large-
format  cylindrical  cell  based  on  2D  transfer  PDE  with  transient  heat
generation,  anisotropic  heat  conduction,  and  non-homogeneous
boundary conditions [82]. By using only 4 states, the accuracy of the
2D SG model can be comparable to the benchmark model (i.e., FOM)
with very small deviations in surface temperature and core temperature
estimations, as illustrated in Fig. 14, though the accuracy can be further
improved  using  more  states.  Wang  and  Li  [210]  used  the  time-space
separation technique to reduce the model order of a 2D heat transfer
PDE  for cylindrical batteries  by considering  the  anisotropic heat con-
duction. The Karhunen–Lo`eve (KL) method was used to obtain the SBFs
and  the  reduced-order  model  with  only  two  orthogonal  SBFs  derived
from the Galerkin method can achieve a satisfactory performance, with
RMSE around 0.1

C.

◦

In  recent years,  there is  also  a  growing trend  to develop  reduced-
order distributed thermal models for large-format batteries with their
increasing  applications.  Since  the  temperature  distribution  of  large-
format  cells  is  more  complicated  than  that  in  small  cylindrical  cells,
2D or 3D heat transfer problems are usually involved. For pouch-type
cells, model order reduction is usually performed based on 2D PDE as
the cell thickness is small and the through-plane temperature gradient is
negligible. Muratori et al. and Yazdanpour et al. derived the analytical
solution  of  the  2D  temperature  distribution  of  a  pouch  battery  by
applying the integral transform to the original PDE [211,212]. The heat

generation of the positive and negative tabs in pouch-type batteries is
one of the factors contributing to the non-uniform in-plane temperature
distribution and thus should be considered during the modeling process
[87].  For  instance,  Hu  et  al.  [109]  developed  a  control-oriented  2D
thermal  model  for  a  pouch-type  battery  by  using  a  reduced-order
distributed thermal model derived from the Chebyshev SG method to
describe the thermal process of the battery body, and two lumped-mass
thermal models to describe the thermal process of two tabs. Other work
considering the heat generation of tabs when developing reduced-order
distributed models can be found in Refs. [213,214], where the spectral
method is also used. Apart from tab heat generation, the non-uniform
heat  generation  caused  by  the  inhomogeneous  current  densities  also
leads to temperature non-uniformity. However, most studies ignore this
effect by  assuming uniform  heat generation  over  the battery  domain.
Zhou et al. derived a 2D thermal model for a pouch cell based on the
spectral method using eigenfunctions as SBFs, by considering the ther-
mal effects from tabs, spatially nonuniform heat generation, unknown
radiation  effects,  and  disturbances  [215].  The  spectral  method  with
other  SBFs,  which  involves  the  use  of  KL  and  its  variants  such  as  in-
cremental  KL  to  adjust  the  SBFs  [216–220],  can  also  be  applied  to
perform the model order reduction to large-format batteries.

Similar  to  TEC  model-based  SOT  estimations,  the  open-loop  esti-
mation  that  purely  relies  on  reduced-order  distributed  models  is  sus-
ceptible to various uncertainties. Therefore, closed-loop observers need
to  be  designed  based  on  these  control-oriented  distributed  thermal
models and the measurement feedback. Kim et al. developed a KF-based
core temperature estimator for cylindrical cells based on the PA model
and the measurement feedback of the surface temperature [98]. In their
later work, they developed a DKF-based estimator for radial temperature
distribution  estimation  based  on  the  PA  model  and  several  measure-
ments  (i.e.,  current,  voltage,  surface  temperature,  and  ambient  tem-
perature)  under  unknown  convective  cooling  conditions  [107].  The
convective  heat  transfer  coefficient  and  the  battery  core  temperature
can  be  identified  and  estimated  simultaneously,  which  makes  the
observer  robust  to  cooling  uncertainties.  A  similar  observer  was
designed  by  Wang  and  Li  based  on  the  model  derived  from  the  KL
method and Galerkin approximation [210]. Richardson et al. [55] esti-
mated the internal temperature distribution of a cylindrical cell by using
the real part of the impedance at 215 Hz, the battery surface tempera-
ture, and a QA thermal model.

For many closed-loop SOT estimations, the battery surface temper-
ature is often used as feedback and is indispensable. However, in real-
world  applications,  the  number  of  temperature  sensors  in  a  battery
pack is limited so attaching a temperature sensor at the surface of each
cell becomes impractical. Considering this, other measurements which
indicate  the  battery  temperature  can  also  be  used  as  feedback  in  the
closed-loop estimation framework. One of the possible methods is to use

Fig. 13. Battery 2D thermal dynamics resulted from asymmetric cooling [82]: (a) Plate cooling at the bottom and air cooling at the lateral surface, (b) unequal
cooling with intercell heat transfer through the tabs.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112019

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 14. Comparison of the 2D SG model with FOM for a cylindrical cell under asymmetric cooling conditions [82]. (a) Temperature variations at the core and the
surface with pulse load profile. T2  refers to the temperature at the surface, while T4  refers to the temperature at the core. (b) radial temperature distribution at
mid-height of the cell, (c) Temperature distribution inside the cell at 240 s.

the bulk temperature inferred by the battery impedance to correct the
estimated states, as proposed by Richardson et al. [53,81]. In Ref. [53],
the real part of impedance at 215 Hz was used instead of surface tem-
perature  measurement  as  the  feedback  to  a  DEKF-based  estimator  to
estimate  the  radial  temperature  distribution  under  an  unknown
convective  cooling  coefficient,  as  shown  in  Fig.  15(a).  Since  the
measured impedance reflects the bulk temperature of the battery, the
proposed observer achieved a similar estimation accuracy compared to
the conventional estimation using surface temperature as the feedback.

In a later work, an EKF-based estimator was designed based on a 2D SG
thermal  model  and  the  impedance  feedback  to  estimate  the  2D  tem-
perature distribution of a large cylindrical cell under asymmetric cool-
ing  configurations  [81],  with  the  schematic  and  flowchart  shown  in
Fig.  15(b)  and  (c),  respectively.  The  2D  SG  thermal  model  and  the
impedance-temperature relationship were parameterized offline at first.
Then  this  model  was  applied  online  to  estimate  the  2D  temperature
distribution  in  real-time  under  inaccurate  initializations  with  the
impedance feedback.

Fig. 15. Schematic of SOT estimation using impedance as feedback. (a) Estimation of 1D temperature distribution of a cylindrical cell under symmetric cooling
boundary conditions [53], (b) Estimation of 2D temperature distribution of a cylindrical cell under asymmetric cooling conditions [81], (c) Flowchart of 2D tem-
perature distribution estimation [81].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112020

Y. Zheng et al.

To sum up, compared with the widely used lumped models, reduced-
order  distributed  thermal  models  are  able  to  provide  comprehensive
information  about  battery  thermal states  since  the  temperature infor-
mation at any point inside the domain is available owing to the global
nature of SBFs. Such models can have lower model order compared to
the lumped model and thus have high computational efficiency. How-
ever, these reduced-order thermal models are usually obtained through
complex mathematical derivation. At present, many existing models are
only  studied  at  the  cell  level  by  considering  1D  or  2D  heat  transfer
problems.  The  development  of  such  thermal  models  for  large-format
cells can be quite challenging due to the complicated 3D heat transfer
problems and increased boundary conditions. At the battery pack level,
it becomes more intractable to develop reduced-order thermal models
due to the complex fluid dynamics of the coolant, intercell heat transfer,
and  the  heat  transfer  between  the  cell  and  the  coolant,  which  are
affected by the cell formats, cell arrangement, and cooling configura-
tions. Moreover, for some model order reduction techniques such as KL,
parameterization  could  be  a  challenge  since  numerous  sensors  are
needed to collect the spatial temperature data. This might be impractical
in  real-world applications  as the  number of temperature sensors allo-
cated to a cell is limited [221] and it is also technically challenging to
measure the internal temperatures of the cylindrical and prismatic cells
[210],  which  calls  for  thermal  modeling  with  minimal  sensors or  the
optimization of sensor placement [221,222].

3.3.4. Summary of thermal model-based estimation

◦

The representative studies on thermal model-based SOT estimation
are summarized in Table 2. It can be concluded that as control-oriented
models,  both  TEC  models  and  reduced-order  thermal  models  enable
accurate and real-time estimation of internal temperatures due to their
high fidelity and easy implementation. In existing studies, TEC models,
particularly the two-state TEC models, are still the most popular ones
since they are simple, easy to be derived. For this reason, two-state TEC
models are also suitable to be applied in the SOT estimation of a battery
pack to characterize the thermal state of each cell [52,192,193]. How-
ever, although TEC model-based estimations can achieve high accuracy
with properly designed observers (with maximum error usually less than
◦
1
C), most estimation schemes have only been validated in a relatively
narrow temperature range. The SOT estimations based on TEC models
should  be  further  validated  in  a  wide  temperature  ((cid:0) 20-45
C).  In
addition, despite that the TEC model with increased nodes can provide
more information about battery SOT, they should be carefully designed
by  considering  the  computational  burdens  and  observability  of  the
thermal states. Reduced-order distributed thermal models, on the other
hand, can provide abundant temperature information at every point in
the study domain with only a few states. Hence, they are more suitable
to  provide  high-resolution  information  about  battery  thermal  states,
especially in high-rate applications such as XFC where the temperature
non-uniformity and  variable  local hot spots should  be monitored and
suppressed. However, they are difficult to be derived, particularly for
large-format cells with higher dimensional heat transfer problems and
complex  boundary  conditions.  Their  application  in  SOT estimation  at
the battery module or pack level is still limited due to the difficulties to
make order reductions regarding complex fluid dynamics of the coolant.
Apart from the model perspective, the estimation scheme is another
aspect that could affect the accuracy of the SOT estimation. Most closed-
loop estimation schemes require a surface-mounted temperature sensor
to  provide  temperature  feedback,  which  may  not  be  practical  in  real
applications.  Therefore,  novel  estimation  schemes  with  sparse  or  no
temperature  sensors  should  be  further  investigated.  For  instance,  the
electrochemical impedance or the resistance of batteries can be used as
feedback instead of the surface temperature to achieve sensorless SOT
estimation with high resolutions. In addition, other sensorless SOT es-
timations  which  purely  make  use  of  the  battery  current  and  voltage
should also be highlighted, which enable the temperature estimation of
those sensor-free cells. Moreover, estimation methods that are robust to

various uncertainties should also be developed to make the estimation
algorithm applicable to different real-world scenarios.

3.4. Data-driven estimation

In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) has shown great success in
data science, and has been widely applied in many other scientific and
industrial areas. In battery research and development, applying AI for
the  discovery  of  new  battery  materials,  cell  manufacturing,  and  state
estimation  has  become  a  new  research  trend  [223].  As  for  state  esti-
mation, the application of AI can greatly improve estimation accuracy
by  recognizing  the  underlying  patterns  in  battery  data,  particularly
when the modeling becomes complex and difficult. In traditional ther-
mal model-based SOT estimations, the control-oriented thermal models
are usually built based on several simplifications in terms of heat gen-
eration  and  heat  transfer,  which  would  limit  the  accuracy  of  these
models due to complicated thermal dynamics inside the battery system.
in
instance,  the  assumption  of  uniform  heat  generation
For
control-oriented  thermal  models  does  not  hold  under  some  extreme
conditions,  especially  for  large-format  batteries  under  high  operating
rates [73], bringing increased errors to the SOT estimation. Data-driven
methods,  however,  can  achieve  accurate  SOT  estimation  by  circum-
venting the intricate thermal modeling process. The training data is fed
into  the  data-driven  estimation  framework,  followed  by  a  standard
training process to train the data-driven models. In the existing litera-
ture,  there  are  two  ways  to  achieve  data-driven  SOT  estimation.  One
way  is  to  directly  apply  some  mature  ML  algorithms  to  map  the
nonlinear relationship between the measured signals and battery SOT,
which can be regarded as pure data-driven estimations. The other way is
to combine existing battery thermal models with data-driven algorithms
to enhance the accuracy and generalization ability. In this section, these
two types of methods will be introduced in detail.

3.4.1. Pure data-driven estimation

One  of  the  main  advantages  of  ML  algorithms is  that they  have  a
strong nonlinear mapping ability so that the complex relationship be-
tween  the  input  and  output  can  be  captured.  Deep  learning,  as  an
important  branch  of  machine  learning,  exhibits  great  flexibility  and
advantages  in  battery  state  estimations  and  health  prognostics
[224–228].  In  battery  SOT  estimation,  the  battery  operation  data,
including the battery current, voltage, SOC, battery temperatures, and
ambient temperature, will be collected in the first place through either
lab  testing  or  field  data  to  form  a  training  dataset.  Afterward,  these
labeled  training  data  will  be  used  to  train  the  designed  data-driven
model so as to capture the nonlinear relationship between measurable
signals (i.e., current, voltage, SOC, etc.) and battery temperatures. Then
the trained data-driven model can be applied to estimate battery SOT
under new scenarios where the loading profiles, ambient temperatures,
and  cooling  conditions  might  be  different  from  that  in  the  training
dataset. The performance of data-driven SOT estimations not only de-
pends on the ML algorithm itself but also on the design of the estimation
framework, including the input features, model structures, as well as the
quantity and quality of the training data.

The most commonly used ML algorithm is the feed-forward neural
network (FNN), which consists of an input layer, one or several hidden
layers, and an output layer. FNNs are well-known as universal approx-
imators that can approximate many complex functions with high accu-
racy, even with a simple structure of three layers [229]. Therefore, they
can be applied to SOT estimations to achieve high estimation accuracy.
For instance, Fang et al. [230] constructed a three-layer FNN to estimate
the surface temperature of a cylindrical cell during charging, based on
the  charging  current,  ambient  temperature,  and  charging  time.  The
maximum estimation error was less than 1.3
C even at 5-C charging.
Hussein  and  Chehade  built  two  FNN  blocks  to  estimate  the  battery
surface  temperature  [231].  The  battery  current  and  SOC  were  the
common input to the two blocks, and the battery voltage estimated by

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112021

Y. Zheng et al.

Table 2
Summary of references on thermal model-based SOT estimation.

Method

Reference

Battery specifications

Model

Estimation approach

Accuracy

Validation
temperature
range

Thermal state
information

FOM

TEC model

[159]

[160,
161]
[51]

[117]

[177]

[84]

Type

Chemistry

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
10-Ah pouch

LFP

LFP

LFP

LFP

–

1D heat transfer
FOM
1D heat transfer
FOM
Two-node TEC
model
Two-state TEC
model
TEC model with 4
nodes

PDE observer

PDE observer

Open-loop estimation

Open-loop estimation

Open-loop estimation

105-Ah
prismatic

NMC

TEC model with
45 nodes

Open-loop estimation

◦
Deviation <1

C

25-45

◦

C

RMSE 0.2

◦

C

25-45

◦

C

Deviation
◦
<1.5
RMSE <1

C

◦

25-60

◦

C

C

5-45

◦

C

◦

C

C

Deviation
◦
<1.4
RMSE <0.2
Maximum error
<2
C
RMSE <1
C
◦
Deviation <1

◦

◦

C

25-45

◦

C

0-50

◦

C

15-45

◦

C

C

Deviation
◦
<0.2
Mean error
<1
C

◦

(cid:0) 10-50

◦

C

25-40

◦

C

Average error
◦
<0.24
C
Maximum mean
relative error:
8%
–

10-30

◦

C

10-30

◦

C

25-45

◦

C

◦
Deviation <1

C

25-50

◦

C

RMSE <0.6

◦

C

10-50

◦

C

Deviation
◦
<1.2
–

C

(cid:0) 20-20

◦

C

20-30

◦

C

Open-loop estimation

KF-based estimator

◦
Deviation <1

C

25-40

◦

C

EKF-based estimator

RMSE 1.01

◦

C

5-55

◦

C

[94]

40-Ah prismatic

LFP

[172]

40-Ah prismatic

LFP

[62]

10-Ah prismatic

LFP

[201]

[173]

[178]

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
3.4-Ah
Panasonic
NCR18650B
25-Ah pouch

LFP

NCA

NMC

[108]

50-Ah prismatic

NMC

TEC model with 9
nodes
Two-state TEC
model
Two-state TEC
model
Two-state TEC
model
Three-node TEC
model

EKF-based estimator

DFK-based estimator

3D TEC model
with 12 nodes
1D TEC model
with 9 nodes

DFK-based estimator

Adaptive KF-based
estimator

Adaptive KF-based
observer with online
parameter identification
Joint KF-based estimator

Joint KF-based estimator
with online parameter
identification
ESO

UKF-based estimator

[56,187]

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650

LFP

Two-state TEC
model

[63]

40-Ah prismatic

LFP

[190]

2.25-Ah 18650

LFP

[191]

2.5-Ah 18650

NMC

[71]

3.45-Ah 18650

NMC

[192]

[193]

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
26650

LFP

–

[180]

70-Ah prismatic

LFP

[168]

10-Ah pouch

–

Two-state TEC
model
Two-state TEC
model

Two-state TEC
model
Two-state TEC
model
Pack-level TEC
model
Pack-level TEC
model
TEC model with
48 nodes
TEC model with
24 nodes

KF-based estimator with
online parameterization
Luenberger observer with
online parameterization
KF-based estimator

◦
Deviation <1

C

25-50

◦

C

–

20-40

◦

C

◦
Deviation <1

C

20-40

◦

C

Sliding mode-based
observer

C (multi

C (single

Deviation
◦
<0.87
sensor)
Deviation
◦
<1.3
sensor)
Worst case
maximum error
<3.1
C
MAE <0.6

C

◦

◦

25-50

◦

C

20-70

◦

C

8-40

◦

C

Pack-level TEC
model

H∞  observer

Open-loop estimation

Reduced-order
distributed
model

[52,195]

[55]

[98]

[53]

[210]

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
2.5-Ah 18650

LFP

LFP

LFP

LFP

LMO

[109]

20-Ah pouch

LFP

Combined
thermal-
impedance model
PA model

2D space-/time-
separation-based
model
SG model

KF-based estimator

RMSE 0.2

◦

C

25-40

◦

C

PA model

DEFK-based estimator

RMSE <1.5

DEKF-based estimator

RMSE <0.1

◦

◦

C

C

8-30

◦

C

20-50

◦

C

Open-loop estimation

MAE <0.3

◦

C

(cid:0) 15-40

◦

C

[215]

20-Ah pouch

LFP

SG model

KF-based estimator

RMSE <1.1

◦

C

25-45

◦

C

Temperature
distribution
Temperature
distribution
Surface and core
temperatures
Surface and core
temperatures
Temperature
distribution

Temperature
distribution

Temperature
distribution
Surface and core
temperatures
Surface and core
temperatures
Surface and core
temperatures
Temperature
distribution

Temperature
distribution
Temperature
distribution

Surface and core
temperatures

Surface and core
temperatures
Surface and core
temperatures

Surface and core
temperatures
Surface and core
temperatures
Surface and core
temperatures
Surface and core
temperatures
Temperature
distribution
Temperature
distribution

Surface and core
temperatures

Temperature
distribution

Temperature
distribution
Temperature
distribution
Temperature
distribution

Temperature
distribution
Temperature
distribution

(continued on next page)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112022

Y. Zheng et al.

Table 2 (continued )

Method

Reference

Battery specifications

Model

Estimation approach

Accuracy

Type

Chemistry

[107]

[81]

2.3-Ah A123
ANR26650
4.4-Ah A123
Model AHR
32113

LFP

LFP

PA model

DKF-based estimator

SG model

EKF-based estimator

RMSE <0.5

RMSE <0.7

◦

◦

C

C

Validation
temperature
range

25-45

◦

C

8-25

◦

C

Thermal state
information

Temperature
distribution
Temperature
distribution

one  of  the  blocks  was  fed  into  the  other  FNN  block  to  estimate  the
surface temperature.

Apart from direct estimation using measurements at the current time
step as inputs, there is also a growing trend to take advantage of his-
torical  data  to  realize  estimation.  Since battery  temperature  has  tem-
poral characteristics, it can be regarded as time-series data and is related
to the previous battery states. Therefore, ML algorithms that are used to
deal with time-series information can be leveraged to estimate battery
SOT. For instance, Hasan et al. [232] applied a nonlinear autoregressive
network with exogenous inputs (NARX) to estimate the cell temperature
based on the historical current and ambient temperature, with the RMSE
of estimation below 1
C. Kleiner et al. [233] used a NARX network to
estimate the core temperature of a prismatic cell, as illustrated in Fig. 16.
The current, voltage, SOC, the temperature of the cooling system, the
temperature  of  the  battery  terminal,  and  the  output  of  previous  time
steps, were treated as the input to the NARX network by using a tapped
delay line (TDL) in order to capture the nonlinear and temporal char-
acteristics of battery temperature. They further compared the estimation
accuracy of the  NARX network with a TEC  model in their later work
[234] and pointed out that the NARX network exhibits slight advantages
in accuracy and computation time in core temperature estimation.

◦

In addition to the NARX network, recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
also exhibit advantages in dealing with time-series data, and therefore
can be good candidates for SOT estimation. For instance, Ojo et al. [29]
applied  a
long  short-term  memory  recurrent  neural  network
(LSTM-RNN) together with a walk-forward technique to estimate bat-
tery  surface  temperature under both normal and  thermal fault condi-
tions.  The structure of the  neural network is  illustrated in  Fig. 17(a),
where the measured voltage, current, SOC, ambient temperature, and
surface  temperature  in  the  previous  time  steps  were  treated  as  input
features to LSTM-RNN. The measured data in the current time step was
included in the input features when estimating the temperature in the
next time step, as shown in Fig. 17(b). Particularly, a multi-step delay
was introduced when feeding the measured surface temperature into the

neural network to avoid the influence of faulty measured data on tem-
perature estimation during a thermal fault. However, such estimation
was  based  on  the  prerequisite  that  a  surface-mounted  temperature
sensor was available. In real-world conditions, many cells in a battery
system  are  not  equipped  with  a  temperature  sensor  to  provide  infor-
mation about their surface temperatures. To this end, it also becomes
important  to  estimate the  surface  temperature  based  on  other signals
such as current, voltage, and SOC. In this way, the number of temper-
ature  sensors  in  a  battery  pack  can  be  greatly  reduced  [235].  The
time-series data-driven models such as LSTM-RNN and gated recurrent
unit RNN (GRU-RNN) are common in the literature to achieve SOT es-
timations with high accuracy [235,236]. Apart from estimating battery
temperature at the current time step, predicting the battery temperature
in  the  following  operations  is  also  important  for  safety  and  control
purposes. Li et al. [27] leveraged LSTM and the convolutional neural
network (CNN) to predict the battery surface temperature ahead of time
by  using  real-world  EV  data  to  train  the  data-driven  model.  The
CNN-LSTM model was able to predict battery temperature 8 min ahead
of time with a mean relative error (MRE) of 0.28%.

In addition to surface temperature estimation, RNNs also have high
performance in core temperature estimation and prediction. Wang et al.
[237] leveraged the LSTM-RNN together with transfer learning to esti-
mate the core temperature of cylindrical batteries under various oper-
ating scenarios (different ambient temperatures and load profiles). The
aim  of  transfer  learning  was  to  enhance  estimation  performance  by
transferring the existing knowledge from different but related domains
[238]. Their estimation framework can be shown in Fig. 18. Specifically,
a cylindrical battery with an intruded temperature sensor was tested in
the lab under constant current-constant voltage (CC-CV) charging and
constant current discharging profiles between (cid:0) 10-55
C to collect the
source dataset. In this way, the current, voltage, ambient temperature,
battery surface and core temperatures can be recorded to train the base
LSTM-RNN model. Then this pre-trained model was transferred to esti-
mate the core temperature of other batteries (with the same type but

◦

Fig. 16. Schematic of the core temperature estimation framework based on the NARX network. (A) Structure of the NARX network using estimated temperature as
feedback, (B) the structure of the prismatic cell [233].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112023

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 17. Schematic of surface temperature estimation based on LSTM-RNN [29]. (a) Input features and neural network structure for surface temperature estimation,
(b) Walk-forward testing scheme.

Fig. 18. Framework of core temperature estimation based on LSTM-RNN with transfer learning. A pre-trained neural network model based on the source dataset is
retrained through fine-tuning according to limited data from the target domain [237].

different cells) under different current profiles and ambient conditions.
The transfer learning was implemented by fine-tuning the parameters of
fully connected layers while setting the  parameters of other layers as
unchangeable with a small amount of data from the target domain. Their
results suggested that the estimation accuracy of LSTM-RNN with the
transfer learning strategy was higher than the base LSTM-RNN model
without  transfer.  Nevertheless,  the  re-training  of  the  base  LSTM-RNN
model  in  Ref.  [237]  still  required  some  labeled  data  containing  core
temperatures from the target domain, which would be difficult to obtain
in real-world scenarios. Regarding core temperature estimation, Li et al.
[239] applied LSTM-RNN to predict the battery core temperature 10 s
ahead of time, based on the surface temperature, heat generation, SOC,
ambient temperatures, and surface temperature difference between the
two adjacent sampling times in the previous 20 s. A multi-step ahead
temperature  prediction  network  was  constructed  to  provide  early
warnings about abnormal core temperatures in advance.

In  summary,  pure  data-driven  methods  can  achieve  accurate  SOT
estimation by applying some mature ML algorithms and the estimation
framework can be built with great flexibility. If carefully designed with

appropriate  inputs,  outputs,  and  hyperparameters,  such  data-driven
models are able to capture the highly nonlinear relationship between
the  measured  signals  (e.g.,  current  and  voltage)  and  battery  SOT.
However,  pure  data-driven  estimations  also  have  some  limitations.
Firstly, as faced by many ML algorithms, the generalization ability is still
the primary concern for data-driven SOT estimations. The model trained
based on a specific training dataset may have poor performance in new
operating  scenarios.  Secondly,  the  performance  of  pure  data-driven
methods  depends  largely  on  both  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the
training  data.  However,  collecting  a  considerable  amount  of  high-
quality  and  labeled  data  could  be  time-consuming  and  challenging,
especially in the engineering field. For instance, in SOT estimations, only
the surface temperature is measurable in real applications while the core
temperature  of  LIBs  can  only  be  obtained  in  the  lab  by  intruding  a
temperature  sensor  inside  the  cell,  which  significantly  reduces  the
amount of labeled data available for model training. Furthermore, the
data-driven  models  are  usually  treated  as  black  box  models  which
merely  obtain  the  characteristics  between  inputs  and  outputs.  Such
models lack insights into the physical process inside and outside the cell

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112024

Y. Zheng et al.

so the pre-trained data-driven models might produce unreasonable re-
sults in new situations, which is also a factor limiting the generalization
ability of the data-driven estimation.

3.4.2. Hybrid estimation

In recent years, there is a growing trend in the existing literature to
combine data-driven algorithms with existing thermal models to address
the  limitations  faced  by  pure  data-driven  methods.  The  possibility  of
combining  the  physics-based  models  with  ML  algorithms  in  battery
management  has  been  discussed  in  Ref.  [240],  where  battery  health
prognostic was used as an example. The integration strategies provided
by Ref. [240] are still applicable to SOT estimation. Generally, the main
advantage of pure data-driven methods is that the complicated modeling
processes are neglected, and high dimensional data patterns hidden in
the collected dataset can be recognized by ML algorithms [240]. How-
ever,  the  generalization  ability of pure  data-driven models is  still the
main concern due to the limited training set and the neglect of physical
processes.  To  overcome  such  a  limitation,  combing  the  physics-based
and data-driven models to take advantage of their respective strengths
is  a  promising  way.  In this  context, thermal  models can provide  esti-
mations that can be interpreted by physical laws to ensure the gener-
alization ability of the estimation despite the possibly lower accuracy.
Data-driven models can further increase the accuracy of estimation re-
sults owing to their nonlinear mapping capabilities. In this way, both the
accuracy and generalization ability can be guaranteed.

There  are  various  ways  to  combine  data-driven  algorithms  with
physics-based models, as discussed in Ref. [240]. However, the appli-
cation  of these hybrid  methods in SOT  estimations is  still at an early
stage  in  the  existing  literature.  One  of  the  representative  works  was
conducted by Li et al. [28]. In their work, they combined a multi-scale
LSTM-RNN and a two-state TEC model to estimate the surface temper-
ature in the next two time steps, as shown in Fig. 19. These two models
were connected in parallel so that both the LSTM-RNN model and the
TEC model would produce an estimation result according to the input.
Then adaptive boosting (AdaBoost) algorithm was applied to synthesize
these two estimation results by adjusting their weights adaptively. Their

results suggested that the hybrid estimation approach achieves higher
accuracy than the pure data-driven and purely model-based methods.
Similar conclusions were also obtained by Liu et al. [241]. In their work,
an  electro-thermal  model  with  EKF  was  connected  in  parallel  with  a
multi-layer FNN to estimate the core temperature of batteries. The error
between model-based estimation and FNN-based estimation was mini-
mized  timely  through  particle  swarm  optimization  (PSO)  by  tuning
parameters in EKF. With optimal parameters in EKF, the accuracy of core
temperature estimation can be significantly improved.

In  addition  to  the  parallel  connection  of  physics-based  and  data-
driven models,  another way  of integrating  these two  models in  exist-
ing SOT estimations is to combine these two models sequentially. That
is, the output of one model is then fed into the other so that the model-
plant  mismatch  can  be  compensated.  For  instance,  Liu  et  al.  [242]
combined  a  two-state  TEC  model  and  a  radial  basis  function  neural
network (RBF-NN) to estimate the internal temperature of a prismatic
battery, as shown in Fig. 20(a). The RBF-NN was trained at first using the
lab data, where the battery current, voltage, and surface temperature
were treated as input, and the internal temperature was the output. Then
the TEC model in combination with EKF was applied to filter out the
outliers  of  the  estimation  produced  by  the  RBF-NN.  In  this  way,  the
estimation accuracy  can be improved  under different conditions.  Wei
et al. [243] combined a multi-node TEC model with a multi-layer FNN
model to capture the temperature in both radial and axial directions, as
illustrated in Fig. 20(b). The TEC model consists of three surface nodes
and three internal nodes to capture the temperature distribution. The
FNN can correct the mismatch between the output of the TEC model and
the actual value, caused by the unmodelled thermal dynamics. Then a
closed-loop observer was designed based on this hybrid model and UKF
to estimate the internal temperature even with inaccurate initialization.
Liu and Li [119] developed a hybrid method to estimate the temperature
distribution inside the battery cell based on a reduced-order distributed
thermal model and an FNN. The FNN was also used to compensate for
the mismatch between the thermal model and the real measurements
triggered  by  spatial  nonlinearities  of  temperatures  and  model  un-
certainties  under  variable  operating  conditions.  Feng  et  al.  [95]

Fig. 19. Hybrid method for surface temperature estimation with parallel model structure. (a) Multi-scale LSTM-RNN structure for surface temperature estimation
[28], (b) Framework of the hybrid method to synthesize estimation results [28].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112025

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 20. Hybrid method for internal temperature estimations with sequential model structure. (a) The framework of internal temperature estimation where an RBF-
NN is followed by a two-state thermal model with EKF [242], (b) Framework of internal temperature distribution estimation with a multi-node TEC model and a
multi-layer FNN with UKF [243].

developed  a  hybrid  electrochemical-thermal-neural-network  (ETNN)
model to capture the electrochemical and thermal characteristics of LIBs
under high operating rates and extreme temperature conditions. In this
hybrid model, the FNN was used to compensate for the mismatch be-
tween  the  single  particle  (SP)  model  and  the  actual  voltage,  which
further contributes to more accurate temperature estimation.

For  hybrid  estimation  with  either  parallel  or  sequential  model
structure,  both  the  thermal  model  and  the  data-driven  model  will  be
calculated in each estimation, which inevitably increases the computa-
tional  burdens  during  online  implementations.  Furthermore,  these
hybrid  models  still  require  a  considerable  dataset  to  train  the  data-
driven part in order to achieve high estimation accuracy, which could
be time-consuming and technically challenging. To address these issues,
some works tried to use thermal models to generate the training dataset.
In this way, the time used for collecting lab data can be greatly reduced
and  the  trained  data-driven  models  can  be  implemented  directly  for
online  SOT  estimation.  In  addition,  by  using  the  training  dataset
generated by thermal models, the input and output patterns of thermal
models  can  be  captured  by  data-driven  models  so  that  the  trained
models can be governed by physical law indirectly, which improves the
generalization  ability  of  the  data-driven  models.  For  instance,  in
Ref. [244], an electro-thermal coupled model was parameterized at first
using  limited  experimental  data.  Then  this  experimentally  validated
electro-thermal model was used to generate sufficient data to train the
data-driven  parts  for  core  temperature  estimation.  As  a  result,  the
trained  data-driven  model  was  able  to  capture  the  input  and  output
characteristics  of  the  electro-thermal  model.  Nevertheless,  since  the
majority of training data is generated by the model, the estimation ac-
curacy of the data-driven model is likely to be bound by the accuracy of
thermal models.

Generally, hybrid methods can be a good alternative to pure data-
driven  approaches  since  they  exhibit  some  potential  in  removing  the
limitations faced by traditional data-driven estimations. A good design
of model fusion has been proven to yield better estimation performance.

Nevertheless, these hybrid methods for battery SOT estimations are in
their early stages and there still exist many issues to be solved in future
studies. Firstly, the estimation accuracy of hybrid methods is bounded
by the accuracy of both models. In particular, applying thermal models
with low accuracy is likely to reduce the accuracy of the hybrid model.
Secondly,  the  data-driven  part  of  hybrid  estimations  needs  a  large
amount of labeled data for model training and the physics-based part
also needs to be parameterized, which could possibly increase the dif-
ficulty of  model parameterization and  training. Thirdly,  in some esti-
mation frameworks, both the thermal model and the data-driven model
must be calculated, bringing additional computational burdens. There-
fore, how to integrate these two models to achieve accurate, robust, and
reliable SOT estimations is worth investigating in the future.

3.4.3. Summary of data-driven estimation

The representative studies on data-driven SOT estimations have been
summarized in Table 3. It can be concluded from the table that the ac-
curacy of data-driven estimations is much higher than impedance/DC
resistance-based  and  thermal  model-based  estimations.  Many  mature
ML algorithms, such as FNN, NARX, CNN, GRU-RNN, and LSTM-RNN,
can  be  applied  to  battery  SOT  estimations  with  great  flexibility  and
high accuracy. The structure of the neural networks can be varied ac-
cording  to  different  application  scenarios.  Purely  data-driven  ap-
proaches are still the prevalent methodology in data-driven estimations,
compared with hybrid estimations. Typically, measurable signals such
as current, voltage, SOC, ambient temperatures, and surface tempera-
ture are used as the input to the data-driven estimation framework, and
the output can be either the surface or the core temperature. A dataset
will be collected through lab testing or field data to train the data-driven
model  and  then  this  trained  model  is  applied  to  different  scenarios.
However,  many  existing  data-driven  studies  lack  thorough  validation
over a wide temperature range to examine their generalization ability.
Furthermore, few studies have investigated the estimation of tempera-
ture distribution inside the cell, which makes them provide less thermal

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112026

Y. Zheng et al.

Table 3
Summary of references on data-driven SOT estimation.

Reference

Battery

Data-driven model

Input features

Output

Training set

Testing set

Accuracy

Type

Chemistry

[230]

8-Ah
cylindrical

Ni-MH

FNN

I, Tamb, t

Tsurf

[231]

1.1-Ah

–

Two FNN blocks

SOC, I

V, Tsurf

◦

1 C, 3 C, and 5 C
C,
charge at 10
20
C, 40
C, 30
–

◦

◦

◦

1 C, 3 C, 5 C
◦
charge at 50

C

C

–

Lithium
polymer
NMC

NARX

NARX

LSTM-RNN

I, Tamb

I, V, SOC, Tcool,
 ̇
Q, estimated
Tcore
I, V, SOC, Tamb,
Tsurf

Tsurf

Tcore

Tsurf

Field data from a PV
plant
Profiles generated by
an experimentally
validated model

Field data from
a PV plant
CC charge-
discharge,
driving profiles

CC Charge-discharge
profile

10 driving cycle
profiles

[232]

75-Ah

[233,

234]

[29]

[235]

[236]

25-Ah
prismatic

2.5-Ah
26650
1.1-Ah
18650
2.15-Ah
18650
1.1-Ah
18650
2.9-Ah
18650
2.9-Ah
18650
31-Ah
prismatic

[239]

–

[237]

2.5-Ah
18650

LFP
LFP
NMC

LFP
NMC

NCA
NMC

–

NMC

GRU-RNN

I, V, SOC, Tamb

Tsurf

Dynamic profiles
◦
((cid:0) 10-50

C)

LSTM-RNN

I, V, SOC, Tamb

Tsurf

◦

Dynamic profiles at
(cid:0) 20-25
C (NCA cell)
1C, 3C, 5C fast charge
at 20

C (NMC cell)

◦

LSTM-RNN

LSTM-RNN with
transfer learning

 ̇
Q, SOC,

Tsurf,
Tamb, ΔTsurf
I, V, Tsurf, Tamb

5 features after
principal
component
analysis (PCA)
 ̇
Tsurf,
Q, SOC,
Tamb, I

Tcore

Tcore

Tsurf

–

CC-CV charge and CC
discharge at different
rates ((cid:0) 10-55
Real-world EV data

C)

◦

Tsurf

–

[27]

Prismatic

NMC

CNN-LSTM

[28]

–

–

LSTM-RNN + two-
state TEC model

[241]

3.25-Ah
18650

NCA

[242]

[243]

10-Ah
prismatic
Cylindrical

LFP

–

FNN + electro-
thermal model (first-
order RC + two-state
TEC)

RBF-NN + two-state
TEC model
Multi-node TEC
model + FNN

I, V, Tsurf

Tcore

Pulse discharge/
charge and constant
current discharge at
◦
◦
(cid:0) 15
C and 5
12 cells

C from

I, V, Tsurf

Tcore

–

I, V

T at six
locations

0.3C and 1C charge-
discharge data (70%)

[244]

[95]

4-Ah LG
18650

40-Ah
pouch

NMC

2D grid LSTM

I, V,

 ̇
Q, Tsurf

T at six
locations

HWFET, US06

LFP

Electrochemical-
thermal-neural-
network

I, Tsurf, Tcore

Tcore

UDDS and US06
◦
((cid:0) 20-50

C)

Thermal state
information

Surface
temperature

Surface
temperature

Surface
temperature
Core
temperature

Surface
temperature

◦

Max
deviation
<1.30
C
◦
C
0.0602
(open-loop)
0.0064
(closed-loop)
RMSE <1
C

◦

Error ±1

◦

C

MAE: 0.01
MAE: 0.02
MAE: 0.03

◦

◦

◦

C
C
C

Dynamic
profiles ((cid:0) 10-
50

C)

◦

Dynamic
profiles with
varying ambient
(NCA cell)
4C fast charge at
20
C (NMC
cell)
–

◦

UDDS and DST
at (cid:0) 10-55

C

◦

Real-world EV
data

3C and 4C
current profiles

Pulse
discharge/
charge and
constant current
discharge at
◦
(cid:0) 15
–

◦
C and 5

C

0.3C and 1C
charge-
discharge data
(30%)
UDDS

FUDS and
HWFET ((cid:0) 10-
40

C)

◦

MAE
<0.42

◦

C

Surface
temperature

C

◦
RMSE 1.8
(NCA cell)
◦
RMSE 0.41
(NMC cell)

C

–

MAE and
RMSE
<0.3302
MRE <0.28%

C

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

C

C

C (4

C
C)

MSE
0.0058
(3C)
MSE
0.0240
C)
RMSE
<0.32
◦
((cid:0) 15
RMSE
<0.25
◦
(5
C)
RMSE <
◦
0.07
C
◦
RMSE 0.43
(1C)
◦
RMSE 0.08
(0.3C)
RMSE ranges
from 0.52
C
C
to 0.81
RMSE
<1.08
under various
profiles

C

◦

◦

◦

C

C

Surface
temperature

Core
temperature

Core
temperature

Surface
temperature

Surface
temperature

Core
temperature

Core
temperature
Temperature
distribution

Core
temperature

Core
temperature

state  information  than  the  thermal  model-based  estimation  does  and
limits their applications in demanding scenarios such as XFC.

3.5. General comparison of existing estimation methods

The ultimate goal of SOT estimation strategies is to achieve accurate,
robust, and reliable estimations of battery temperature status without

increasing the cost and complexity of the battery system. As discussed
previously,  different  SOT  estimation  methodologies  exhibit  strengths
and  weaknesses,  regarding  their  model  complexity,  online  imple-
mentation capability, data requirement for parameterization/training,
hardware  cost,  accuracy,  generalization  ability,  and  the  amount  of
thermal  state  information  provided  by  estimations.  However,  it  is
difficult to compare different estimation methods quantitatively due to

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112027

Y. Zheng et al.

varying operating scenarios in different studies. Therefore, a general and
qualitative comparison  of these  methodologies has been  made in  this
review to evaluate them from different aspects and provide readers with
an overview of the pros and cons of these methods, as listed in Table 4.
Generally,  it  can be inferred  from the  table that complex  models can
achieve  higher  estimation  accuracy  but  they  are  subjected  to  higher
parameterization/training  difficulty.  Thermal  model-based  estimation
can achieve a trade-off between these two issues. However, the model
complexity does not have a high correlation to the hardware cost. For
instance,  the  impedance-based  estimation  requires  an  AC  excitation
source during implementation despite the simple estimation model. The
data-driven models, though difficult to be trained offline, can still have
high computational efficiency in BMS once it has been trained. Apart
from  the  estimation  performance,  it  should  be  highly  noted  that  the
amount  of  thermal  state  information  obtained  through  estimation  is
different with different methodologies. Therefore, it is also important to
select an appropriate estimation method with which the thermal state
information can meet the requirement of target applications.

4. Key challenges for battery thermal state monitoring

The key challenges to effective thermal state monitoring in BMSs can
be identified according to the survey of the state of the art in Section 3.
Generally,  the  challenges  arise  from  the  battery  system  itself,  the
hardware  characteristic  of  the  pack,  as  well  as  the  limitations  of  the
existing  methodology,  among which  some challenges  may  be  interre-
lated. Despite the significant progress made in SOT estimation at the cell
level, these above-mentioned challenges are still the major obstacles to
effective  thermal  state  monitoring  at  the  pack  or  system  level.  The
specific  challenges  include  the  complicated  thermal  dynamics  of  the
battery cell and the pack, the variable operating conditions of the bat-
tery  system,  the  limitations  of  the  sensing  techniques  in  the  battery
system, as well as the limitation of the estimation methods during online
applications. These five key challenges, as illustrated in Fig. 21 with the
main features summarized, will be elucidated in this section.

4.1. Complex thermal dynamics inside LIBs

A battery cell can be regarded as an independent and highly complex
electrochemical and thermodynamic system. The internal thermal dy-
namics and the electrochemical behaviors are coupled with each other
[245],  making  it  difficult  to  capture  the  thermal  behavior  of  the  cell
accurately, which can be illustrated in Fig. 21(a). Specifically, the heat
generation inside the cell originates not only from contact resistance but
also from various electrochemical reactions that are laborious to cali-
brate in real applications, as investigated by Bernardi et al. [100]. As a
result, the complex heat sources inside the battery cell make it difficult
for the onboard BMS to capture the actual heat generation of batteries.
Although a simplified model (i.e., Eq. (4)) has been widely applied to
calculate  heat  generation  when  modeling  the  thermal  dynamics  of

Table 4
Comparison of various SOT estimation methodologies.

batteries, it may cause large errors in heat generation characterization
under high-rate operations. For instance, the heat of mixing, as a result
of  the  composition  change  of  the  electrode  material  due  to  lithium
diffusion in the particle in the presence of concentration gradients, has a
contribution of 23% of the total heat generation at a charge rate of 6 C
[246], while this heat source is often assumed to be negligible in the
existing works. The inaccurate modeling of heat generation will bring
significant errors in SOT estimations for both open-loop and closed-loop
estimations, causing ineffective thermal state monitoring in demanding
applications such as XFC.

Since the temperature gradients are common inside battery cells as a
result of poor through-plane thermal conductivity, the electrochemical
reactions will not be homogenous over the battery domain, which causes
uneven heat generation inside the cell and further exacerbates the non-
uniformity  of  temperature  distribution  and  electrochemical  reactions
[73].  This  effect  becomes  more  significant  when  the  battery  format
becomes larger and the operating rates increase, particularly when in-
ternal short circuit happens locally inside a battery [206]. However, in
the  existing  literature,  the  heat  generation  is  usually  assumed  to  be
uniform over the battery volume so that the inhomogeneous heat gen-
eration is ignored, bringing errors to the thermal modeling process and
the subsequent temperature estimation, especially under high-rate op-
erations. Seldom studies have considered this non-uniform heat gener-
ation  during  control-oriented  thermal  modeling  [215].  Furthermore,
batteries  will  inevitably  undergo  complex  degradation  during  usage.
The  change  in  electrochemical  dynamics  with  degradation,  which  is
macroscopically manifested by the variation in battery resistance, leads
to the change in heat generation. However, the degradation process of
the battery is path-dependent, leading to different resistance variations
under  various  usage  patterns  [152,153].  Such  path-dependent  varia-
tions in battery internal resistance make it difficult to track the real heat
generation when batteries age differently.

In addition to heat generation, heat transfer inside the cell is also
complicated as it is dependent on battery thermal properties (e.g., spe-
cific heat capacity, thermal conductivities), which are determined by the
structure, material properties, and geometry of the cell [45]. The ther-
mal properties of the cell are also dependent on the SOC, temperature,
and aging status [45], causing different thermal responses. For battery
cells with different chemistries and formats, the heat transfer patterns
differ remarkably and therefore yield distinct temperature distributions.
As a result of complicated heat generation and heat transfer inside the
cell, it is still challenging to model and capture the thermal behavior of
batteries under different application scenarios even at the cell level.

4.2. Intricate thermal dynamics inside a battery pack

A  battery  pack  is  usually  composed  of  many  cells  with  series  and
parallel  connections,  which  makes  the  pack-level  thermal  dynamics
intractable. The challenge caused by pack-level thermal dynamics can
be shown in Fig. 21(b). In terms of heat generation, the resistances stem

Model
complexity

Online
implementation
capability

Parameterization/
training difficulty

Hardware
cost

Accuracy

Generalization
ability

Method

Impedance and

resistance-based
estimations
Thermal model-

based
estimations

Data-driven

estimations

Impedance-based
DC resistance-
based
FOM-based
TEC model-based
Reduced-order
distributed
model-based
Purely data-
driven
Hybrid

Low
Low

High
Medium
Medium

High

High

Low
Low

Low
High
High

Medium

Medium

Low
Low

Medium
Medium
Medium

High

High

High
Low

Medium
Medium
Medium

Low
Low

Medium
Low

High
Medium
Medium

High
High
High

Amount of
thermal state
information

Low
Low

High
High
High

Medium

High

Medium

Medium

Medium

High

Medium

Medium

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112028

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 21. Identified key challenges to effective thermal state monitoring of a battery system. (a) Complex thermal dynamics of the cell. (b) Intricate thermal dynamics
inside the pack. (c) Variable operating conditions. (d) Limited sensors in a battery pack. (e) Limitations of existing methodologies in online applications.

from the connection between cells and welding points could bring extra
heat generation to the battery pack [247–250]. Furthermore, since the
internal resistance of batteries inside a pack could be inconsistent as a
result of cell manufacturing, differences in cell temperature, SOC, and
aging  status,  the  current  flowing  through  each  branch  in  the  parallel
configurations  will  be  different  [115,247–249],  causing  non-uniform
heat generation inside a pack and further giving rise to larger temper-
ature  inhomogeneity. As  for  heat transfer  in  a  battery  pack, the  inte-
gration  of  many  individual  batteries  will  inevitably  increase  the
complexity  of  the  heat  transfer  problems.  Apart  from  the  complex
thermal behavior of each cell, the interactions between adjacent cells, as
well  as  between  the  cell  and  the  coolant  cannot  be  neglected.  For
instance, there exists inter-cell heat exchange when the temperatures of
two adjacent cells are not equal [82]. In addition, the fluid dynamics of
the coolant inside a battery pack are also complicated and intractable
[249,251]. Taking air cooling as an example, the air pressure and ve-
locity  will  vary  from  the  inlet  to  the  outlet,  resulting  in  different
convective heat transfer coefficients at different locations of the pack
[251]. The inhomogeneous heat dissipation inside the pack will aggra-
vate  the  temperature inhomogeneities,  and  in  turn, affect  the  battery
resistance and the distribution of branch currents. However, capturing
the  fluid  dynamics  of  the  coolant  is  challenging  since  the  airflow
channels  and  the  flowing  patterns  are  complicated,  which  not  only
depend on the cell geometry but also the arrangement of cells in a pack.

Despite various attempts to model the heat generation and heat transfer
characteristics in a battery pack, these methods are more or less based on
assumptions that could oversimplify the thermal issues in the pack, and
therefore  might  neglect  some  underlying  physics  that possibly  affects
the  thermal  dynamics  of  the  battery  pack.  To  date,  the  inability  of
capturing the pack-level thermal dynamics is still the primary obstacle
to accurate estimations of battery temperatures at the system level.

4.3. Variable operating conditions

Batteries  usually  undergo  variable  and  complicated  load  profiles,
ambient  temperatures,  and  cooling  conditions  in  real-world  applica-
tions, which bring difficulties to the SOT estimations, as shown in Fig. 21
(c).  The  loading  profile  of  batteries  will  inevitably  change  under
different  EV  operating  conditions,  leading  to  dissimilar  thermal  re-
sponses as a result of different internal thermal dynamics [53,61,81].
For instance, the internal heat sources under XFC will be different from
that in normal EV driving cycles due to the significant contribution of
the heat of mixing [246]. Furthermore, it is also likely that the battery
system  will  operate  under  varying  ambient.  The  change  in  ambient
temperature  will  eventually  change  the  internal  electrochemistry  and
thermal properties of battery materials, causing different heat genera-
tion  rates  and  thermal  parameters  such  as  thermal  conductivity.
Furthermore, the heat dissipated rate will also be altered as a result of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112029

Y. Zheng et al.

the  ambient  temperature  change  [22].  As  such,  the  temperature  rise
pattern and the temperature distribution of even the same cell will be
distinctive  under  different  ambient  conditions.  Due  to  the  aforemen-
tioned factors, it is highly likely that the SOT estimation model devel-
oped  from  one  condition  might  suffer  from  reduced  accuracy  under
other conditions [60,237,252]. In addition, the cooling configurations of
battery packs could also be different as a result of different BTMSs such
as  air  cooling  and  liquid  cooling,  causing  completely  different  heat
transfer  inside  the  pack.  Additionally,  batteries  in  different  systems
might  have  distinctive  chemistries,  geometries,  and  arrangements,
resulting in different heat generations and heat dissipations, which will
finally cause different temperature distribution characteristics inside the
pack [82,103,112]. These two issues make pack-level thermal modeling
a  non-trivial  task,  especially  when  modeling  the  completed  fluid  dy-
namics of coolant in different BTMS, and thus bring difficulties to the
parameterization and the model-based SOT estimation [182,251]. Even
with the same BTMS, the cooling conditions will also vary in terms of
different coolant temperatures and cooling power in order to actively
regulate  battery  temperature.  For  instance,  the  increase  in  battery
temperature is lower with forced convective cooling than that in natural
convective  cooling  due  to  the  increased  heat  dissipation,  while  the
temperature gradients will be larger in the former case [72]. However,
existing estimation methodologies typically assume that the battery is
under  constant  cooling  conditions,  making  the  developed  estimation
model unable to adapt to real-world varying conditions. Hence, in order
to  develop  accurate  and  robust  SOT  estimation  methods,  challenges
caused by variable operating conditions such as varying current profiles,
ambient  temperatures,  and  cooling  conditions  must  be  addressed
properly.

4.4. Limited sensors in a battery pack

From the data acquisition perspective, the available physical infor-
mation obtained by existing sensing solutions in the battery pack is quite
limited. Even in the ideal case where sufficient sensors have been ar-
ranged in the pack, the measurable signals from each cell are merely
limited  to  current,  voltage,  and  surface  temperature  at  the  measured
point, as assumed by many SOT estimation studies. The thermal state
information  with  spatial  resolutions,  especially  the  internal  tempera-
ture, still needs to be monitored via the proper design of SOT observers.
Nevertheless, in practical applications, due to the cost and complexity
considerations, the number of sensors in a pack is limited, which makes
the thermal state monitoring becomes challenging, as depicted in Fig. 21
(d). As for temperature sensors, the average sensors-to-cells ratio in most
battery systems is about 1/10 [52]. Hence, for the majority of cells in a
battery system, even the surface temperature information is not avail-
able, which limits the application of many existing SOT estimation and
fault diagnosis methodologies at the cell level that require the measured
surface  temperature  as  feedback.  Such  a  sparse  temperature  sensing
configuration could make the thermal state monitoring a more formi-
dable task at the module/pack level as observability issues emerge when
the  temperature  of  all  the  cells  needs  to  be  estimated  via  the  sparse
temperature signals. Furthermore, the limited temperature sensors in a
pack  also  bring  obstacles  to  model  parameterization/training.  As  for
pack-level thermal models, where model parameters need to be identi-
fied at first, the scarce temperature measurements will add uncertainties
to the identified model parameters. For data-driven SOT estimations at
the pack level, where a considerable amount of labeled data of each cell
is  required  during  the  training  process  [29,237],  the  limited  surface
temperature data makes the model difficult to be trained well.

In addition to limited temperature sensors, the limited current sen-
sors in a battery pack can also add more difficulties to effective thermal
state  monitoring,  especially  for  battery  systems  with  parallel  connec-
tions.  Due  to  the  cell  inconsistency  and  temperature  difference,  the
current  flowing  through  each  branch  will  be  different  [247–249].
However,  it  is  not  practical  to  add  a  current  sensor  to  each  parallel

branch due to its high cost. Without knowing the actual current in each
branch, it is difficult to estimate the cell temperature in the branch based
on existing SOT estimation methodologies. For instance, the impedance
or DC resistance of the cell in the parallel branch cannot be obtained in
the  absence  of  current  information,  which  limits  the  applicability  of
impedance/resistance-based estimation. In addition,  without knowing
the actual heat generation due to the lack of current information in the
branch,  thermal  model-based  SOT  estimations  may  suffer  from
increased errors. Therefore, the sparsely allocated temperature sensors,
along with the limited current sensors, make thermal state monitoring a
challenging task in a battery system.

4.5. Online applicability of SOT estimation methods

Ideally,  the  thermal state  of  batteries in  an  energy storage  system
should be monitored and estimated in real time for better management
of safety and  performance. Nevertheless, online applicability is still a
major  concern  for  most  existing  SOT  estimation  methodologies  that
developed in lab conditions or ideal cases (e.g., sufficient sensors). In
fact, each estimation method reviewed in this article is faced with online
application challenges to different extents. For instance, in impedance-
based  estimations,  accurate  measurement  of  battery  impedance  in
real-time during operations is still a formidable challenge since batteries
should be at a close-to-equilibrium state for accurate impedance mea-
surement,  which  requires  the  cell  to  have  sufficient  rest  and  then
interrupt  normal  operations.  The  DC  resistance-based  estimations
require specific current pulses in order to attain accurate estimation and
such pulses  are not always available in  real applications. The limited
current sensors in a battery pack with parallel modules also add diffi-
culties to the estimation. Therefore, these factors bring challenges to the
real-time  applications  of
impedance/resistance-based  estimation,
limiting their online applicability. For thermal model-based estimations,
despite  the  capability  of  generating  real-time  estimations,  the  lack  of
surface temperature and current information as a result of limited sen-
sors  could impair the  application of  these methods.  In particular,  the
battery pack nowadays has sparse temperature sensing so that the sur-
face  temperature  of  only  a  small  portion  of  the  cells  is  obtainable.
Additionally,  the  model  fidelity,  computational  complexity,  and
parameterization difficulty of thermal models should be well-traded to
facilitate  online  applications.  However,  this  could  be  difficult  for
module/pack-level  estimation  as  many  interrelated  physics  such  as
current and temperature distributions in a parallel module need to be
considered  during  modeling.  Regarding  data-driven  approaches,  their
disadvantages with respect to the computational burden during training
and the requirement of a large training set cannot be overlooked during
online applications despite their merits in accuracy. These limitations
make it difficult for conventional data-driven methods to adjust model
parameters online in order to adapt to the variable operating conditions.

5. Future trends

As discussed previously in the key challenges, thermal state moni-
toring at the pack or system level is still a formidable task at the moment
despite some advances in cell-level estimation. Nevertheless, with the
advancement  of  emerging  technologies,  some  opportunities  can  be
found to address existing challenges in the near future to realize real-
time, accurate, and comprehensive monitoring of the battery thermal
state. In this context, several promising trends for battery thermal state
monitoring are provided and elaborated, as illustrated in Fig. 22, which
require  efforts  from  multidisciplinary  domains.  These  solutions  are
benefited  from  the  maturity  of  advanced  sensing  technology,  mathe-
matical  and  control  theory,  AI  technologies,  and  signal  processing
techniques.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112030

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 22. Future trends of thermal state monitoring for
advanced  battery  management.  (a)  Application  of
advanced  sensing  technologies  in  the  battery  pack.
(b)  Applying  mathematical  techniques  to  develop
high-fidelity  control-oriented  thermal  models.  (c)
Combination  of  physics-based  models  with  machine
learning  algorithms.  (d)  Transferring  the  knowledge
of  SOT  estimation  from  one  domain  to  another
related  domain.  (e)  Reconstruction  of  the  tempera-
ture distribution inside a cell or pack based on sensor
measurements or estimations on finite locations.

5.1. Advanced sensing technologies

The battery cell is an enclosed electrochemical and thermodynamic
system, and therefore multiple internal states and parameters can hardly
be  obtained  directly  via  external  measurements.  The  existing  sensing
solutions in a battery pack can only provide some external information
such as the cell voltage, total current, and limited surface temperatures,
which  leads  to  the  development  of  many  algorithms  to  estimate  the
internal  states.  For  thermal  state  monitoring,  even  with  temperature
sensors  arranged at  the surface  of  each  cell,  the  internal temperature
information still needs to be estimated while such estimation may still
suffer  from  low  accuracy  in  large-format  batteries  or  under  high-rate

operations. With the development of sensing technologies, some phys-
ical information inside the cell such as internal temperatures, strains,
and pressures can be measured directly by advanced sensors, which help
yield more accurate results about battery internal states than conven-
tional  estimation  approaches  [253].  Fiber  optic  sensors,  for  example,
exhibit great advantages in battery thermal state monitoring [254–258].
These sensors are known to be lightweight, chemically inert, and robust
to electromagnetic interference so that they can be embedded inside the
cell  to  measure  both  the  strain  and  temperature  of  batteries  without
affecting  the  functionality  of  the  cell  [255–257],  which  makes  them
superior  to  traditional  bulky  temperature  sensors.  For  instance,  Wei
et al. implanted a distributed fiber optic sensor (DFOS) into a cylindrical

Fig. 23. Fiber optic sensors in the application of internal temperature measurement [243]. (a) Schematic of the arrangement of the DFOS in a cylindrical cell, where
D1 measures the internal temperature distribution of the jellyroll from the top to the bottom, while D2 and D3 measure the surface temperature distribution. (b)-(e)
Measured results of current, voltage, internal, and surface temperature distributions during 1 C charge and discharge cycle at 25

C.

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112031

Y. Zheng et al.

battery  to  measure  the  space-resolved  internal  temperature  [243],  as
illustrated in Fig. 23, where the temperature distribution with a high
resolution  can  be  obtained.  With  the  directly  measured  internal  tem-
peratures as input, the temperature distribution inside the cell can be
estimated with better accuracy and spatial resolutions, which contrib-
utes to better management of large-format cells and cells in demanding
applications. Furthermore, some physical signals may have high corre-
lations to battery internal states, which can contribute to more accurate
and robust state estimations [259,260]. For instance, battery stress was
found to be highly correlated to SOC [259,260]. In light of this, it is still
possible  to  find  some  temperature-related  physical  signals  based  on
some advanced sensors, which can be used as supplementary informa-
tion  together  with  current  and  voltage  to  realize  SOT  estimations,  as
shown in Fig. 22(a). To this end, future work can also focus on finding
those  temperature-related  signals  by  trying  various  sensors,  such  as
piezoelectric  sensors  [261],  contact-type  displacement  sensors  [262],
and ultrasonic transmission-based probes [263]. With such extra infor-
mation about batteries provided, both the accuracy and robustness of
the existing SOT estimation framework could be improved.

5.2. Development of high-fidelity control-oriented thermal models

To date, thermal models still play a key role in battery thermal state
monitoring as they enable insights into thermal dynamics and provide
more thermal state information than other methods. Despite the appli-
cations of emerging technologies such as AI in SOT estimations in recent
years, the thermal models will be still widely applied in the BMS thanks
to  their  accuracy,  physical  interpretation,  and  generalization  capabil-
ities. The first principle-based thermal models, namely the FOMs, are the
most  accurate  ones  for  SOT  estimation.  However,  given  the  limited
onboard computational resources, these models are too complicated to
be implemented in BMS, particularly at the pack-level estimations where
the complex thermal dynamics in a pack need to be considered. As such,
it is an imperative but challenging task to decrease the computational
burdens to a manageable level for onboard implementations.

Simplification  of  the  PDEs  in  this  DPS  requires  advanced  mathe-
matical techniques for model order reduction, where the key idea is to
approximate the infinite-dimensional solution space of the DPS by using
a set of ODEs. In light of this, there are two main approaches for the
development of high-fidelity control-oriented thermal models via model
order reduction, as depicted in Fig. 22(b). The first approach is to lump
the DPS by discretizing the spatial domain into sub-domains where the
system state is assumed to be uniform, as the multi-node TEC models do.
In this way, the battery thermal process is represented by the thermal
dynamics of a number of nodes, which yield a comparable solution to
FOM but are more tractable and computationally efficient. Techniques
such as FEM [264,265], FDM [265], FVM [266], and the method of lines
[168] can be applied for model derivation. The amount of thermal state
information  included in these reduced-order lumped models are typi-
cally determined by the mesh density. Lower mesh density contains less
thermal state information but achieves higher computational efficiency,
while higher mesh density can include more spatial information about
the thermal state but brings more computational burdens. Hence, it is
important  to  make  sure  that  these  models  contain  sufficient  thermal
state  information  for  high-performance  battery  management  when
conducting model order reduction. The other approach is to reformulate
the FOM mathematically by using the global SBFs to approximate the
original solution as the spectral method does [82,98,210]. Owing to the
global  properties  of  SBFs,  this  reformulation  achieves  lower-order
models  than  the  model  lumping  method  and  the  thermal  state  infor-
mation  at  any  point  of  the  battery  domain  becomes  available,  which
promotes  better  battery  management  with  more  thermal  state  infor-
mation.  This  method  often  requires  the  DPS  with  a  regular  space
domain. In the future, with the combination of these two approaches,
for
high-fidelity  and  computationally  efficient  thermal  models
large-format  cells  and  battery  modules/packs  are  expected  to  be

developed by considering the complex fluid dynamics of the coolant and
heat transfer inside the pack. These high-fidelity control-oriented ther-
mal models are very promising for thermal state monitoring in online
applications, enabling the high performance of SOT observers.

5.3. Integrating physics with machine learning

Pure  physics-based  models  and  pure  data-driven  models  exhibit
strengths  and  weaknesses  of  their  own  during  battery  thermal  state
monitoring.  Pure  physics-based  models  present  good  generalization
ability since they are developed based on first principles and the esti-
mation  can  be  governed  by  physical  laws.  However,  the  unmodeled
dynamics and the parameter uncertainties deteriorate the accuracy of
control-oriented  models  in  SOT  estimations.  Data-driven  models  are
able to recognize the patterns of battery data with the  neglect of un-
derlying physical processes with remarkably high estimation accuracy.
Nevertheless, these black-box models require a huge amount of data for
training, and they are prone to failure when applied to new scenarios.
Therefore,  integrating  physics-based  models  with  data-driven  models
can  be  a  promising  way  by  taking  advantage  of  their  respective
strengths,  which  is  also  referred  to  as  physics-informed  machine
learning (PIML) in recent years, as illustrated in Fig. 22(c). Generally,
there are many ways to realize PIML with different model structures and
combination manners of both models, as discussed in Refs. [240,267].
PIML is a promising technique and can benefit battery thermal state
monitoring  in  several  aspects.  First,  the  accuracy  and  generalization
capability of SOT estimation can be significantly improved with PIML.
Some examples can be seen in the existing literature by integrating the
physics-based  thermal  model  with  the  ML  algorithm  in  the  SOT  esti-
mation loop [119,243,252]. In these works, the physics-based thermal
models can generate a prior estimation at first and the ML algorithms are
able to learn the difference between the model output and the actual
value in order to eliminate such mismatch so that the estimation accu-
racy and generalization capability can be enhanced. In other cases, PIML
enables  this  performance  enhancement  based  on  only  a  small  experi-
mental  dataset,  which  is  difficult  to  be  achieved  with  conventional
data-driven  approaches.  For  instance,  as  one  of  the  PIML  methods,
physics-inspired or physics-informed neural networks (PINNs), by add-
ing physical constraints into the loss functions of the neural network or
directly embedding the physical laws governed by PDEs into the neural
network structure, can be well-trained using significantly less labeled
data  and  the  model  accuracy  is  comparable  to  the  original  FOM
[268–271]. Such neural networks are the paradigm for solving problems
where only limited data and limited physical laws are known [268], and
are therefore particularly suitable for the thermal state monitoring at the
pack level where only limited signals and thermal dynamics are avail-
able.  In  the  existing  literature,  these  neural  networks  have  also  been
applied to the thermal state monitoring of LIBs [272–274]. Deng et al.
constructed a PINN to estimate the temperature distribution in the radial
direction  of  a  cylindrical  battery,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  24  [274].  The
physical information, including the governing equations, as well as the
initial  and  boundary  conditions,  together  with  the  limited  amount  of
measured  surface  temperature  data,  was  used  to  train  the  PINN  to
achieve high accuracy and good generalization capability.

5.4. Transferring knowledge from related domains

Typically, a battery system will undergo variable operating condi-
tions and inevitable battery degradation, which bring great challenges
to existing SOT estimations. As a result, SOT estimation models devel-
oped  in  specific  conditions  will  fail  to  track  battery  SOT  under  new
scenarios. Moreover, limited sensors in a battery system also impede the
model  parameterization/training  due  to  the  lack  of  measured  data.
Typically, developing a new estimation model is time-consuming since
experimental data needs to be collected for model parameterization or
training, which makes it impractical to develop a new estimation model

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112032

Y. Zheng et al.

Fig. 24. Schematic of the PINN for the estimation of radial temperature distribution of a cylindrical cell [274].

whenever the operating condition changes. Therefore, it is an important
but challenging task to improve the generalization capability of existing
estimation models and make them adapt to different scenarios based on
limited measured data, without causing significant changes to the esti-
mation framework. One promising way is to apply transfer learning that
can  transfer  existing  knowledge  about  SOT  estimation  to  different
operating conditions and aging statuses, as shown in Fig. 22(d). In this
way, the existing models can be migrated to new application scenarios
(i.e., the target domain) to achieve SOT estimations with high perfor-
mance.  To  realize  model  transfer,  only  limited  data  from  the  target
domain will be needed to tune certain parameters of the base model.
Take  fine-tuning  strategies  in  Ref.  [237]  as  an  example,  by  merely
tuning the parameters of the top layers in a neural network, the base
model  could  be  re-trained  and  applied  to  estimate  battery  SOT  accu-
rately under different operating conditions. Since only a small amount of
data from the target domain is needed, such a re-training process can be
implemented  onboard  with  reasonable  computational  cost  and  the
estimation  accuracy  can  be  improved  significantly.  So  far,  transfer
learning has exhibited great success in state estimations [226,275] and
health prognostics [224,276,277], and its success in the field of battery
thermal state monitoring can also be foreseen in the future.

5.5. Temperature field reconstruction techniques

In the existing literature, many temperature measurements or SOT
estimations only provide temperature information at some specific lo-
cations in the battery system (e.g., battery surface or core). Since the
temperature distribution inside a cell or pack is spatially non-uniform,
merely  using  the  measured  and  estimated  temperature  at  the  limited
locations  might  cause  the  information  loss  of  the  spatially  uneven
thermal behavior, especially when some transient hot spots exist inside a
battery cell/pack. For large-format cells with high energy density and
batteries  under  demanding  applications  such  as  XFC,  it  is  of  vital
importance to acquire the spatially resolved temperature information in
order to better manage battery safety, performance, and lifetime. In this
context, temperature field reconstruction techniques based on limited
measurements  and  estimation  information  are  essential  in  future  ap-
plications, as illustrated in Fig. 22(e). Distributed KF, for instance, can
be applied to reconstruct the 3D temperature distribution of a battery
pack  based  on  the  measured  surface  temperatures  [278].  Inpainting
methods,  which  originate  from  the  image  processing  field,  have  also
been  applied  to  reconstruct  the  battery  temperature  field  based  on
limited  measurements  at  the  battery  surface  [108,178].  Originating
from the image processing field, such methods assume that the global
information of a system consists of a set of discrete points so that iter-
ative algorithms can be applied to restore the global information from
the partial information. In particular, the battery temperature obtained
from the limited points is treated as the intact pixel in a damaged pic-
ture,  and  the  complete  picture  (i.e.,  the  global  temperature  field  of
batteries) can be restored via algorithms [178]. Most recently, ML al-
gorithms such as neural networks can also be leveraged to reconstruct

the global temperature field with high accuracy using partial observa-
tions [279,280]. Other methods such as the SBF-based reconstruction
can also be used based on either full sensing or sparse sensing [196,281].
As  a  way  of  approximating  the  true  global  temperature  field,  the
reconstructed  temperature  can  provide  the  BMS  with  high-fidelity
spatiotemporal  temperature  information  about  the  battery  system  for
various application purposes.

6. Conclusions

Temperature has a non-negligible impact on the safety, performance,
and  lifetime  of  LIBs,  and  has  become  a  critical  barrier  to  high-
performance battery systems. Advanced battery management is a key
enabling technology to address the thermally induced issues of batteries,
where  the  battery’s  thermal  state  should  be  properly  monitored  for
better  management.  Given  limited  onboard  temperature  sensors  and
their  inability  to  measure  battery  internal  temperature,  temperature
estimation plays an important role in the thermal state monitoring of
LIBs. Therefore, this paper provides a comprehensive review of the state-
of-the-art temperature estimation techniques for LIBs. Metrics such as
surface temperature, core temperature, bulk temperature, and temper-
ature distribution, are discussed in terms of their capability to charac-
terize  the  battery  thermal  state  since  the  amount  of  temperature
information provided by them is different. Applying different metrics to
manage battery systems yields distinct performance. Generally, simple
metrics such as surface temperature are applicable to small batteries and
low-rate  operations,  while  large-format  batteries  and  demanding  ap-
plications require metrics that provide spatiotemporal temperature in-
formation. Afterward, existing temperature estimation techniques have
been reviewed systematically and discussed in terms of their principles,
merits, weaknesses, and potential improvement. These methodologies
can  be  classified  into  three  categories:  impedance/resistance-based
estimation,  thermal  model-based  estimation,  and  data-driven  estima-
tion,  which  have  different  model  complexity,  online  implementation
capability,  parameterization  difficulty,  hardware  cost,  accuracy,
generalization  ability,  and  the  amount  of  thermal  state  information.
Despite much progress made at the cell-level estimation, the challenges
resulting from the complicated thermal dynamics of the battery cell and
pack, variable operating conditions of batteries, insufficient sensing of
the pack, as well as online applicability of existing methodologies still
hinder the effective thermal state monitoring at the pack or system level.
Addressing these issues requires multidisciplinary efforts, including the
application  of  advanced  sensing  technologies  in  the  battery  system,
derivation  of  high-fidelity  control-oriented  thermal  models  based  on
mathematical techniques, the use of state-of-the-art AI technologies such
as  PIML  and  transfer  learning  to  achieve  estimation  in  an  accurate,
robust  and  data-efficient  way,  as  well  as  the  employment  of  image
processing  method  to  reconstruct  temperature  information.  With  the
thermal  state  of  batteries  being  monitored  comprehensively,  high-
performance battery management and thermal management strategies
are  able  to  be  developed  to  ensure  the  safe,  efficient,  and  reliable

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112033

Y. Zheng et al.

operations of the whole battery system.

Authors contribution statement

Yusheng  Zheng:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Writing  -  Orig-
inal  Draft,  Writing  -  Review  &  Editing,  Visualization  Yunhong  Che:
Writing  -  Original  Draft,  Writing  -  Review  &  Editing  Xiaosong  Hu:
Conceptualization,  Writing  -  Review  &  Editing,  Supervision,  Project
administration,  Funding  acquisition  Xin  Sui:  Methodology,  Writing  -
Review & Editing Daniel-Ioan Stroe: Methodology, Writing - Review &
Editing  Remus  Teodorescu:  Conceptualization,  Writing  -  Review  &
Editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported in part by the Villum Foundation for Smart
Battery project (No. 222860), the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 52111530194) and the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities (2022CDJDX-006).

References

[1] U.S. Energy Information Administration. International Energy Outlook 2021
(IEO2021); 2021. https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=41433
(accessed March 28, 2022).

[2] Williams JH, DeBenedictis A, Ghanadan R, Mahone A, Moore J, Morrow WR,

et al. The technology path to deep greenhouse gas emissions cuts by 2050: the
pivotal role of electricity. Science 2012;1979(335):53–9. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1208365.

[3] Pacala S, Socolow R. Stabilization wedges: solving the climate problem for the
next 50 Years with current technologies. Science 2004;305(1979):968–72.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1100103.

[4] International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2022; 2022. https://iea.blo

b.core.windows.net/assets/830fe099-5530-48f2-a7c1-11f35d510983/WorldEn
ergyOutlook2022.pdf (accessed June 26, 2023).

[5] Cano ZP, Banham D, Ye S, Hintennach A, Lu J, Fowler M, et al. Batteries and fuel
cells for emerging electric vehicle markets. Nat Energy 2018;3:279–89. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0108-1.

[6] Nykvist B, Olsson O. The feasibility of heavy battery electric trucks. Joule 2021;5:

901–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.03.007.

[7] Yang X-G, Liu T, Ge S, Rountree E, Wang C-Y. Challenges and key requirements of
batteries for electric vertical takeoff and landing aircraft. Joule 2021;5:1644–59.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.05.001.

[8] Sch ̈afer AW, Barrett SRH, Doyme K, Dray LM, Gnadt AR, Self R, et al.

Technological, economic and environmental prospects of all-electric aircraft. Nat
Energy 2019;4:160–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0294-x.

[9] Viswanathan V, Epstein AH, Chiang YM, Takeuchi E, Bradley M, Langford J, et al.

The challenges and opportunities of battery-powered flight. Nature 2022;601:
519–25. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04139-1.

[10] Schmuch R, Wagner R, H ̈orpel G, Placke T, Winter M. Performance and cost of
materials for lithium-based rechargeable automotive batteries. Nat Energy 2018;
3:267–78. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0107-2.

[11] Feng X, Ouyang M, Liu X, Lu L, Xia Y, He X. Thermal runaway mechanism of

lithium ion battery for electric vehicles: a review. Energy Storage Mater 2018;10:
246–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2017.05.013.

[12] Feng X, Ren D, He X, Ouyang M. Mitigating thermal runaway of lithium-ion
batteries. Joule 2020;4:743–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2020.02.010.

[13] Hu X, Zheng Y, Howey DA, Perez H, Foley A, Pecht M. Battery warm-up

methodologies at subzero temperatures for automotive applications: recent
advances and perspectives. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;77:100806. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.100806.

[14] Rodrigues M-TF, Babu G, Gullapalli H, Kalaga K, Sayed FN, Kato K, et al.

A materials perspective on Li-ion batteries at extreme temperatures. Nat Energy
2017;2:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2017.108.

[15] Lin X, Khosravinia K, Hu X, Li J, Lu W. Lithium plating mechanism, detection, and

mitigation in lithium-ion batteries. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2021;87. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100953.

[16] Edge JS, O’Kane S, Prosser R, Kirkaldy ND, Patel AN, Hales A, et al. Lithium ion

battery degradation: what you need to know. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2021;23:
8200–21. https://doi.org/10.1039/d1cp00359c.

[17] Keyser M, Pesaran A, Li Q, Santhanagopalan S, Smith K, Wood E, et al. Enabling
fast charging – battery thermal considerations. J Power Sources 2017;367:
228–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.07.009.

[18] Liu Y, Zhu Y, Cui Y. Challenges and opportunities towards fast-charging battery
materials. Nat Energy 2019;4:540–50. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019-
0405-3.

[19] Tomaszewska A, Chu Z, Feng X, O’Kane S, Liu X, Chen J, et al. Lithium-ion

battery fast charging: a review. ETransportation 2019;1:100011. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.etran.2019.100011.

[20] Zhu G, Wen K, Lv W, Zhou X, Liang Y, Yang F, et al. Materials insights into low-

temperature performances of lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2015;300:
29–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.09.056.

[21] Zhu J, Knapp M, Darma MSD, Fang Q, Wang X, Dai H, et al. An improved electro-
thermal battery model complemented by current dependent parameters for
vehicular low temperature application. Appl Energy 2019;248:149–61. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.04.066.

[22] Ji Y, Zhang Y, Wang C-Y. Li-ion cell operation at low temperatures. J Electrochem

Soc 2013;160:A636–49. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.047304jes.

[23] Fly A, Kirkpatrick I, Chen R. Low temperature performance evaluation of

electrochemical energy storage technologies. Appl Therm Eng 2021;189:116750.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.116750.

[24] Che Y, Hu X, Lin X, Guo J, Teodorescu R. Health prognostics for lithium-ion

batteries: mechanisms, methods, and prospects. Energy Environ Sci 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee03019e.

[25] Cai W, Yao Y-X, Zhu G-L, Yan C, Jiang L-L, He C, et al. A review on energy

chemistry of fast-charging anodes. Chem Soc Rev 2020;49:3806–33. https://doi.
org/10.1039/C9CS00728H.

[26] Longchamps RS, Yang X-G, Wang C-Y. Fundamental insights into battery thermal
management and safety. ACS Energy Lett 2022;7:1103–11. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsenergylett.2c00077.

[27] Li D, Liu P, Zhang Z, Zhang L, Deng J, Wang Z, et al. Battery thermal runaway
fault prognosis in electric vehicles based on abnormal heat generation and deep
learning algorithms. IEEE Trans Power Electron 2022;37:8513–25. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TPEL.2022.3150026.

[28] Li M, Dong C, Mu Y, Yu X, Xiao Q, Jia H. Data-model alliance network for the

online multi-step thermal warning of energy storage system based on surface
temperature diffusion. Patterns 2022;3:100432. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
patter.2021.100432.

[29] Ojo O, Lang H, Kim Y, Hu X, Mu B, Lin X. A neural network based method for
Thermal Fault detection in lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2021;
68:4068–78. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2020.2984980.

[30] Lai X, Jin C, Yi W, Han X, Feng X, Zheng Y, et al. Mechanism, modeling, detection,
and prevention of the internal short circuit in lithium-ion batteries: recent
advances and perspectives. Energy Storage Mater 2021;35:470–99. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ensm.2020.11.026.

[31] Yang XG, Liu T, Gao Y, Ge S, Leng Y, Wang D, et al. Asymmetric temperature

modulation for extreme fast charging of lithium-ion batteries. Joule 2019;3:
3002–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.09.021.

[32] Yang XG, Zhang G, Ge S, Wang CY. Fast charging of lithium-ion batteries at all

temperatures. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;115:7266–71. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1807115115.

[33] Wang CY, Liu T, Yang XG, Ge S, Stanley Nv, Rountree ES, et al. Fast charging of
energy-dense lithium-ion batteries. Nature 2022. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-022-05281-0.

[34] Yin Y, Choe SY. Actively temperature controlled health-aware fast charging

method for lithium-ion battery using nonlinear model predictive control. Appl
Energy 2020;271:115232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115232.
[35] Liu T, Yang X-G, Ge S, Leng Y, Wang C-Y. Ultrafast charging of energy-dense
lithium-ion batteries for urban air mobility. ETransportation 2021;7:100103.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etran.2021.100103.

[36] Zeng Y, Zhang B, Fu Y, Shen F, Zheng Q, Chalise D, et al. Extreme fast charging of

commercial Li-ion batteries via combined thermal switching and self-heating
approaches. Nat Commun 2023;14:3229. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-
38823-9.

[37] Mohan S, Kim Y, Stefanopoulou AG. Energy-conscious warm-up of Li-ion cells
from subzero temperatures. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2016;63:2954–64. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2016.2523440.

[38] Wang CY, Zhang G, Ge S, Xu T, Ji Y, Yang XG, et al. Lithium-ion battery structure

that self-heats at low temperatures. Nature 2016;529:515–8. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature16502.

[39] Longchamps RS, Yang XG, Ge S, Liu T, Wang CY. Transforming rate capability

through self-heating of energy-dense and next-generation batteries. J Power
Sources 2021:510. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230416.

[40] Li X, Yuan C, Wang Z, Xie J. A data-fusion framework for lithium battery health

condition Estimation Based on differential thermal voltammetry. Energy 2022;
239:122206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.122206.

[41] Wang Z, Yuan C, Li X. Lithium battery state-of-health estimation via differential

thermal voltammetry with Gaussian process regression. IEEE Transactions on
Transportation Electrification 2021;7:16–25. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TTE.2020.3028784.

[42] Yang J, Cai Y, Mi C. Lithium-ion battery capacity estimation based on battery

surface temperature change under constant-current charge scenario. Energy
2022;241:122879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.122879.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112034

Y. Zheng et al.

[43] Hu X, Xu L, Lin X, Pecht M. Battery lifetime prognostics. Joule 2020;4:310–46.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.11.018.

[44] Liu H, Wei Z, He W, Zhao J. Thermal issues about Li-ion batteries and recent

progress in battery thermal management systems: a review. Energy Convers
Manag 2017;150:304–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.08.016.

[45] Steinhardt M, Barreras Jv, Ruan H, Wu B, Offer GJ, Jossen A. Meta-analysis of
experimental results for heat capacity and thermal conductivity in lithium-ion
batteries: a critical review. J Power Sources 2022;522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2021.230829.

[46] Wu W, Wang S, Wu W, Chen K, Hong S, Lai Y. A critical review of battery thermal
performance and liquid based battery thermal management. Energy Convers
Manag 2019;182:262–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2018.12.051.
[47] Lin J, Liu X, Li S, Zhang C, Yang S. A review on recent progress, challenges and
perspective of battery thermal management system. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;
167:120834. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120834.

[48] Raijmakers LHJ, Danilov DL, Eichel R-A, Notten PHL. A review on various

temperature-indication methods for Li-ion batteries. Appl Energy 2019;240:
918–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.02.078.

[49] Ma S, Jiang M, Tao P, Song C, Wu J, Wang J, et al. Temperature effect and

thermal impact in lithium-ion batteries: a review. Prog Nat Sci: Mater Int 2018;
28:653–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnsc.2018.11.002.

[50] Jinasena A, Spitthoff L, Wahl MS, Lamb JJ, Shearing PR, Strømman AH, et al.

Online internal temperature sensors in lithium-ion batteries: state-of-the-art and
future trends. Frontiers in Chemical Engineering 2022;4. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fceng.2022.804704.

[51] Forgez C, Vinh Do D, Friedrich G, Morcrette M, Delacourt C. Thermal modeling of

a cylindrical LiFePO4/graphite lithium-ion battery. J Power Sources 2010;195:
2961–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.10.105.

[52] Lin X, Perez HE, Siegel JB, Stefanopoulou AG. Robust estimation of battery

system temperature distribution under sparse sensing and uncertainty. IEEE Trans
Control Syst Technol 2020;28:753–65. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TCST.2019.2892019.

[53] Richardson RR, Howey DA. Sensorless battery internal temperature estimation
using a kalman filter with impedance measurement. IEEE Trans Sustain Energy
2015;6:1190–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSTE.2015.2420375.

[54] Li Z, Zhang J, Wu B, Huang J, Nie Z, Sun Y, et al. Examining temporal and spatial
variations of internal temperature in large-format laminated battery with
embedded thermocouples. J Power Sources 2013;241:536–53. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.04.117.

[55] Richardson RR, Ireland PT, Howey DA. Battery internal temperature estimation
by combined impedance and surface temperature measurement. J Power Sources
2014;265:254–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.04.129.

[56] Lin X, Perez HE, Siegel JB, Stefanopoulou AG, Li Y, Anderson RD, et al. Online
parameterization of lumped thermal dynamics in cylindrical lithium ion batteries
for core temperature estimation and health monitoring. IEEE Trans Control Syst
Technol 2013;21:1745–55. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST.2012.2217143.
[57] Wang Y, Tian J, Sun Z, Wang L, Xu R, Li M, et al. A comprehensive review of
battery modeling and state estimation approaches for advanced battery
management systems. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2020;131. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2020.110015.

[58] Samanta A, Williamson SS. A comprehensive review of lithium-ion cell

temperature estimation techniques applicable to health-conscious fast charging
and smart battery management systems. Energies 2021;14:5960. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en14185960.

[59] Hu X, Feng F, Liu K, Zhang L, Xie J, Liu B. State estimation for advanced battery
management: key challenges and future trends. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;
114:109334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109334.

[60] Liu K, Peng Q, Che Y, Zheng Y, Li K, Teodorescu R, et al. Transfer learning for
battery smarter state estimation and ageing prognostics: recent progress,
challenges, and prospects. Advances in Applied Energy 2023;9:100117. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.adapen.2022.100117.

[61] Lin X, Perez HE, Mohan S, Siegel JB, Stefanopoulou AG, Ding Y, et al. A lumped-
parameter electro-thermal model for cylindrical batteries. J Power Sources 2014;
257:12–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.01.097.

[62] Zhang C, Li K, Deng J. Real-time estimation of battery internal temperature based
on a simplified thermoelectric model. J Power Sources 2016;302:146–54. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.10.052.

[63] Dai H, Zhu L, Zhu J, Wei X, Sun Z. Adaptive Kalman filtering based internal

temperature estimation with an equivalent electrical network thermal model for
hard-cased batteries. J Power Sources 2015;293:351–65. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.05.087.

[64] Zeng Y, Chalise D, Lubner SD, Kaur S, Prasher RS. A review of thermal physics

and management inside lithium-ion batteries for high energy density and fast
charging. Energy Storage Mater 2021;41:264–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ensm.2021.06.008.

[65] Drake SJ, Wetz DA, Ostanek JK, Miller SP, Heinzel JM, Jain A. Measurement of
anisotropic thermophysical properties of cylindrical Li-ion cells. J Power Sources
2014;252:298–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.11.107.
[66] Wei L, Lu Z, Cao F, Zhang L, Yang X, Yu X, et al. A comprehensive study on

thermal conductivity of the lithium-ion battery. Int J Energy Res 2020;44:
9466–78. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.5016.

[67] Murashko KA, Pyrh ̈onen J, Jokiniemi J. Determination of the through-plane

thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of a Li-ion cylindrical cell. Int J
Heat Mass Tran 2020;162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120330.

[68] Xie Y, Li W, Yang Y, Feng F. A novel resistance-based thermal model for lithium-
ion batteries. Int J Energy Res 2018;42:4481–98. https://doi.org/10.1002/
er.4193.

[69] Yin L, Bj ̈orneklett A, S ̈oderlund E, Brandell D. Analyzing and mitigating battery
ageing by self-heating through a coupled thermal-electrochemical model of
cylindrical Li-ion cells. J Energy Storage 2021;39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
est.2021.102648.

[70] Nie P, Zhang SW, Ran A, Yang C, Chen S, Li Z, et al. Full-cycle electrochemical-
thermal coupling analysis for commercial lithium-ion batteries. Appl Therm Eng
2021;184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.116258.

[71] Sun L, Sun W, You F. Core temperature modelling and monitoring of lithium-ion
battery in the presence of sensor bias. Appl Energy 2020;271:115243. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115243.

[72] Zhang G, Cao L, Ge S, Wang C-Y, Shaffer CE, Rahn CD. In situ measurement of

radial temperature distributions in cylindrical Li-ion cells. J Electrochem Soc
2014;161:A1499–507. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0051410jes.

[73] Fleckenstein M, Bohlen O, Roscher MA, B ̈aker B. Current density and state of

charge inhomogeneities in Li-ion battery cells with LiFePO4 as cathode material
due to temperature gradients. J Power Sources 2011;196:4769–78. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.01.043.

[74] Zhao Y, Patel Y, Zhang T, Offer GJ. Modeling the effects of thermal gradients

induced by tab and surface cooling on lithium ion cell performance.
J Electrochem Soc 2018;165:A3169–78. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0901813jes.

[75] Veth C, Dragicevic D, Merten C. Thermal characterizations of a large-format

lithium ion cell focused on high current discharges. J Power Sources 2014;267:
760–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.05.139.

[76] Heenan TMM, Mombrini I, Llewellyn A, Checchia S, Tan C, Johnson MJ, et al.

Mapping internal temperatures during high-rate battery applications. Nature
2023;617:507–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-05913-z.

[77] Merla Y, Wu B, Yufit V, Brandon NP, Martinez-Botas RF, Offer GJ. Extending

battery life: a low-cost practical diagnostic technique for lithium-ion batteries.
J Power Sources 2016;331:224–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2016.09.008.

[78] Merla Y, Wu B, Yufit V, Brandon NP, Martinez-Botas RF, Offer GJ. Novel

application of differential thermal voltammetry as an in-depth state-of-health
diagnosis method for lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2016;307:308–19.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.12.122.

[79] Wu B, Yufit V, Merla Y, Martinez-Botas RF, Brandon NP, Offer GJ. Differential

thermal voltammetry for tracking of degradation in lithium-ion batteries. J Power
Sources 2015;273:495–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.09.127.
[80] Du X, Meng J, Peng J, Zhang Y, Liu T, Teodorescu R. Sensorless temperature

estimation of lithium-ion battery based on broadband impedance measurements.
IEEE Trans Power Electron 2022:1. https://doi.org/10.1109/tpel.2022.3166170.
1.

[81] Richardson RR, Zhao S, Howey DA. On-board monitoring of 2-D spatially-

resolved temperatures in cylindrical lithium-ion batteries: Part II. State
estimation via impedance-based temperature sensing. J Power Sources 2016;327:
726–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.06.104.

[82] Richardson RR, Zhao S, Howey DA. On-board monitoring of 2-D spatially-

resolved temperatures in cylindrical lithium-ion batteries: Part I. Low-order
thermal modelling. J Power Sources 2016;326:377–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jpowsour.2016.06.103.

[83] Hua X, Heckel C, Modrow N, Zhang C, Hales A, Holloway J, et al. The prismatic
surface cell cooling coefficient: a novel cell design optimisation tool & thermal
parameterization method for a 3D discretised electro-thermal equivalent-circuit
model. ETransportation 2021;7:100099. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
etran.2020.100099.

[84] Y wei Pan, Hua Y, Zhou S, He R, Zhang Y, Yang S, et al. A computational multi-

node electro-thermal model for large prismatic lithium-ion batteries. J Power
Sources 2020;459:228070. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.228070.

[85] Lundgren H, Svens P, Ekstr ̈om H, Tengstedt C, Lindstr ̈om J, Behm M, et al.
Thermal management of large-format prismatic lithium-ion battery in PHEV
application. J Electrochem Soc 2016;163:A309–17. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.09411602jes.

[86] Wu B, Li Z, Zhang J. Thermal design for the pouch-type large-format lithium-ion
batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2015;162:A181–91. https://doi.org/10.1149/
2.0831501jes.

[87] Xie Y, He X, Hu X, Li W, Zhang Y, Liu B, et al. An improved resistance-based
thermal model for a pouch lithium-ion battery considering heat generation of
posts. Appl Therm Eng 2020;164:114455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2019.114455.

[88] Wang T, Li C, Chang L, Duan B, Zhang C. Thermal behavior analysis of Pouch
Lithium ion Battery using distributed electro-thermal model. In: 2019 3rd
conference on vehicle control and intelligence (CVCI). IEEE; 2019. p. 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVCI47823.2019.8951685.

[89] Goutam S, Nikolian A, Jaguemont J, Smekens J, Omar N, Van Dan Bossche P,

et al. Three-dimensional electro-thermal model of li-ion pouch cell: analysis and
comparison of cell design factors and model assumptions. Appl Therm Eng 2017;
126:796–808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.07.206.

[90] He CX, Yue QL, Wu MC, Chen Q, Zhao TS. A 3D electrochemical-thermal coupled
model for electrochemical and thermal analysis of pouch-type lithium-ion
batteries. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2021;181:121855. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2021.121855.

[91] Gao X, Li Y, Wang H, Liu X, Wu Y, Yang S, et al. Probing inhomogeneity of

electrical-thermal distribution on electrode during fast charging for lithium-ion

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112035

Y. Zheng et al.

batteries. Appl Energy 2023;336:120868. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2023.120868.

[92] Jaguemont J, Boulon L, Dub ́e Y. Characterization and modeling of a hybrid-
electric-vehicle lithium-ion battery pack at low temperatures. IEEE Trans Veh
Technol 2016;65:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2015.2391053.

[93] Zhang C, Li K, Deng J, Song S. Improved realtime state-of-charge estimation of
LiFePO4 battery based on a novel thermoelectric model. IEEE Trans Ind Electron
2017;64:654–63. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2016.2610398.

[94] Damay N, Forgez C, Bichat MP, Friedrich G. Thermal modeling of large prismatic
LiFePO4/graphite battery. Coupled thermal and heat generation models for
characterization and simulation. J Power Sources 2015;283:37–45. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.02.091.

[95] Feng F, Teng S, Liu K, Xie J, Xie Y, Liu B, et al. Co-estimation of lithium-ion

battery state of charge and state of temperature based on a hybrid
electrochemical-thermal-neural-network model. J Power Sources 2020;455:
227935. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.227935.

[96] Perez HE, Hu X, Dey S, Moura SJ. Optimal charging of Li-ion batteries with
coupled electro-thermal-aging dynamics. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2017;66:
7761–70. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2017.2676044.

[97] Liu K, Zou C, Li K, Wik T. Charging pattern optimization for lithium-ion batteries
with an electrothermal-aging model. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2018;14:5463–74.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2866493.

[98] Kim Y, Siegel JB, Stefanopoulou AG. A computationally efficient thermal model
of cylindrical battery cells for the estimation of radially distributed temperatures.
In: Proceedings of the American control conference. IEEE; 2013. p. 698–703.
https://doi.org/10.1109/acc.2013.6579917.

[99] Smith K, Wang C-Y. Power and thermal characterization of a lithium-ion battery
pack for hybrid-electric vehicles. J Power Sources 2006;160:662–73. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.01.038.

[100] Bernardi D, Pawlikowski E, Newman J. A general energy balance for battery

systems. J Electrochem Soc 1985;132:5–12. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2113792.

[101] Ludwig S, Steinhardt M, Jossen A. Determination of internal temperature

differences for various cylindrical lithium-ion batteries using a pulse resistance
approach. Batteries 2022;8:60. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries8070060.

[102] Perez HE, Siegel JB, Lin X, Stefanopoulou AG, Ding Y, Castanier MP.

Parameterization and validation of an integrated electro-thermal cylindrical lfp
battery model. ASME 2012 5th annual dynamic systems and control conference
joint with the JSME 2012 11th motion and vibration conference, DSCC 2012-
MOVIC 2012, 3. ASME; 2012. p. 41–50. https://doi.org/10.1115/DSCC2012-
MOVIC2012-8782.

[103] Liu W, Hu X, Lin X, Yang XG, Song Z, Foley AM, et al. Toward high-accuracy and
high-efficiency battery electrothermal modeling: a general approach to tackling
modeling errors. ETransportation 2022;14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
etran.2022.100195.

[104] Lin X. Real-time prediction of anode potential in Li-ion batteries using long short-

term neural networks for lithium plating prevention. J Electrochem Soc 2019;
166:A1893–904. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0621910jes.

[105] Zhang D, Dey S, Perez HE, Moura SJ. Real-time capacity estimation of lithium-ion
batteries utilizing thermal dynamics. IEEE Trans Control Syst Technol 2020;28:
992–1000. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST.2018.2885681.

[106] Hu X, Liu W, Lin X, Xie Y. A comparative study of control-oriented thermal
models for cylindrical Li-ion batteries. IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 2019;5:1237–53. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2019.2953606.

[107] Kim Y, Mohan S, Siegel JB, Stefanopoulou AG, Ding Y. The estimation of

temperature distribution in cylindrical battery cells under unknown cooling
conditions. IEEE Trans Control Syst Technol 2014;22:2277–86. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TCST.2014.2309492.

[108] Xie Y, Li W, Hu X, Tran M-K, Panchal S, Fowler M, et al. Co-estimation of SOC and

three-dimensional SOT for lithium-ion batteries based on distributed spatial-
temporal online correction. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2022:1–10. https://doi.org/
10.1109/tie.2022.3199905.

[109] Hu X, Liu W, Lin X, Xie Y, Foley AM, Hu L. A control-oriented electrothermal

model for pouch-type electric vehicle batteries. IEEE Trans Power Electron 2021;
36:5530–44. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPEL.2020.3027561.

[110] Li X, Xiao M, Choe SY. Reduced order model (ROM) of a pouch type lithium

polymer battery based on electrochemical thermal principles for real time
applications. Electrochim Acta 2013;97:66–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2013.02.134.

[116] Kim H, Kim S, Kim T, Hu C, Youn BD. Online thermal state estimation of high
power lithium-ion battery. In: 2015 IEEE conference on prognostics and health
management: enhancing safety, efficiency, availability, and effectiveness of
systems through PHAf technology and application. PHM 2015; 2015. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICPHM.2015.7245067.

[117] Park C, Jaura AK. Dynamic thermal model of Li-Ion battery for predictive

behavior in hybrid and fuel cell vehicles. SAE Technical Papers 2003. https://doi.
org/10.4271/2003-01-2286.

[118] Lin X, Lee TK. Space-resolved reduced order modeling of prismatic battery

thermal dynamics. In: Proceedings of the American control conference 2015;
2015. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACC.2015.7170751. July: 294–8.

[119] Liu Z, Li HX. A spatiotemporal estimation method for temperature distribution in
lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2014;10:2300–7. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TII.2014.2341955.

[120] Hunt IA, Zhao Y, Patel Y, Offer J. Surface cooling causes accelerated degradation
compared to tab cooling for lithium-ion pouch cells. J Electrochem Soc 2016;163:
A1846–52. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0361609jes.

[121] Qin Y, Xu Z, Wu Y, Lu L, Han X, Du J, et al. Temperature distribution of lithium

ion battery module with inconsistent cells under pulsed heating method. Appl
Therm Eng 2022;212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2022.118529.

[122] Wang X, Wei X, Zhu J, Dai H, Zheng Y, Xu X, et al. A review of modeling,

acquisition, and application of lithium-ion battery impedance for onboard battery
management. ETransportation 2021;7:100093. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
etran.2020.100093.

[123] Raijmakers LHJ, Danilov DL, Van Lammeren JPM, Lammers MJG, Notten PHL.
Sensorless battery temperature measurements based on electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy. J Power Sources 2014;247:539–44. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.09.005.

[124] Zhu JG, Sun ZC, Wei XZ, Dai HF. A new lithium-ion battery internal temperature
on-line estimate method based on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
measurement. J Power Sources 2015;274:990–1004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2014.10.182.

[125] Beelen HPGJ, Raijmakers LHJ, Donkers MCF, Notten PHL, Bergveld HJ.

A comparison and accuracy analysis of impedance-based temperature estimation
methods for Li-ion batteries. Appl Energy 2016;175:128–40. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.04.103.

[126] Srinivasan R, Carkhuff BG, Butler MH, Baisden AC. Instantaneous measurement of

the internal temperature in lithium-ion rechargeable cells. Electrochim Acta
2011;56:6198–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2011.03.136.

[127] Schmidt JP, Arnold S, Loges A, Werner D, Wetzel T, Ivers-Tiff ́ee E. Measurement
of the internal cell temperature via impedance: evaluation and application of a
new method. J Power Sources 2013;243:110–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2013.06.013.

[128] Mc Carthy K, Gullapalli H, Ryan KM, Kennedy T. Review—use of impedance

spectroscopy for the estimation of Li-ion battery state of charge, state of health
and internal temperature. J Electrochem Soc 2021;168:080517. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1945-7111/ac1a85.

[129] Spinner NS, Love CT, Rose-Pehrsson SL, Tuttle SG. Expanding the operational
limits of the single-point impedance diagnostic for internal temperature
monitoring of lithium-ion batteries. Electrochim Acta 2015;174:488–93. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2015.06.003.

[130] Mc Carthy K, Gullapalli H, Kennedy T. Real-time internal temperature estimation

of commercial Li-ion batteries using online impedance measurements. J Power
Sources 2022;519:230786. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230786.
[131] Ouyang K, Fan Y, Yazdi M, Peng W. Data-driven–based internal temperature
estimation for lithium-ion battery under variant state-of-charge via
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Energy Technol 2022;10. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ente.202100910.

[132] Raijmakers LHJ, Danilov DL, Van Lammeren JPM, Lammers TJG, Bergveld HJ,

Notten PHL. Non-zero intercept frequency: an accurate method to determine the
integral temperature of Li-ion batteries. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2016;63:
3168–78. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2016.2516961.

[133] Srinivasan R. Monitoring dynamic thermal behavior of the carbon anode in a

lithium-ion cell using a four-probe technique. J Power Sources 2012;198:351–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.09.077.

[134] Wang L, Lu D, Song M, Zhao X, Li G. Instantaneous estimation of internal

temperature in lithium-ion battery by impedance measurement. Int J Energy Res
2020;44:3082–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.5144.

[111] Song W, Chen M, Bai F, Lin S, Chen Y, Feng Z. Non-uniform effect on the thermal/

[135] Beelen HPGJ, Raijmakers LHJ, Donkers MCF, Notten PHL, Bergveld HJ. An

aging performance of Lithium-ion pouch battery. Appl Therm Eng 2018;128:
1165–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.09.090.

[112] Wang T, Tseng KJ, Zhao J, Wei Z. Thermal investigation of lithium-ion battery
module with different cell arrangement structures and forced air-cooling
strategies. Appl Energy 2014;134:229–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2014.08.013.

[113] Paul S, Diegelmann C, Kabza H, Tillmetz W. Analysis of ageing inhomogeneities

in lithium-ion battery systems. J Power Sources 2013;239:642–50. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.01.068.

[114] Yang N, Zhang X, Shang B, Li G. Unbalanced discharging and aging due to
temperature differences among the cells in a lithium-ion battery pack with
parallel combination. J Power Sources 2016;306:733–41. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.12.079.

[115] Liu X, Ai W, Naylor Marlow M, Patel Y, Wu B. The effect of cell-to-cell variations
and thermal gradients on the performance and degradation of lithium-ion battery
packs. Appl Energy 2019;248:489–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.04.108.

improved impedance-based temperature estimation method for li-ion batteries.
IFAC-PapersOnLine 2015;28:383–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ifacol.2015.10.055.

[136] Troxler Y, Wu B, Marinescu M, Yufit V, Patel Y, Marquis AJ, et al. The effect of
thermal gradients on the performance of lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources
2014;247:1018–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.06.084.
[137] Str ̈obel M, Pross-Brakhage J, Kopp M, Birke KP. Impedance based temperature

estimation of lithium ion cells using artificial neural networks. Batteries 2021;7:
85. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries7040085.

[138] Raijmakers LHJ, Shivakumar KM, Donkers MCF, Lammers MJG, Bergveld HJ.

Crosstalk interferences on impedance measurements in battery packs. IFAC-
PapersOnLine 2016;49:42–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.08.007.

[139] Beelen H, Mundaragi Shivakumar K, Raijmakers L, Donkers MCF, Bergveld HJ.

Towards impedance-based temperature estimation for Li-ion battery packs. Int J
Energy Res 2020;44:2889–908. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.5107.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112036

Y. Zheng et al.

[140] Howey DA, Mitcheson PD, Yufit V, Offer GJ, Brandon NP. Online measurement of

battery impedance using motor controller excitation. IEEE Trans Veh Technol
2014;63:2557–66. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2013.2293597.

[141] Yokoshima T, Mukoyama D, Nara H, Maeda S, Nakazawa K, Momma T, et al.

Impedance measurements of kilowatt-class lithium ion battery modules/cubicles
in energy storage systems by square-current electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy. Electrochim Acta 2017;246:800–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electacta.2017.05.076.

ion battery cells. IEEE ASME Trans Mechatron 2023;28:621–31. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TMECH.2023.3235726.

[166] Mitsuyama T, Iwane N, Takashima N. Secondary battery internal temperature

estimation device and secondary battery internal temperature estimation method.
U.S. Patent 10,396,407. 27 Aug. 2019.

[167] Leutheuser AH, Liu W, Franchett ME, Kenkre MM, Dudley PJ, Nolte JJ, et al.

Dynamic estimation of cell core temperature by simple external measurements. U.
S. Patent 8,529,125. 10 Sep. 2013.

[142] Geng Z, Thiringer T, Olofsson Y, Groot J, West M. On-board impedance

[168] Sattarzadeh S, Roy T, Dey S. Real-time estimation of 2-D temperature distribution

diagnostics method of Li-ion traction batteries using pseudo-random binary
sequences. 2018 20th European conference on power electronics and
applications, EPE 2018 ECCE europe. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc.; 2018.

[143] Sihvo J, Stroe D-I, Messo T, Roinila T. Fast approach for battery impedance

identification using pseudo-random sequence signals. IEEE Trans Power Electron
2020;35:2548–57. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPEL.2019.2924286.

[144] Robinson RS. System noise as a signal source for impedance measurements on
batteries connected to operating equipment. J Power Sources 1993;42:381–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-7753(93)90005-L.

[145] Bullecks B, Suresh R, Rengaswamy R. Rapid impedance measurement using chirp
signals for electrochemical system analysis. Comput Chem Eng 2017;106:421–36.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPCHEMENG.2017.05.018.

in lithium-ion pouch cells. IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification
2021;7:2249–59. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2021.3071950.

[169] Firoozi R, Sattarzadeh S, Dey S. Cylindrical battery fault detection under extreme

fast charging: a physics-based learning approach. IEEE Trans Energy Convers
2022;37:1241–50. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEC.2021.3112950.

[170] Cordoba-Arenas A, Onori S, Rizzoni G. A control-oriented lithium-ion battery

pack model for plug-in hybrid electric vehicle cycle-life studies and system design
with consideration of health management. J Power Sources 2015;279:791–808.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.12.048.

[171] Motapon SN, Lupien-Bedard A, Dessaint L-A, Fortin-Blanchette H, Al-Haddad K.
A generic electrothermal Li-ion battery model for rapid evaluation of cell
temperature temporal evolution. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2017;64:998–1008.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2016.2618363.

[146] Zhu J, Sun Z, Wei X, Dai H. Battery internal temperature estimation for LiFePO4

[172] Debert M, Colin G, Bloch G, Chamaillard Y. An observer looks at the cell

battery based on impedance phase shift under operating conditions. Energies
2017;10. https://doi.org/10.3390/en10010060.

[147] Wang X, Wei X, Chen Q, Zhu J, Dai H. Lithium-ion battery temperature on-line

estimation based on fast impedance calculation. J Energy Storage 2019;26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2019.100952.

[148] Ludwig S, Zilberman I, Horsche MF, Wohlers T, Jossen A. Pulse resistance based
online temperature estimation for lithium-ion cells. J Power Sources 2021;490:
229523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.229523.

[149] Ludwig S, Zilberman I, Oberbauer A, Rogge M, Fischer M, Rehm M, et al.

Adaptive method for sensorless temperature estimation over the lifetime of
lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2022;521:230864. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230864.

[150] Waag W, K ̈abitz S, Sauer DU. Experimental investigation of the lithium-ion

battery impedance characteristic at various conditions and aging states and its
influence on the application. Appl Energy 2013;102:885–97. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.09.030.

temperature in automotive battery packs. Control Eng Pract 2013;21:1035–42.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conengprac.2013.03.001.

[173] Xie Y, Li W, Hu X, Lin X, Zhang Y, Dan D, et al. An enhanced online temperature
estimation for lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 2020;6:375–90. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2020.2980153.
[174] Xie Y, Li W, Hu X, Zou C, Feng F, Tang X. Novel mesoscale electrothermal

modeling for lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans Power Electron 2020;35:
2595–614. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPEL.2019.2927014.

[175] Wang N, Chen A, Zhao W, Zhu R, Duan B. An online temperature estimation for
cylindrical lithium-ion batteries based on simplified distribution electrical-
thermal model. J Energy Storage 2022;55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
est.2022.105326.

[176] Li S, Kirkaldy N, Zhang C, Gopalakrishnan K, Amietszajew T, Diaz LB, et al.

Optimal cell tab design and cooling strategy for cylindrical lithium-ion batteries.
J Power Sources 2021;492:229594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2021.229594.

[151] Li W, Xie Y, Liu K, Yang R, Chen B, Zhang Y. An enhanced thermal model with

[177] Guo Z, Xu J, Xu Z, Mubashir M, Wang H, Mei X. A three-heat-source electro-

virtual resistance technique for pouch batteries at low temperature and high
current rates. IEEE J Emerg Sel Top Power Electron 2023;11:44–56. https://doi.
org/10.1109/JESTPE.2021.3127892.

[152] Che Y, Stroe D-I, Sui X, Vilsen SB, Hu X, Teodorescu R. Battery aging behavior
evaluation under variable and constant temperatures with real loading profiles.
In: 2023 IEEE applied power electronics conference and exposition (APEC). IEEE;
2023. p. 2979–83. https://doi.org/10.1109/APEC43580.2023.10131534.

thermal coupled model for fast estimation of the temperature distribution of a
lithium-ion battery cell. IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification
2022;8:288–97. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2021.3095288.

[178] Li W, Xie Y, Hu X, Zhang Y, Li H, Lin X. An online SOC-SOTD joint estimation

algorithm for pouch Li-ion batteries based on spatio-temporal coupling correction
method. IEEE Trans Power Electron 2022;37:7370–86. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TPEL.2021.3137416.

[153] Raj T, Wang AA, Monroe CW, Howey DA. Investigation of path-dependent

[179] Li D, Yang L. Identification of spatial temperature gradient in large format lithium

degradation in lithium-ion batteries. Batter Supercaps 2020;3:1377–85. https://
doi.org/10.1002/batt.202000160.

battery using a multilayer thermal model. Int J Energy Res 2020;44:282–97.
https://doi.org/10.1002/er.4914.

[154] Li H-X, Qi C. Modeling of distributed parameter systems for applications—a
synthesized review from time–space separation. J Process Control 2010;20:
891–901. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprocont.2010.06.016.

[180] Xiao Y. Model-based virtual thermal sensors for lithium-ion battery in EV
applications. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2015;62:3112–22. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TIE.2014.2386793.

[155] Chen Y, Evans JW. Thermal analysis of lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc

[181] Lin X, Fu H, Perez HE, Siege JB, Stefanopoulou AG, Ding Y, et al.

1996;143:2708–12. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1837095.

[156] Xiao M, Choe S-Y. Theoretical and experimental analysis of heat generations of a

pouch type LiMn2O4/carbon high power Li-polymer battery. J Power Sources
2013;241:46–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.04.062.
[157] Bandhauer TM, Garimella S, Fuller TF. A critical review of thermal issues in

lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2011;158:R1. https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.3515880.

[158] Gu WB, Wang CY. Thermal-electrochemical modeling of battery systems.
J Electrochem Soc 2000;147:2910. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1393625.
[159] Zhang D, Dey S, Tang SX, Drummond R, Moura SJ. Battery internal temperature

estimation via a semilinear thermal PDE model. Automatica 2021;133:109849.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.automatica.2021.109849.

[160] Dey S, Perez HE, Moura SJ. Model-based battery Thermal Fault diagnostics:

algorithms, analysis, and experiments. IEEE Trans Control Syst Technol 2019;27:
576–87. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST.2017.2776218.

[161] Dey S, Perez HE, Moura SJ. Thermal fault diagnostics in Lithium-ion batteries

based on a distributed parameter thermal model. In: Proceedings of the American
control conference. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.; 2017.
p. 68–73. https://doi.org/10.23919/ACC.2017.7962932.

[162] Vyas SD, Roy T, Dey S. Thermal Fault-tolerance in lithium-ion battery cells: a

barrier function based input-to-state safety framework. In: 2022 IEEE conference
on control technology and applications (CCTA). IEEE; 2022. p. 1178–83. https://
doi.org/10.1109/CCTA49430.2022.9966084.

[163] al Hallaj S, Maleki H, Hong JS, Selman JR. Thermal modeling and design

considerations of lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 1999;83:1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0378-7753(99)00178-0.

[164] Elsergany AM, Hussein AA, Wadi A, Abdel-Hafez MF. An adaptive autotuned

polynomial-based extended kalman filter for sensorless surface temperature
estimation of Li-ion battery cells. IEEE Access 2022;10:14038–48. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3148281.

[165] Sajid M, Hussein AA, Wadi A, Abdel-Hafez MF. An enhanced fusion algorithm

with empirical thermoelectric models for sensorless temperature estimation of Li-

Parameterization and observability analysis of scalable battery clusters for
onboard thermal management. Oil & Gas Science and Technology – Revue d’IFP
Energies Nouvelles 2013;68:165–78. https://doi.org/10.2516/ogst/2012075.

[182] Guo Z, Xu J, Wang X, Mei X. Fast multilayer temperature distribution estimation
for lithium-ion battery pack. ETransportation 2023;18:100266. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.etran.2023.100266.

[183] Gan Y, Wang J, Liang J, Huang Z, Hu M. Development of thermal equivalent

circuit model of heat pipe-based thermal management system for a battery
module with cylindrical cells. Appl Therm Eng 2020;164:114523. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.114523.

[184] Ramotar L, Rohrauer GL, Filion R, MacDonald K. Experimental verification of a
thermal equivalent circuit dynamic model on an extended range electric vehicle
battery pack. J Power Sources 2017;343:383–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2017.01.040.

[185] Lin X, Kim Y, Mohan S, Siegel JB, Stefanopoulou AG. Modeling and estimation for

advanced battery management. Annu Rev Control Robot Auton Syst 2019;2:
393–426. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-control-053018-023643.
[186] Sun J, Wei G, Pei L, Lu R, Song K, Wu C, et al. Online internal temperature
estimation for lithium-ion batteries based on Kalman filter. Energies 2015;8:
4400–15. https://doi.org/10.3390/en8054400.

[187] Lin X, Stefanopoulou AG, Perez HE, Siegel JB, Li Y, Anderson RD. Quadruple

adaptive observer of the core temperature in cylindrical Li-ion batteries and their
health monitoring. Proc Am Control Conf 2012:578–83. https://doi.org/10.1109/
acc.2012.6315386.

[188] Kumar P, Rankin G, Pattipati KR, Balasingam B. Model-based approach to long
term prediction of battery surface temperature. IEEE Journal of Emerging and
Selected Topics in Industrial Electronics 2023;4:389–99. https://doi.org/
10.1109/JESTIE.2022.3214060.

[189] Zhang W, Wan W, Wu W, Zhang Z, Qi X. Internal temperature prediction model of

the cylindrical lithium-ion battery under different cooling modes. Appl Therm
Eng 2022;212:118562. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2022.118562.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112037

Y. Zheng et al.

[190] Shi H, Wang L, Wang S, Fernandez C, Xiong X, Dablu BE, et al. A novel lumped
thermal characteristic modeling strategy for the online adaptive temperature and
parameter co-estimation of vehicle lithium-ion batteries. J Energy Storage 2022;
50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.104309.

[191] Zhu C, Shang Y, Lu F, Jiang Y, Cheng C, Mi C. Core temperature estimation for
self-heating automotive lithium-ion batteries in cold climates. IEEE Trans Ind Inf
2020;16:3366–75. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2960833.

[192] Ma Y, Cui Y, Mou H, Gao J, Chen H. Core temperature estimation of lithium-ion
battery for EVs using Kalman filter. Appl Therm Eng 2020;168:114816. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.114816.

[193] He F, Ma L. Thermal management of batteries employing active temperature

control and reciprocating cooling flow. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2015;83:164–72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2014.11.079.

[194] Lin X, Ding Y, Castanier MP, Stefanopoulou AG. Estimating core temperatures of

battery cells in a battery pack. U.S. Patent 10,230,137. 12 Mar. 2019.

[216] Shen W, Xu K, Deng L, Zhang S. A Karhunen-Loeve Galerkin online modeling

approach for the thermal dynamics of Li-ion batteries. IEEE Access 2020;8:
187893–901. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3030719.

[217] Wang B-C, Li H-X. A sliding window based dynamic spatiotemporal modeling for

distributed parameter systems with time-dependent boundary conditions. IEEE
Trans Ind Inf 2019;15:2044–53. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2859444.
[218] Wang BC, Li HX, Yang HD. Spatial correlation-based incremental learning for
spatiotemporal modeling of battery thermal process. IEEE Trans Ind Electron
2020;67:2885–93. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2019.2914637.

[219] Wei P, Li HX. Two-dimensional spatial construction for online modeling of
distributed parameter systems. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2022;69:10227–35.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2022.3150099.

[220] Zhou Y, Li HX, Xie SL. Fast modeling of battery thermal dynamics based on spatio-
temporal adaptation. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2022;18:337–44. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TII.2021.3071775.

[195] Lin X, Stefanopoulou AG, Siegel JB, Mohan S. Temperature estimation in a battery
string under frugal sensor allocation. American Society of Mechanical Engineers;
2014. https://doi.org/10.1115/DSCC2014-6352.

[221] Zhou Y, Deng H, Li H-X, Xie S-L. Data-driven real-time prediction of pouch cell
temperature field under minimal sensing. IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 2023;9:1034–41. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2022.3200729.

[196] Wei P, Li H-X. Multiscale dynamic construction for abnormality detection and

[222] Wang Y, He S-H, Wang B-C. Evolutionary sensor placement for spatiotemporal

localization of Li-ion batteries. Appl Energy 2022;325:119814. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.119814.

[197] Samad NA, Siegel JB, Stefanopoulou AG, Knobloch A. Observability analysis for
surface sensor location in encased battery cells. In: 2015 American control
conference (ACC). IEEE; 2015. p. 299–304. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACC.2015.7170752.

[198] Deshpande VM, Bhattacharya R, Subbarao K. Sensor placement with optimal

precision for temperature estimation of battery systems. IEEE Control Syst Lett
2022;6:1082–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/LCSYS.2021.3089564.

[199] Lystianingrum V, Hredzak B, Agelidis VG, Djanali VS. Observability degree
criteria evaluation for temperature observability in a battery string towards
optimal thermal sensors placement. In: 2014 IEEE ninth international conference
on intelligent sensors, sensor networks and information processing (ISSNIP).
IEEE; 2014. p. 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSNIP.2014.6827641.

[200] Gao M, Lai Q, Lin X. Temperature sensor deployment for scalable battery packs.
ASME 2020 dynamic systems and control conference, 1. DSCC 2020; 2020. p. 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1115/DSCC2020-3124.

[201] Pang H, Guo L, Wu L, Jin J, Zhang F, Liu K. A novel extended Kalman filter-based
battery internal and surface temperature estimation based on an improved
electro-thermal model. J Energy Storage 2021;41:102854. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.est.2021.102854.

[202] Rodríguez-Iturriaga P, Anse ́an D, L ́opez-Villanueva JA, Gonz ́alez M, Rodríguez-

Bolívar S. A method for the lifetime sensorless estimation of surface and core
temperature in lithium-ion batteries via online updating of electrical parameters.
J Energy Storage 2023;58:106260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.106260.
[203] Dey S, Biron ZA, Tatipamula S, Das N, Mohon S, Ayalew B, et al. Model-based

real-time thermal fault diagnosis of Lithium-ion batteries. Control Eng Pract 2016;
56:37–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conengprac.2016.08.002.

[204] Wei J, Dong G, Chen Z. Lyapunov-based Thermal Fault diagnosis of cylindrical
lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2020;67:4670–9. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TIE.2019.2931275.

modeling of battery thermal process. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2022;18:2223–32.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3084133.

[223] Lombardo T, Duquesnoy M, El-Bouysidy H, År ́en F, Gallo-Bueno A, Jørgensen PB,
et al. Artificial intelligence applied to battery research: hype or reality? Chem Rev
2021. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00108.

[224] Che Y, Zheng Y, Wu Y, Sui X, Bharadwaj P, Stroe D-I, et al. Data efficient health

prognostic for batteries based on sequential information-driven probabilistic
neural network. Appl Energy 2022;323:119663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2022.119663.

[225] Sui X, He S, Vilsen SB, Meng J, Teodorescu R, Stroe DI. A review of non-

probabilistic machine learning-based state of health estimation techniques for
Lithium-ion battery. Appl Energy 2021;300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2021.117346.

[226] Bhattacharjee A, Verma A, Mishra S, Saha TK. Estimating state of charge for xEV

batteries using 1D convolutional neural networks and transfer learning. IEEE
Trans Veh Technol 2021;70:3123–35. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TVT.2021.3064287.

[227] Li Y, Liu K, Foley AM, Zülke A, Berecibar M, Nanini-Maury E, et al. Data-driven
health estimation and lifetime prediction of lithium-ion batteries: a review.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2019.109254.

[228] Severson KA, Attia PM, Jin N, Perkins N, Jiang B, Yang Z, et al. Data-driven

prediction of battery cycle life before capacity degradation. Nat Energy 2019;4:
383–91. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019-0356-8.

[229] Hornik K, Stinchcombe M, White H. Multilayer feedforward networks are
universal approximators. Neural Network 1989;2:359–66. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8.

[230] Fang K, Mu D, Chen S, Wu B, Wu F. A prediction model based on artificial neural
network for surface temperature simulation of nickel-metal hydride battery
during charging. J Power Sources 2012;208:378–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2012.02.059.

[205] Lystianingrum V, Hredzak B, Agelidis VG. Multiple model estimator based

[231] Hussein AA, Chehade AA. Robust artificial neural network-based models for

detection of abnormal cell overheating in a Li-ion battery string with minimum
number of temperature sensors. J Power Sources 2015;273:1171–81. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.09.166.

[206] Sattarzadeh S, Roy T, Dey S. Thermal fault detection and localization framework

for large format batteries. J Power Sources 2021;512:230400. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230400.

[207] Muratori M, Ma N, Canova M, Guezennec Y. A model order reduction method for
the temperature estimation in a cylindrical Li-ion battery cell. ASME 2010
dynamic systems and control conference, DSCC2010, 1; 2010. p. 633–40. https://
doi.org/10.1115/DSCC2010-4200.

[208] Shen J, Tang T, Wang L-L. Spectral methods, 41. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg; 2011. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-71041-7.
[209] Meng X-B, Li H-X, Yang H-D. Evolutionary design of spatio–temporal learning

model for thermal distribution in lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2019;
15:2838–48. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2866468.

[210] Wang M, Li HX. Real-time estimation of temperature distribution for cylindrical
lithium-ion batteries under boundary cooling. IEEE Trans Ind Electron 2017;64:
2316–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2016.2624720.

[211] Yazdanpour M, Taheri P, Mansouri A, Bahrami M. A distributed analytical

electro-thermal model for pouch-type lithium-ion batteries. J Electrochem Soc
2014;161:A1953–63. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1191412jes.

accurate surface temperature estimation of batteries. IEEE Trans Ind Appl 2020;
56:5269–78. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIA.2020.3001256.

[232] Hasan MM, Ali Pourmousavi S, Jahanbani Ardakani A, Saha TK. A data-driven
approach to estimate battery cell temperature using a nonlinear autoregressive
exogenous neural network model. J Energy Storage 2020;32:101879. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.est.2020.101879.

[233] Kleiner J, Stuckenberger M, Komsiyska L, Endisch C. Real-time core temperature

prediction of prismatic automotive lithium-ion battery cells based on artificial
neural networks. J Energy Storage 2021;39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
est.2021.102588.

[234] Kleiner J, Stuckenberger M, Komsiyska L, Endisch C. Advanced monitoring and
prediction of the thermal state of intelligent battery cells in electric vehicles by
physics-based and data-driven modeling. Batteries 2021;7. https://doi.org/
10.3390/batteries7020031.

[235] Yao Q, Lu DDC, Lei G. A surface temperature estimation method for lithium-ion
battery using enhanced GRU-RNN. IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 2022. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2022.3197927.
[236] Naguib M, Kollmeyer P, Emadi A. Application of deep neural networks for

lithium-ion battery surface temperature estimation under driving and fast charge
conditions. IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification 2022. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TTE.2022.3200225.

[212] Muratori M, Canova M, Guezennec Y. A spatially-reduced dynamic model for the

thermal characterisation of Li-ion battery cells. Int J Veh Des 2012;58:134–58.
https://doi.org/10.1504/IJVD.2012.047402.

[213] Zhou Y, Deng H, Li H-X, Xie S. Dual separation-based spatiotemporal modeling

[237] Wang N, Zhao G, Kang Y, Wang W, Chen A, Duan B, et al. Core temperature
estimation method for lithium-ion battery based on long short-term memory
model with transfer learning. IEEE J Emerg Sel Top Power Electron 2021:1.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JESTPE.2021.3136906.

methodology for battery thermal process under nonhomogeneous boundary
conditions. IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification 2021;7:2260–8.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2021.3061426.

[214] Zhou Y, Li H-X, Xie S-L. Space-decomposition-based spectral modeling for
distributed battery thermal dynamics. IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 2022;8:1634–41. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2021.3124894.

[215] Zhou Y, Deng H, Li HX. Optimal-sensing-based recursive estimation for
temperature distribution of pouch-type batteries. IEEE Transactions on
Transportation Electrification 2022. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TTE.2022.3171857.

[238] Zhuang F, Qi Z, Duan K, Xi D, Zhu Y, Zhu H, et al. A comprehensive survey on
transfer learning. Proc IEEE 2021;109:43–76. https://doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC.2020.3004555.

[239] Li M, Dong C, Yu X, Xiao Q, Jia H. Multi-step ahead thermal warning network for
energy storage system based on the core temperature detection. Sci Rep 2021;11:
1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93801-9.

[240] Aykol M, Gopal CB, Anapolsky A, Herring PK, van Vlijmen B, Berliner MD, et al.
Perspective—combining physics and machine learning to predict battery lifetime.
J Electrochem Soc 2021;168:030525. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/
abec55.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112038

Y. Zheng et al.

[241] Liu Y, Huang Z, Wu Y, Yan L, Jiang F, Peng J. An online hybrid estimation method
for core temperature of Lithium-ion battery with model noise compensation. Appl
Energy 2022;327:120037. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.120037.

[242] Liu K, Li K, Peng Q, Guo Y, Zhang L. Data-driven hybrid internal temperature
estimation approach for battery thermal management. Complexity 2018;2018.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/9642892.

[243] Wei Z, Li P, Cao W, Chen H, Wang W, Yu Y, et al. Machine learning-based hybrid

thermal modeling and diagnostic for lithium-ion battery enabled by embedded
sensing. Appl Therm Eng 2022;216:119059. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2022.119059.

[244] Surya S, Samanta A, Marcis V, Williamson S. Hybrid electrical circuit model and
deep learning-based core temperature estimation of lithium-ion battery cell. IEEE
Transactions on Transportation Electrification 2022;(7782):1. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TTE.2022.3170359. 1.

[245] Farag M, Sweity H, Fleckenstein M, Habibi S. Combined electrochemical, heat
generation, and thermal model for large prismatic lithium-ion batteries in real-
time applications. J Power Sources 2017;360:618–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2017.06.031.

multiphysics simulations of Li-ion cells. J Power Sources 2014;246:876–86.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.08.040.

[265] Wu M-S, Liu KH, Wang Y-Y, Wan C-C. Heat dissipation design for lithium-ion
batteries. J Power Sources 2002;109:160–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-
7753(02)00048-4.

[266] Christensen J, Cook D, Albertus P. An efficient parallelizable 3D

thermoelectrochemical model of a Li-ion cell. J Electrochem Soc 2013;160:
A2258–67. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.086311jes.

[267] Xu Y, Kohtz S, Boakye J, Gardoni P, Wang P. Physics-informed machine learning

for reliability and systems safety applications: state of the art and challenges.
Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2023:230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2022.108900.
[268] Karniadakis GE, Kevrekidis IG, Lu L, Perdikaris P, Wang S, Yang L. Physics-

informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics 2021;3:422–40. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s42254-021-00314-5.

[269] Raissi M, Perdikaris P, Karniadakis GE. Physics-informed neural networks: a deep
learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear
partial differential equations. J Comput Phys 2019;378:686–707. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045.

[246] Chalise D, Lu W, Srinivasan V, Prasher R. Heat of mixing during fast charge/

[270] Chen Z, Liu Y, Sun H. Physics-informed learning of governing equations from

discharge of a Li-ion cell: a study on NMC523 cathode. J Electrochem Soc 2020;
167:090560. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/abaf71.

scarce data. Nat Commun 2021;12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26434-
1.

[271] Swischuk R, Mainini L, Peherstorfer B, Willcox K. Projection-based model

reduction: formulations for physics-based machine learning. Comput Fluids 2019;
179:704–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2018.07.021.

[272] Cho G, Zhu D, Campbell JJ, Wang M. An LSTM-PINN hybrid method to estimate
lithium-ion battery pack temperature. IEEE Access 2022;10:100594–604. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3208103.

[273] Cho G, Wang M, Kim Y, Kwon J, Su W. A physics-informed machine learning

approach for estimating lithium-ion battery temperature. IEEE Access 2022;10:
88117–26. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3199652.

[274] Deng H-P, He Y-B, Wang B-C, Li H-X. Physics-dominated neural network for

spatiotemporal modeling of battery thermal process. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2023:1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3266404.

[275] Qin Y, Adams S, Yuen C. Transfer learning-based state of charge estimation for
lithium-ion battery at varying ambient temperatures. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2021;17:
7304–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3051048.

[276] Che Y, Deng Z, Lin X, Hu L, Hu X. Predictive battery health management with

transfer learning and online model correction. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2021;70:
1269–77. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2021.3055811.

[277] Tan Y, Tan Y, Zhao G, Zhao G. Transfer learning with long short-term memory

network for state-of-health prediction of lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans Ind
Electron 2020;67:8723–31. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2019.2946551.
[278] Tian N, Fang H, Wang Y. 3-D temperature field reconstruction for a lithium-ion

battery pack: a distributed kalman filtering approach. IEEE Trans Control Syst
Technol 2019;27:847–54. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST.2017.2779434.

[279] Fang Z, Wang M, Hu W, Chang K, Zhang B. Temperature-field sparse-

reconstruction of lithium-ion battery pack based on artificial neural network and
virtual thermal sensor technology. Energy Technol 2021;9:2100258. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ente.202100258.

[280] Peng X, Li X, Gong Z, Zhao X, Yao W. A deep learning method based on patchwise

training for reconstructing temperature field. 2022.

[281] Wei P, Li H-X, Xie S. Spatial-Construction-based abnormality detection and
localization for distributed parameter systems. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2022;18:
4707–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3121509.

Yusheng Zheng received the B.E. degree in mechanical en-
gineering and the M.S. degree in automotive engineering from
Chongqing University, Chongqing, China, in 2018 and 2021,
respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the  Department  of  Energy,  Aalborg  University,  Aalborg,
Denmark, and a visiting student researcher with the Depart-
ment of Mechanical Engineering at Imperial College London,
London,  UK.  His  research  interests  include  state  estimation
and  prediction  of  lithium-ion  batteries,  battery  thermal
management, as well as battery fast charging.

[247] Xie Y, Wang X, Hu X, Li W, Zhang Y, Lin X. An enhanced electro-thermal model
for EV battery packs considering current distribution in parallel branches. IEEE
Trans Power Electron 2022;37:1027–43. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TPEL.2021.3102292.

[248] Cui Z, Cui N, Rao J, Li C, Zhang C. Current distribution estimation of parallel-
connected batteries for inconsistency diagnosis using long short-term memory
networks. IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification 2022;8:1013–25.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2021.3118691.

[249] Li C, Cui N, Chang L, Cui Z, Yuan H, Zhang C. Effect of parallel connection

topology on air-cooled lithium-ion battery module: inconsistency analysis and
comprehensive evaluation. Appl Energy 2022;313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2022.118758.

[250] Xie Y, Yang R, Li W, Liu K, Chen B, Qian Y, et al. A comprehensive study on

influence of battery thermal behavior on degradation and consistency. IEEE
Transactions on Transportation Electrification 2022;8:3707–24. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TTE.2022.3148335.

[251] Xie Y, Zheng J, Li W, Lee K, Zhang Y, Liu J, et al. An improved electrothermal-
coupled model for the temperature estimation of an air-cooled battery pack. Int J
Energy Res 2020;44:2037–60. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.5058.

[252] Zheng Y, Che Y, Hu X, Sui X, Teodorescu R. Sensorless temperature monitoring of
lithium-ion batteries by integrating physics with machine learning. IEEE
Transactions on Transportation Electrification 2023:1. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TTE.2023.3294417. 1.

[253] Wei Z, Hu J, He H, Yu Y, Marco J. Embedded distributed temperature sensing

enabled multistate joint observation of smart lithium-ion battery. IEEE Trans Ind
Electron 2023;70:555–65. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2022.3146503.
[254] Wei Z, Zhao J, He H, Ding G, Cui H, Liu L. Future smart battery and management:

advanced sensing from external to embedded multi-dimensional measurement.
J Power Sources 2021;489:229462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2021.229462.

[255] Yang G, Leit ̃ao C, Li Y, Pinto J, Jiang X. Real-time temperature measurement with
fiber Bragg sensors in lithium batteries for safety usage. Measurement 2013;46:
3166–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2013.05.027.

[256] Novais S, Nascimento M, Grande L, Domingues M, Antunes P, Alberto N, et al.

Internal and external temperature monitoring of a Li-ion battery with fiber bragg
grating sensors. Sensors 2016;16:1394. https://doi.org/10.3390/s16091394.

[257] Ganguli A, Saha B, Raghavan A, Kiesel P, Arakaki K, Schuh A, et al. Embedded

fiber-optic sensing for accurate internal monitoring of cell state in advanced
battery management systems part 2: internal cell signals and utility for state
estimation. J Power Sources 2017;341:474–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2016.11.103.

[258] Li Y, Wang W, Yang XG, Zuo F, Liu S, Lin C. A smart Li-ion battery with self-

sensing capabilities for enhanced life and safety. J Power Sources 2022;546.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2022.231705.

[259] Dai H, Yu C, Wei X, Sun Z. State of charge estimation for lithium-ion pouch

batteries based on stress measurement. Energy 2017;129:16–27. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2017.04.099.

[260] Jiang B, Tao S, Wang X, Zhu J, Wei X, Dai H. Mechanics-based state of charge
estimation for lithium-ion pouch battery using deep learning technique. Energy
2023;278:127890. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.127890.

[261] Ladpli P, Kopsaftopoulos F, Chang F-K. Estimating state of charge and health of

lithium-ion batteries with guided waves using built-in piezoelectric sensors/
actuators. J Power Sources 2018;384:342–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2018.02.056.

[262] Kim Y, Samad NA, Oh K-Y, Siegel JB, Epureanu BI, Stefanopoulou AG. Estimating
state-of-charge imbalance of batteries using force measurements. In: 2016
American control conference (ACC). IEEE; 2016. p. 1500–5. https://doi.org/
10.1109/ACC.2016.7525128.

[263] Gold L, Bach T, Virsik W, Schmitt A, Müller J, Staab TEM, et al. Probing lithium-
ion batteries’ state-of-charge using ultrasonic transmission – concept and
laboratory testing. J Power Sources 2017;343:536–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2017.01.090.

[264] Allu S, Kalnaus S, Elwasif W, Simunovic S, Turner JA, Pannala S. A new open
computational framework for highly-resolved coupled three-dimensional

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112039

Y. Zheng et al.

Yunhong Che received the B.E. and M.S. degrees in the Col-
lege of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering from Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China, in 2019 and 2021, respectively.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department
of Energy, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. He was a
visiting student scholar with the Institute of Civil Engineering
at Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland, and the Department of Energy Science
& Engineering at Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 2023.
His  research  interests  include  battery  health  estimation  and
fault  diagnostics,  physics-informed  machine
prediction,
learning in modeling and prognostics, and smart health man-
agement for energy storage systems.

Xin  Sui  received  the  B.Eng.  degree  from  Northeast  Electric
Power University, Jilin, China, in 2015, and the M.Sc. degree
from  Institute  of  Electrical  Engineering,  Chinese  Academy  of
Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2018, both in electrical engineering.
In 2022, Xin received the Ph.D. degree in machine learning for
battery  state  of  health  estimation  from  Aalborg  University,
Aalborg,  Denmark.  She  is  currently  a  postdoctoral  researcher
with the Center for Research on Smart Battery (CROSBAT), AAU
Energy,  Aalborg  University.  Her  research  interests  include
battery  state  of  health  estimation,  lifetime  extension,  feature
engineering, and machine learning.

Xiaosong Hu received the Ph.D. degree  in automotive engi-
neering  from  the  Beijing  Institute  of  Technology,  Beijing,
China, in 2012. He did scientific research and completed the
Ph.D. dissertation in Automotive Research Center at the Uni-
versity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, between 2010 and
2012. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Me-
chanical  and  Vehicle  Engineering,  Chongqing  University,
Chongqing, China. He was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, between 2014 and 2015,
as  well  as  at  the  Swedish  Hybrid  Vehicle  Center  and  the
Department of Signals and Systems at Chalmers University of
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, between 2012 and 2014. He
was also a Visiting Postdoctoral Researcher with the Institute for Dynamic Systems and
Control at Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich, Switzerland, in 2014. His
research  interests  include  modeling  and  control  of  alternative  powertrains  and  energy
storage systems. Dr. Hu has been the recipient of numerous prestigious awards/honors,
including Web of Science Highly-Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics, SAE Environ-
mental  Excellence  in  Transportation  Award,  IEEE  ITSS  Young  Researcher  Award,  SAE
Ralph  Teetor  Educational  Award,  Emerging  Sustainability  Leaders  Award,  EU  Marie
Currie Fellowship, ASME DSCD Energy Systems Best Paper Award, and Beijing Best Ph.D.
Dissertation Award. He is an IET Fellow.

Daniel-Ioan Stroe received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in automatics
from the Transilvania University of Brasov, Romania, in 2008,
and  the  M.Sc.  degree  in  wind  power  systems  and  the  Ph.D.
degree  in  lifetime  modelling  of  Lithium-ion  batteries  from
Aalborg  University  (AAU),  Aalborg,  Denmark,  in  2010  and
2014, respectively. He has been with AAU, since 2010. He is
currently an Associate Professor with AAU Energy, where he
leads the  Batteries  Research Group,  and  the Battery  Systems
Testing Laboratory. He was a Visiting Researcher with RWTH
Aachen, Germany, in 2013. He has coauthored over 150 jour-
nals  and  conference  papers in  various  battery-related  topics.
His current research interests include the area of energy stor-
age  systems  for  grid  and  e-mobility,  Lithium-based  batteries

testing, modelling, and diagnostics and their lifetime estimation.

Remus Teodorescu received the Dipl.Ing. degree in electrical
engineering  from  the  Politehnica  University  of  Bucharest,
Romania, in 1989, and the Ph.D. degree in power electronics
from the University of Galati, Romania, in 1994.,In 1998, he
joined  the  Power  Electronics  Section,  AAU  Energy,  Aalborg
University, where he currently works as a Full Professor. From
2013 to 2017, he was a Visiting Professor with the Chalmers
University  of  Grid  Converters  for  Photovoltaic  and  Wind
Power Systems (Wiley-IEEE Press, 2011) and Design, Control
and Application of Modular Multilevel Converters for HVDC
Transmission  Systems  (Wiley-IEEE  Press,  2016).  He  has
coauthored  over  500  IEEE  journal  articles  and  conference
papers.  His  research  interests  include  design  and  control  of
grid connected converters for photovoltaic and wind power systems, HVDC/FACTS based
on MMC, SiC-based converters, storage systems for utility based on Li-Ion battery tech-
nology, and battery lifetime model using artificial intelligence. In 2021, he was awarded
the  Villum  Investigator  grant  for  the  development  of  the  Center  of  Research  on  Smart
Battery at Aalborg University.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10112040
