Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Biodiesel from microalgae: Recent progress and key challenges

Jee Young Kim a,1, Jong-Min Jung b, 1, Sungyup Jung b, Young-Kwon Park c, Yiu Fai Tsang d,
Kun-Yi Andrew Lin e, Yoon-E Choi a, *, Eilhann E. Kwon b,*
a Division of Environmental Science and Ecological Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
b Department of Earth Resources and Environmental Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea
c School of Environmental Engineering, University of Seoul 02504, Republic of Korea
d Department of Science and Environmental Studies, The Education University of Hong Kong, Tai Po, New Territories 999077, Hong Kong
e Department of Environmental Engineering & Innovation and Development Center of Sustainable Agriculture & Research Center of Sustainable Energy and
Nanotechnology, National Chung Hsing University, 250 Kuo-Kuang Road, Taichung, Taiwan

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Biorefinery
Biofuel
Biodiesel
Microalgae
Euglena
Lipid production
Environmental impact
Practical viability

High lipid content and excellent CO2 fixation capability of microalgae by photosynthesis have made microalgal
biodiesel  (BD)  a  promising  carbon-neutral  fuel.  Nonetheless,  the  commercialization  of  BD  has  not  yet  been
realized because of expensive and energy-intensive cultivation, pretreatment, and BD conversion processes in
reference to 1st generation BD production. To resolve the issues, this study comprehensively reviewed the current
technical  developments  of microalgal  BD production  process and suggested  promising  future studies. Current
microalgal  BD  production  processes  highly  rely  on  the  processes  developed  from  1st  generation  BD  process,
namely base-catalyzed transesterifications. However, the base-catalyzed suffers from saponification reaction and
low production yield due to high water and free fatty acid contents in microalgae. Vigorous pretreatments such
as dewatering, drying, esterification of free fatty acid, and purification are required for high yield of microalgal
BD production, making this process economically not attractive. As efforts to construct new transesterification
platform,  novel  approaches tolerant  to  impurities  such  as  thermally induced  non-catalytic transesterifications
were suggested. The thermally induced reactions allowed in situ conversion of microalgal lipid into BD (≥ 95 wt.
% yield) within 1 min of reaction at ≥ 350  ̊C. This process resists to presence of water and free fatty acids and
does not require lipid extraction process. To make this process more promising, it was suggested lowering re-
action  temperature  for  thermally  induced  transesterifications.  In  addition,  pilot  study,  in-depth  life  cycle
assessment, and economic analysis were suggested to assess economic viability and environmental impacts.

1. Introduction

Our  society  has  been  heavily  relied  on  the  fossil  resources  (coal,
petroleum, and natural gas) to sate the social metabolisms for carbon
since  an  era  of  industrialization  [1].  Although  the  practical  imple-
mentation  of  fossil  fuels  has  opened  an  opportunity  to  boost  the  life
quality  index,  heavy-reliance  of  them  has  triggered  the  critical  envi-
ronmental  problems  (such  as  global  warming)  [2].  It  was  confirmed
from  a  long-standing  scientific/engineering  research  that  massive
emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the use of fossil fuels serves a
critical contributor triggering global warming [3,4]. The use of carbon
free/neutral  energies  as  a  strategic  measure  to  mitigate  catastrophic
consequences by global warming is of great significance. Thus, biofuels

(biodiesel (BD), bioethanol (BE), biogas, and biohydrogen) has gained
considerable attention due to their intrinsic carbon neutrality [5,6]. In
particular,  the  practical  implementation  and  commercialization  of
BD/BE as transportation fuels have been realized in that they were used
by  means  of  blending  with  petro-derived gasoline/diesel  without  any
engine modifications [7,8]. As such, the uses of BD/BE have been well
implemented  because  they  seamlessly  shares  the  current  distribution
networks [7,8].

BE is produced through yeast fermentation [9,10]. Such fact suggests
that carbon loss during the biological BE conversion process is inevitable
due to yeast respiration and carbon deposit into yeast cell [11]. More
than 50 % of carbon from the sugary compound is lost during the BE
conversion process [12]. Given that BD is currently converted through

* Corresponding authors.

E-mail addresses: yechoi@korea.ac.kr (Y.-E. Choi), ek2148@hanyang.ac.kr (E.E. Kwon).

1  Co-first authorsThese authors contributed this work equally.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101020
Received 10 February 2021; Received in revised form 28 December 2021; Accepted 26 May 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)101020Availableonline25July20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

J.Y. Kim et al.

the chemical process (catalytic transesterification), more than 90 % of
carbon  in  a  lipid  feedstock  is  conserved  [13].  As  such,  it  is  readily
inferred that production of BD is advantageous over BE in terms of the
carbon  conservation  from  a  raw  material.  BD  is  classified  into  three
categories  (1st, 2nd, and  3rd  generation  BD), which  is according  to its
feedstocks. 1st generation BD is produced from edible fat (derived from
soybean, palm, rapeseed, corn oil, etc.) under the presence of homoge-
neous alkaline catalysts (KOH or NaOH) [14,15]. However, the use of
edible fat in production of BD has caused several problems including an
increase in food price and deforestation [16,17]. In an effort to abate the
noted  problems  associated  with  production  of  1st  generation  BD,  fat
from  the  non-edible  resources  have  been  sought  to  produce  BD  (2nd
generation)  [18].  Biomass  obtained  from  plants  grown  on  non-arable
land  or  wastes  such  as  waste  cooking  oils,  animal  fats  and  manures
are the main feedstocks for 2nd generation BD [19,20]. Although these
feedstocks are inexpensive, they contain the large amount of impurities
that  make  difficult  to  convert  BD  through  the  catalytic  trans-
esterification  process  [2].  Microalgae  has  been  also  considered  as  an
attractive raw material for BD production (3rd generation BD) [21]. For
example, the yield of lipid from microalgae is 10-800 times higher than
that  from  terrestrial  biomass  [22,23].  Microalgae  are  also  able  to
assimilate CO2  due to the superior carbon fixation capability in refer-
ence to terrestrial plants [24]. Photosynthetic capability of microalgae is
10  to  50  times  higher  than  that  of  terrestrial  ones  [24].  Moreover,
cultivation  of  microalgae  is  not  required  arable  land  and  pesticides,
which makes it more eco-friendly [25].

Research  on  microalgae-derived  BD  has  been  increased  annually

worldwide.  Specifically,  in  terms  of  total  publications,  the  Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology  (KAIST),  and  Tsinghua  University  contributed  the  most
[26]. BD production from microalgae is realized through the two main
processes: upstream and downstream processes (Fig. 1). The upstream
process  includes  species  selection  and  microalgae  cultivation.  The
downstream process includes harvesting, drying, lipid extraction, and
BD  conversion.  Despite  a  high  potential  of  microalgae  as  a  BD  raw
material, an economic feasibility is still challenging. Accordingly, it is
highly desirable to seek a technical breakthrough by means of insightful
diagnosis of the current status of all unit operations for microalgae BD
production. In an effort to realize these grand premises, this review was
to provide the up-to-date information on all unit operations in micro-
algae BD production. To this end, the literature reviews on the upstream
process were done. Specifically, this review laid great emphasis on se-
lection of microalgal species and the cultivation optimization for lipid
accumulation.  In  addition,  the  technical  merits/demerits  of  each  unit
operation in the downstream process (harvesting, drying, lipid extrac-
tion, and BD conversion) are summarized. This review also provided the
environmental impacts and an economic viability of BD based on life
cycle assessment (LCA) and techno-economic assessment (TEA). More-
over, all required aspects for mass production of microalgae BD were
discussed.  Lastly,  perspectives  to  overcome  the  environmental  and
economic hurdles of microalgae BE were suggested.

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the upstream (green color) and downstream (blue color) processes for BD production from microalgae.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010202

J.Y. Kim et al.

2. Upstream process for BD production

The upstream process including selection of microalgal species and
cultivation  is discussed. The outline of  the entire upstream  process is
presented in Fig. 2.

2.1. Classification of microalgae

Microalgae  are  unicellular  or  multi-cellular  microorganisms,  and
their habitats are confined in an aquatic environment. Their ecological
functions are of great importance since they are one of the main pro-
ducers of oxygen (O2). Their contributions are equivalent to 40 % of O2
supply in our ecosystem [27]. To date, it was reported that more than
50,000  microalgal  species  are  identified,  but  more  than  100,000
microalgal species are expected [23,28]. Classification of microalgae is
of  great  significance  in  terms  of  microalgae-based  biofuel/chemical
productions.  In  1990,  three-domain  system  was  determined  by  Carl
Woose, which divides organisms into three large categories; Archaea,
Bacteria,  and  Eukaryota  [29].  In  1995,  evolutionary  analysis  of  the
glutamine synthetase genes offered that archaebacteria are more closely
related to eubacteria than to eukaryote, and this supports the classical
division of organisms into the two main superkingdoms (Prokaryota and
Eukaryota)  [30].  Cavalier-smith  also  introduced  7  kingdoms,  namely
Archaea, Bacteria, Protozoa, Chromista, Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia
[31]. Most microalgae belong to eukaryote such as Protozoa (Eugleno-
zoa), Chromista (Ochrophyta), and Plantae (Rhodophyta/Chlorophyta)
[32].  However,  sole  phylum  in  Prokaryota,  Cyanobacteria,  was
considered as microalgae due to their photosynthetic ability [33–35].
The  microalgae  are  classified  by  different  characteristics,  such  as

presence or absence of flagella and distinct nucleus, type of pigments,
cell wall chemistry, etc. [28]. Specifically, the type of chlorophyll (Chl),
a  light-harvesting  molecule  located  in  thylakoid,  is  a  distinguishing
characteristic  of  microalgae  [36].  According  to  the  type  of  super-
kingdom, the thylakoid is located in cytoplasm (Prokaryota) and chlo-
roplast  (Eukaryota)  [37].  Five  types  (a,  b,  c,  d,  and  f)  of  Chl  have
different  chemical  structures  (although  the  difference  is  minor),  and
these  differences  make  microalgae  to  harvest  light  at  different  wave-
length [38]. The diverse Chl lets microalgae to adapt to a different niche
[39,40].

2.2. Biorefinery using microalgae

Like  terrestrial  biomass,  microalgae  are  comprised  of  the  three
nutritional  components  (carbohydrate,  protein,  and  lipid)  [41].  Their
compositional matrix is very varied on the microalgal species. Botryo-
coccus  braunii  can  accumulate  lipid  up  to  60  wt.%  (dry  basis),  and
Euglena gracilis can accumulate carbohydrate up to 80 wt.% (dry basis)
[42,43]. The secondary metabolites including β-carotene, astaxanthin,
α-tocopherol,  and lutein  could be  obtained from microalgae. The pri-
mary/secondary metabolites from microalgae are beneficial to be used
as a raw material in biorefinery. The examples for the specific use of
microalgae  in  biorefinery  were  tabulated  in  Table  1,  and  their  repre-
sentative microscopic images were visualized in Fig. 3. Table 1 showed
that various species of microalgae were used in lipid production. Given
that lipid production from microalgae is consequence of carbon fixation
and their fixation rates are much faster than those of terrestrial biomass,
the use of microalgae as a raw feedstock for BD has been considered as a
strategic measure to enhance the environmental sustainability [44].

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of upstream process for microalgae-derived BD.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010203

J.Y. Kim et al.

Table 1
Main products through biorefinery using microalgae as a raw material.

Empire

Prokaryota

Phylum

Cyanobacteria

Eukaryota

Chlorophyta

Euglenozoa

Ochrophyta

Rhodophyta

Species

Main target product

References

Anabaena fertilissima
Arthrospira fusiformis
Arthrospira platensis
Botryococcus braunii
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Chlorella minutissima
Chlorella protothecoides
Chlorella pyrenoidosa
Chlorella sorokiniana
Chlorella vulgaris
Chlorella zofingiensis
Chlorococcum sp.
Dunaliella salina
Dunaliella tertiolecta
Haematococcus pluvialis
Muriellopsis sp.
Scenedesmus obliquus
Euglena gracilis
Euglena sanguinea
Phaeodactylum tricornutum
Cyclotella cryptica
Porphyridium cruentum
Porphyridium marinum

Phycocyanin
Phycocyanin
Protein and phycocyanin
Lipid
Lipid
Lipid
Lipid
Lutein
Lipid
Lipid
Astaxanthin
Astaxanthin
β-carotene
α-tocopherol
Astaxanthin
Lutein
Astaxanthin and lipid
Paramylon and lipid
Lipid
Fucoxanthin and edible lipid
Lipid
Glucose
Exopolysaccharide

[45]
[46]
[47]
[43]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58,59]
[60]
[61,62]
[63]
[64]
[65,66]
[67]
[68]
[69]

Fig. 3. Microscopic images of microalgal species; (a) Haematococcus pluvialis, (b) Chlorella vulgaris, (c) Dunaliella salina, (d) Ochromonas danica, (e) Euglena gracilis,
and (f) Porphyridium cruentum.

Understanding metabolisms in line with microalgal lipid accumula-
tion are of great significance in BD production. Both the quantity and the
quality of a raw feedstock for BD production from a specific strain are
closely  linked  to  how  lipid  metabolism  is  controlled  [70].  Microalgal
lipids are classified into two groups according to their structure, neutral
lipids (acylglycerol (AGs) and sterol) and polar lipids (free fatty acids
(FFAs), phospholipids (PLs), glycolipids (GLs) and sphingolipids (SLs)),
of  which  components  contain  1-3  fatty  acids  (FAs)  [71].  When  the
carboxylate end of the fatty acid molecule is branched to an uncharged
head group (glycerol), a neutral lipid molecule is formed (triacylglycerol
(TAG)). On the other hand, the association of a fatty acid molecule to a
charged head group (e.g. glycol and phosphate complex) forms a polar
lipid molecule (e.g. GLs and PLs) [72], which become a building block of
membrane bilayer and have a polar side-group at the sn-3 position of
their glycerol backbone [73]. Some lipids such as PLs, GLs, and sterols
are  essential  structural  components  of  cell  and  organelle  membranes
such as plasma membrane and thylakoid membrane of chloroplast [74].
SLs and oxidative products of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) act as
key  intermediates  in  the  cell  signaling  pathways  and  play  a  role  in
sensing environmental changes [75]. AGs are stored in vacuole and is

categorized according to its number of fatty acids: triacylglycerol (TAG:
triglyceride),  diacylglycerol  (DAG:  diglyceride),  monoacylglycerol
(MAG: monoglyceride) [74]. TAG is a major form of stored energy in
microalgae with energy-rich acyl chains [76]. TAG biosynthesis is a part
of  the  primary  cell  metabolism,  integrated  with  membrane  lipid  as-
sembly and turnover [77]. Production of TAG is responsible for micro-
algal  species  or  cultivation  conditions  such  as  nutrients  and
photosynthesis  [73].  However,  the  details  and  dynamics  of  TAG  and
membrane lipid metabolism have remained largely uncertain.

It  is  assumed  that  a  pathway  of  lipid  synthesis  in  microalgae  is
similar with that in higher plant cells, which is conducted by de novo
fatty  acid  synthesis  that  takes  place  in  plastid  [78].  De  novo  fatty  acid
synthesis  involves  two  key  enzymes,  acetyl-coenzyme  A  carboxylase
(ACCase) and fatty acid synthase (FASN). The glucose catabolism pro-
duces an excess of the glycolytic end-production, pyruvate. Most of the
pyruvate  is  converted  to  lactate,  whereas  some  of  it  is  converted  to
acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA), which in turn, is used in de novo fatty
acid  synthesis.  ACCase-FAs  synthesis  requires  carbon  in  the  form  of
acetyl-CoA, energy (ATP)  and reducing power (NADPH), as well  as a
certain  set  of  predominantly  nuclear-encoded  proteins,  which

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010204

J.Y. Kim et al.

carboxylates  acetyl-CoA  to  form  malonyl-CoA  [79].  Prior  to  entering
FASN  complex  in  the  plastid,  the  malonyl-CoA  is  converted  into  an
malonyl  acyl  carrier  protein  (ACP)  by  malonyl-CoA:ACP  transacylase
(MAT)  [80].  This  step  involves the  consecutive  condensation  step  for
donating two carbons in FA synthesis from malonyl-ACP (the donor) to
the growing acyl chain in the form of acyl-ACP [81]. The malonyl-CoA
product is further converted into long-chain FAs (C16-C22) by a multi-
domain  homomeric  ACCase  in  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  [82].  The
role  of  FASN-dependent  FA  synthesis  in  FA  supply  is  membrane  pro-
duction and energy production through β-oxidation [70,83].

The  difference  of  FA  production  from  higher  plants  cell  is  that
microalgae  produce  middle-chain  saturated  FAs  (C10-C14)  and  long
chain  polyunsaturated  fatty  acids  (LC-PUFAs)  due  to  a  controlled
desaturase/elongase in FA synthesis [77]. The substrate preference of
acyl-ACP thioesterase (TE) is an important determinant of the middle
chain  FAs  (C8:0,  C10:0,  and  C12:0)  synthesis  as  inferred  from  studies
performed  [84].  12:0-ACP  and  14:0-ACP  in  the  diatom  microalgae
Phaeodactylum tricornutum result in accumulation of shorter chain length
FAs in TAGs [85]. Also, Nannochloropsis contains a considerable amount
of LC-PUFAs such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). In Chlamydomonas,
several  desaturases  have  been  characterized  by  forward  genetic  ap-
proaches including one gene encoding a Δ4-desaturase associated with
plastid envelopes [86] that is involved in the synthesis of 4,7,10,13-hex-
adecatetraenoic  acid  (HTA)  [87].  This  HTA  acyl  group  is  exclusively
present  in  GLs  that  is  certain  chloroplast  membrane,  monogalcto-
syldiacylglacerol  (MGDG).  The  microalgal  research  community  has
shown strong interest in this group of enzymes given their potential for
manipulation of microalgal TAG FA composition and thus for improving
oil quality for BD feedstock. Although the PUFAs cause weak oxidative
stability of BD, BD made from PUFA and medium chain length FAs has a
relatively  low  cloud  point,  which  made  BD  possible  to  use  in  cold
climate region [85].

According to enzyme activity for metabolism, an extensive range of
lipid content and compositional matrix of FAs are observed in micro-
algae.  Commonly  studied  microalgal  species  for  lipid  production  are
listed  in  Table  2.  Channeling  of  carbon  away  from  either  of  these

Table 2
Lipid contents and lipid productivity of various microalgae.

Microalgae
species

Lipid
content
(wt.%)

Lipid
productivity (mg
(cid:0) 1 d
lipids L

(cid:0) 1)

Major fatty
acid

Reference

23.4 -
43.4
35.9 -
62.7
20.2 -
61.2
13.4

19.3 -
35.0
4.54 -
8.86
31.5 -
49.5
24.81
60.4

49.0 -
53.2
52.1

37.0 -
38.8
17.3 -
32.8

Acutodesmus
obliquus
Botryococcus
braunii

Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii

Chlorella

pyrenoidosa

Chlorella

sorokiniana

Chlorella variabilis

Chlorella vulgaris

Euglena gracilis
Nannochloropsis

granulata

Nannochloropsis

oceanica

Nannochloropsis

occulata

Nannochloropsis

salina

Scenedesmus
abundans

Scenedesmus
obliquus

11.3 - 23.8

Palmitic acid

[89]

9.0 - 19.0

Oleic acid

[90]

14.4 - 33.8

Oleic acid

[91]

16.6

Oleic acid

[92]

41.3 - 50.9

0.9 - 2.0

Linolenic
acid
Palmitic acid

[93]

[94]

10.3 - 18.9

Palmitic acid

[89]

131
130.4

Myristic acid
Oleic acid

[95]
[96]

100.2 - 158.8

Palmitic acid

[96]

137.4

Palmitic acid

[96]

122.5 - 134.2

Palmitic acid

[96]

9.8 - 39.2

6.6 - 11.7

5.6 - 58.6

Palmitic acid
or linolenic
acid
Palmitic acid

[97]

[62]

(cid:0) 1  d

pathways  to  TAG  synthesis  would  reduce  the  carbon  available  for
pathways  supporting  cellular  growth,  such  as  the  tricarboxylic  acid
(TCA) cycle [88]. Therefore, growth rate is simultaneously considered
for estimating economic feasibility of BD production from microalgae. A
great deal of researches has been carried out to determine volumetric
(cid:0) 1) of microalgae as shown in Table 2.
lipid productivity (g  lipid  L
(cid:0) 1
Most of microalgae species have lipid productivity under 100 mg lipid L
(cid:0) 1. However, a few species such as Nannochloropsis spp. and Euglena
d
(cid:0) 1 of lipid productivity. The
gracilis showed more than 100 mg lipid L
variation of lipid content and productivity are observed despite of same
species. Also, the lipid composition was different among species. Given
that  microalgae  were  cultured  at  the  different  cultivation  conditions,
optimizing  the  cultivation conditions  are  of  great importance  in  lipid
production from microalgae.

(cid:0) 1 d

2.3. Microalgae cultivation

Cultivation of microalgae is one of the critical steps for maximizing
the  lipid  yield.  The  technical  merits/demerits  from  the  commonly
adapted cultivation systems were summarized in Table 3. As also visu-
alized in Fig. 4, three cultivation systems (open, closed, and attached
systems) were widely employed [98,99]. The open system is generally
employed  for  mass  production  of  microalgae  [100].  Natural  pond  or
artificial pond (e.g. circular and raceway pond) is used for open system
(Fig.  4(a)) [35].  The open  system  is  attractive to  microalgae  that are
cultured in the harsh conditions such as high alkalinity/salinity. Note
that the harsh conditions are beneficial to circumvent contaminations
[101]. To remain the concentration of the nutrients in the ponds and
light exposure to the microalgae constant, it is of great importance to
continuously mix nutrients and microalgae in the ponds [102,103]. The
homogeneous  mixing  of  nutrients  and  microalgae  also  helps  to  avoid
gravitational  precipitation  and  aggregation  of  microalgae.  Another
critical  factor  to  control  the  cultivation  efficiency  is  the  depth  of  the
pond. The optima for pond depth and biomass depend on the cultivation
location. To reach peak productivity, deep ponds have to be combined
with  low  biomass concentrations  and  shallow  ponds have  to  be com-
bined with high biomass concentrations [104]. Although the open sys-
tem  is  simple,  it  is  sensitive  to  weather  and  contamination  such  as
external and/or internal organisms including fungi, bacteria, and roti-
fers  [103].  Also,  the  scale-up  is  technically  challenging  because  light
penetration is limited by the depth of pond and the cell concentration.
The  closed  system  cultures  microalgae  in  the  photobioreactors
(PBRs) (Fig. 4(b)). The types of PBRs depend on the structures; include
tubular  PBRs,  vertical  column  PBRs,  flat-plate  PBRs,  etc.  [110].  The
culture  conditions  (pH,  temperature,  and  nutrient)  can  be  automated
due to its built-in modules such as gas flow controller (O2 and CO2) and a
heat exchanger [111]. A two-stage cultivation strategy is beneficial to
increase  the  production  of  microalgae,  and  many  algal  species  were
tested in the two-stage cultivation system [112]. The cultivation con-
dition in accordance with a specific stage for microalgae can be tuned
sophisticatedly  by  means  of  the  automations  (gas  flow  rate,  light  in-
tensity, nutrient, etc.) in the PBR [113]. Considering the closed system,
the  frequency  of  contamination  is  reduced  [105].  However,  fouling
(biofilm formation) of PBR has been considered as one of the technical
demerits  [23].  Adapting  an  adhesion  resistant  material  prevents  the
aforementioned fouling problem to some extent [114]. The high cost of
PBRs (includes PBR, piping and fitting, and other equipment) has been
also pointed out as a main constraint for mass production of microalgae
[115].  Similar  with  the  case  of  the  open  system,  light  penetration  is
greatly affected by cell density of microalgae [116]. Such problem can
be resolved by varying the diameter of the PBRs [116]. Recently, the
attached  cultivation  system  has  been  actively  tested  for  microalgae
cultivation.  For  the  inoculum  of  the  microalgae,  the  algal  disks  were
attached to the filter paper and the culture medium flowed through the
filter paper (Fig. 4(c)) [99]. Water demand for microalgae cultivation is
notably  reduced  as  compared  to  other  cultivation  systems  (open  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010205

J.Y. Kim et al.

Table 3
Technical merits/demerits in cultivation methods of microalgae [105–107].

Cultivation
style

Units

Notes

Advantages

Disadvantages

System

Open

Closed

Attached

Condition

Phototrophic

Heterotrophic

Mixotrophic

• Natural
ponds or
artificial
ponds can be
utilized
• Diverse types
of systems are
available
(raceway,
paddlewheel,
etc.)
• Extensively
used in
microalgae
cultivation,
especially for
high-value
products
• Automated
system
(temperature,
pH, and
nutrient
distribution) is
possible
• Microalgae
culture on the
surface of
attaching
materials

• Converts
light (both
sunlight and
artificial light)
into energy
sources via
photosynthesis
• All culture
systems are
available
• Gains energy
from organic
carbon sources
such as
glucose
• Cultures in
the dark
• Gains energy
from both
organic carbon
sources and
photosynthesis

• Low cost
• Well-
established

• Easy to
operate
• High
productivity

• Difficult in
temperature
control
• Greatly affect
by weather
• Easy to
contaminate
• Hard to scale-
up
• Large area is
required
• High cost
• Biofouling
due to
adhesion of
microalgae on
the PBR
surface

• Low water
consumption
• High
productivity
• Easy to
harvest
• Low cost of
operation

• High cell
density
• Space
intensive

• Relative
high cell
density

• Light
permeability
problem
• More valid
data is
required
• Low cell
density
• High energy
consumption
(when
artificial light
is used)
• Light
permeability
problem
• High risk of
contamination
due to organic
carbon sources
• High cost of
substrate

• Light
permeability
problem
• High cost of
substrate

closed systems) when the attached system is employed [117]. Despite its
usefulness, its practical implementation is limited due to a short period
of testing history [118].

From  the  literature  reviews  on  three  representative  cultivation
methods  for  microalgae,  it  is  concluded  that  the  most  critical  factor
governing the growth rate of microalgae is a light source. Also, this is
one of the main constraints for limiting mass production of microalgae.
Hence, adapting mixotrophic/heterotrophic microalgae provides a great
venue for resolving the main technical huddles in the current cultivation
methods. Some strains such as E. gracilis can be cultured with organic
carbon sources in heterotrophic cultivation [119]. The presence of sugar
transporters gives the distinguishable characteristic between phototroph
and heterotroph [120]. Also, lipid content is higher in heterotrophic and
mixotrophic conditions than phototrophic condition [121]. Li et al. re-
ported  the  comparative  test  in  terms  of  lipid  content  of  Chlorella  sor-
okiniana  [122].  Lipid  content  of  C.  sorokiniana  in  heterotrophic  and
mixotrophic cultivation was higher as 3.86 and 3.41 times than that in
phototrophic cultivation, respectively. With the substrate feeding pro-
cess  (fed-batch  or  continuous  cultivation),  maximized  productivity  of
microalgae  was  reported  [119].  A  fermenter,  another  type  of  closed
system,  is  widely  used  for  heterotrophic  cultivation  [123].  Because
microalgae are cultured with a conventional bacterial fermenter, capital
cost for microalgae production can be reduced [120]. In addition, mass
production  of  microalgae  using  fermenter  can  be  readily  achieved
considering  its  technical  readiness  level  as  compared  to  that  of  open
pond  and  PBR  [106].  One  of  the  critical  constraints  deteriorating  an
economic  viability  in  heterotrophic  cultivation  is  high  cost  of
sugar-based substrate that accounts for 60% of the overall production
cost  [34].  In  these  contexts,  utilizing  waste  resources  opens  new  op-
portunities to reduce the substrate cost. According to the report from the
World  Bank,  1.3  billion  tonnes  of  municipal  solid  waste  (MSW)  is
globally generated, and by 2025, this weight is predicted to increase to
2.2 billion tonnes [124]. Over 50% of MSW are derived from food waste
[125]. Food wastes contain various elements such as carbon, nitrogen,
and phosphorous, which are essential for microalgal metabolisms [126,
127]. Zhang et. al. reported that food wastes obtained from 500 sources
contain 46.78 wt.% of carbon, 3.16 wt.% of nitrogen and 0.52 wt.% of
phosphorous in dry basis, respectively [128]. Food wastes containing a
high amount of carbon are readily converted to glucose which is desir-
able for heterotrophic cultivation of microalgae [125]. A potential for
glucose supply from food wastes including potato peeling, bagasse, corn,
etc. is summarized in Table 4. Anaerobic digestion is a useful approach to
convert residual solid and liquid products into biogas, and the technical
development of the anaerobic digestion has been more established [129]
As  such,  it  could  be  a  reasonable  choice  to  convert  food  wastes  into
glucose  and  biogas  in  the  aspect  of  waste  management,  carbon
neutralization, and microalgae cultivation for valorization of more than
a million tonnes of food wastes every year.

2.4. Factors governing lipid accumulation in microalgae

The growth rate of microalgae in line with the content of lipid varies

Fig. 4. Cultivation systems for microalgae: (a) open system [108], (b) closed system [109], and (c) attached system [99]. Fig. 4(a) and 4(c) were reprinted from [99,
108] with permission of Elsevier. Fig. 4(b) was reproduced from [109] under the terms of the CC-BY Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010206

J.Y. Kim et al.

Table 4
Yield of glucose obtained from waste sources using conversion methods.

Source

Conversion method

Conversionyield
(wt.%)

Mixed food waste

Enzymatic hydrolysis

53-63

Potato peeling

Carrot peeling

Lignocellulosic

waste
Sugarcane
bagasse
Corn stalk

Milled wheat

straw
Wheat pulp
Corn stover

Fungi treatment
Acid treatment
Acid and microwave
treatment
Enzymatic hydrolysis after
acid, steam, and microwave
treatment
Enzymatic hydrolysis after
acid, steam, and microwave
treatment
Enzymatic hydrolysis after
acid treatment
Fungi treatment after
microwave treatment
Radiation and chemical
treatment
Catalytic hydrolysis

Acid treatment
Supercritical carbon dioxide
treatment

31.9
53.8
59

89

73

13

>30

43

59.6

40
30

Ref.

[130,
131]
[132]
[133]
[134]

[135]

[135]

[136]

[137]

[138]

[139]

[140]
[141]

among  microalgae  species  and  also  influenced  by  the  cultivation  pa-
rameters such as energy (light and temperature), cultivation condition
(salinity,  operation times, etc.), and nutrients (carbon/nitrogen/phos-
phorus) [142]. A great deal of researches has been conducted to maxi-
mize  lipid  production  from  microalgae  through  genetic  manipulation
and/or  parametric  study  on  cultivation  [143,144].  Although  several
studies  have  been  conducted  to  overexpression  or  knockout  the  gene
involved in lipid synthesis in microalgae, lipid content was not signifi-
cantly  increased  [145],  thus,  commercialization  with  genetically
modified  strain  is  not  visible  yet.  Furthermore,  the  concerns  of  envi-
ronmental and health issues on genetically modified (GM) microalgae
have still remained [146].

Environmental parameters including light and temperature affect the
lipid metabolism of microalgae. Lipid synthesis of microalgae is accel-
erated under high light intensity, but overfull light exposure damages
microalgal metabolism (called photoinhibition) [147,148]. Wavelength
and light duration time also influence on lipid accumulation in micro-
algae [149]. Teo et al. reported that the yields of lipid of Tetraselmis sp.
and  Nannochloropsis  sp.  were  increased  under  blue  LED  wavelength
[150]. Microalgae grow faster at high temperature as compared to low
temperature,  however,  fine-tuning  for  the  optimal  temperature  is  of
importance because cells get damage at too high temperature [151]. In
open system, temperature is critical because it is not usually controlled
[152]. However, considering that a closed system (especially fermenter)
is  often  located  indoor,  controlling  other  parameters  would  be  more
efficient  to  enhance  lipid  production.  A  high  evaporation  rate  in  the
open  system  increases  the  concentration  of  various  compounds  in
media. Increased salinity due to the high evaporation rate in the open
system  is considered one of the stress factors to microalgae [153].  In
high salinity conditions, lipid synthesis is induced due to osmotic stress
[22]. Operating time is also important for lipid accumulation. Generally,
microalgae proliferate in a log stage and accumulate metabolites in the
stationary stage [154]. Xia et al. also reported that the lipid content was
2-fold higher in aged culture phase (day 20) than active growth phase
(day 4) [155].

Compared with the other parameters, alteration of carbon, nitrogen,
and phosphorus is highly related with accumulation of lipid in micro-
algae.  The  main  carbon-sources  for  microalgal  growths  are  CO2  and
glucose in the phototrophic and heterotrophic conditions, respectively
[156].  The  previous  study  reported  that  the  increase  of  organic
carbon-source  (i.e.  glucose)  concentration  in  media  affected  growth

(positively) and lipid content (negatively) of Chlorella sp. and Nanno-
chloropsis sp. [157]. In case of nitrogen, relative content of nitrogen, in
comparison  with  carbon,  has  become  one  of  key  indicators  for  nutri-
tional status of microalgae and expressed as ‘C/N ratio (carbon to ni-
trogen ratio)’ representing the important nutritional impact on the lipid
production of microalgae [158]. Although nitrogen and phosphorus are
essential elements for microalgal growth which accounting for 10-20%
of biomass [159], inadequate concentrations might affect negatively on
lipid  production.  In  detail,  most  microalgae  accumulate  high  lipid
contents under adverse growth conditions such as nitrogen-starvation
and  limitation  [73].  Ho  et  al.  reported  that  under  5  days  of
nitrogen-starvation condition Scenedesmus obliquus accumulated almost
double lipid content in comparison to day 0 [160]. The concentration of
phosphorus  in  culture  medium  also  significantly  influence  on  lipid
accumulation of microalgae. For example, the lipid content of Chlorella
zofingiensis increased in phosphate deficient condition compared to the
phosphate sufficient condition [161]. The cell density, on the contrary,
increased with the high phosphorus-concentration [162]. The optimized
concentrations  of  nutrients  for  microalgae  cultivation  and  lipid  pro-
duction vary depending on microalgal species. For example, contrary to
common knowledge that lipid content of microalgae is enriched under
the nutrient starvation conditions [163], the lipid content of E. gracilis
was rather low in the nutrient starvation condition and sufficient nu-
trients should be supplied to enhance E. gracilis lipid production [164].
According  to  the  study  of  Jung  et  al.,  maximum  lipid  contents  of
E. gracilis in heterotrophic cultivation reached in the following nutrient
(cid:0) 1 of
concentrations; 20 g L
(cid:0) 1  of po-
asparagine, 5 g L
tassium  phosphate  monobasic  [95].  Therefore,  finding  the  optimized
concentration  of  nutrients  of  each  species  is  of  great  importance  to
maximize lipid productivity from microalgae.

(cid:0) 1 of glutamic acid, 4 g L

(cid:0) 1  of urea, and 0.4 g L

(cid:0) 1  of glycine, 0.8 g L

(cid:0) 1 of glucose, 10 g L

Microalgae-bacteria  co-cultivation  strategy  has  been  widely  per-
formed for a decade to enhance biomass and metabolite productions of
microalgae  [165–167].  However,  since  the  mechanism  for  such  en-
hancements remained unknown, further researches are necessary for the
successful application of the co-cultivation strategy in large scale culti-
vation [168].

3. Downstream process for BD production

For BD production from cultivated microalgae, a series of pretreat-
ment  processes  is  required  prior  to  transesterification  of  lipid  in
microalgae.  After  harvesting  the  microalgae  from  cultivation  spots,
drying  and  lipid  extraction  processes  are  needed  to  prepare  a  raw
feedstock for BD production. Schematic of downstream processes for BD
production is drawn in Fig. 5. Detailed descriptions for each process can
be found in the following sub-sections.

3.1. Harvesting method

After cultivation of microalgae, harvesting the microalgae with its
minimal  loss  is  an  important  process  for  the  utilization  of  microalgal
biomass  and  target  metabolites  extraction.  Because  surface  charge  of
microalgae  is  a  negative  charge, the  cells  repel  each  other,  thus  cells
suspend  in  the  media.  Flocculation  is  often  used  to  make  microalgae
agglomerated, thereby allowing the subsequent harvesting steps avail-
able:  sedimentation,  centrifugation,  filtration,  and  floatation  [35].
Diverse flocculation mechanisms are established, but the broadly used
ones  include  charge  neutralization,  electrostatic  path  mechanism,
bridging, sweeping or in combination as drawn in Fig. 6 [169].

Since  the  harvesting  and  subsequent  dewatering  processes  are  en-
ergy intensive, accounting for 3 – 15% in total BD production cost, it is
crucial  to  select  the  appropriate  harvesting  method  for  lowering  the
overall product cost [170]. In addition, the harvesting method should
not  affect  to  the  quality  of  microalgae  (e.g.  cell  rupture  and  cellular
component  loss)  for  guaranteeing  maximum  production  yields  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010207

J.Y. Kim et al.

non-biodegradable  materials.  For  example,  cationic
inulin,  a
plant-derived  flocculant,  was  deployed  for  harvesting  a  microalga
(Botrycoccus  sp.)  [177].  Also,  chitosan,  an  edible-nontoxic  flocculant,
was selected as a ubiquitous natural polymer and displayed high har-
vesting  efficiency  [178].  In  another  example,  microorganisms  them-
selves, such as bacteria and fungi, were also used as bio-flocculants. The
negatively charged microalgae cells interacted with the hyphae of some
fungal  strains,  which  were  positively  charged;  thus  forming  the
co-pelletized matrix (flocculated) [179,180]. Similarly, the microalgae
and some bacteria strains enabled to form the microalgal-bacterial ag-
gregates [181].

Among  various  harvesting  techniques,  gravity  sedimentation  is
considered  one  of  the  simplest  and  inexpensive  approaches.  In  brief,
dispersed microalgal cell cultures in water settled down under the in-
fluence of gravity after cultivation [182]. Because gravity sedimentation
does not require any additional input of energy and chemical reagents,
the harvesting cost is significantly low. However, the main disadvantage
of this technique is that the process is time-consuming and relatively low
harvesting  efficiency,  compared to  other methods. The  sedimentation
velocity varies depending on the types of microalgae, and the velocity is
affected mainly by the morphology and size of the cells [183]. In gen-
eral, microalgal cell sizes are proportionate to the velocity of the sedi-
mentation.  Furthermore,  the  capability  of  auto-flocculation  could
further facilitate gravity sedimentation [182].

Although the centrifugation method is an old-fashioned technique, it
has been widely used for microalgae harvesting owing to a high recovery
rate.  However,  the  principal  hindrance  of  centrifugation  is  the  high
energy consumption rate and associated process cost. The specific en-
ergy  consumption  rates  differ  in  regard  to  centrifuge  types  (e.g.  disc
stack and solid bowl) and microalgae species [184]. Due to the fast and
easy process of centrifugation,  a variety  of industries still utilize cen-
trifuges for commercial microalgae harvesting in spite of high energy
cost and expenditure [185].

The  cultivated  microalgal  cells  can  be  separated  from  the  culture
medium  by  using  a  porous  filter.  The  conventional  filtration  which
operates under pressure or vacuum is suitable for the harvesting of large
cells; on the contrary, for the harvesting of the cells smaller than 30 μm,
microfiltration or ultrafiltration is desirable instead [110]. By increasing
harvesting target cell size through flocculation, further cost reduction is
possible, permitting the installation of the cheap and large filter mesh
size  for  sufficient  cell  recovery.  The  main  obstacle  of  filtration  is  the
fouling and clogging which delay the process and demand the new costly
filters, as with the other filtering systems.

Flotation is a harvesting technique that employs a micro-air bubble
to float microalgal cells on a media surface and thus evidently differs
from flocculation, which uses chemicals to aggregate [110]. The main
advantage  of  flotation  lies  in  the  applicability  to  the  harvesting  even
small-sized microalgal cells. Furthermore, the flotation is an appropriate
strategy for the harvesting of oil-rich microalgae due to the character-
istic that lipid-rich microalgae tend to stay near the surface by sponta-
neous  floating  [186].  Moreover,  rather  than  simply  dispersing  air,
electrotechnologies to float microalgal cells is also possible and could be
deployed  for  harvesting  purpose.  The  microbubbles  (hydrogen  and

Fig. 5. Schematic of BD production process from microalgal biomass.

media reuse for a certain cases [171]. Table 5 summarizes the currently
available methods for microalgae harvesting. Every technique has own
advantages and disadvantages; therefore, combinations or fine-tuning of
the techniques would be desirable and could be helpful to achieve more
effective and cheaper harvesting strategy.

Some microalgal species are aggregated themselves during cultiva-
tion, which is called auto-flocculation. The auto-flocculation is induced
by  pH modulation, nutrient stress, and biochemical agents  (i.e., poly-
saccharides or glycoproteins) produced by microalgae [172]. In some
cases, the cell debris, a consequence of cell lysis, of microalgae also in-
duces  the  auto-flocculation  spontaneously  [173].  However,  the  main
drawback  is  that  every  microalgal  species  could  not  perform
auto-flocculation and the majority of microalgal species are incapable of
the  auto-flocculation.  To  flocculate  the  cells,  exogenous  additions  of
flocculants have been applied. Previous studies confirmed that the salt
treatment induced the microalgae coagulation by the charge neutrali-
zation  and  suggested  that  the  selection  of  appropriate  salts  would  be
performed in the consideration of the purposes (e.g., aluminum chloride
for BD production) [174]. Cationic polymers are also widely studied to
be  used  as  flocculants.  Although  a  manufacturing  cost  of  synthetic
polymers  is affordable, such non-biodegradable polymers could cause
unexpected  problems  into  the  environment  [175,176].  Therefore,
alternative bio-derived flocculants have been studied in many research
from
teams

the  environmental  problems  arising

solve

to

Fig. 6. Flocculation mechanisms.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010208

J.Y. Kim et al.

Table 5
Harvesting methods of cultivated microalgae and these advantages and disad-
vantages [169,171,191].

Advantages

Limitations

Characteristic

Physical

Harvesting
technique

Gravity
sedimentation
Centrifugation

Filtration

• Low cost

• High recovery
• Simple and rapid
process
• Strain
independent
• Simple process

Air-flotation

• Simple process

Scraping

Chemical

Chemical
flocculation

• Low cost
• High recovery
• Relatively low
water content
• Simple and rapid
process

Electro-
flotation

• High recovery
• Rapid process

Biological

Auto-
flocculation

Bio-flocculation

• Low cost
• No biomass
contamination
• Environmental-
friendly

• Time-consuming
• Low recovery
• High cost to set up
• High energy
consumption

• Replacement of the
filters due to fouling
and clogging
• Small size cells are not
desirable
• High energy
consumption
• Available only in
attached cultivation
mode

• Biomass
contamination by
flocculants.
• Secondary pollution
• Replacement of the
electrodes
• High energy
consumption
• Limited to some
microalgal species
• Time-consuming
• Biomass
contamination by
flocculants
• Limited to lab-scale
experiment

oxygen gases), that are generating on the electrode surfaces during the
electrolytic lysis of water, move upward to the surface of the cultured
medium  and,  during  the  upward  movement  of  microbubbles,  the
microalgae in suspension are also carried up to the surface along with
the  microbubbles  (called  electroflotation)  [187].  Moreover,  the  cell
surface is destabilized in the electric field, resulting in the flocculation
and  flotation  of  the  cells  (electrocoagulation-flotation)  [188].  Several
factors  influence  the  efficiency  of  the  electroflotation  technique
including  medium  composition,  electrode  material  and  current
intensity.

Scraping is a method of harvesting by literally scraping the cultivated
microalgae on the supporting material surfaces (e.g. polystyrene foam)
using  a  sharp-edged  tool  [189].  Since  some  microalgal  cells  are  still
deposited  on  the  surface  during  the  scraping,  continuous  cultivation
without  the  preparation  of  new  inoculum  is  possible.  Furthermore,
compared to the centrifugation, the water content of harvested micro-
algae  was  comparable  each  other,  which  indicated  that  the  scraping
hold merits of a good dewatering efficiency, thereby possibly facilitating
the next step (i.e., drying) [189,190]. However, the scraping is limited
only to the attached growth system where mass production of micro-
algae is far from being achievable.

3.2. Drying method

Although  the  water  in  microalgae  is  partially  removed  during  the
harvesting process, remaining water needs to be further dried from the
harvested microalgae prior to their storage, carriage, and lipid extrac-
tion. Note that microalgae existing with high water content is vulnerable
to contamination and decomposition. Therefore, drying is a necessary
step  before  further  processes.  For  drying  of  microalgae,  diverse  ap-
proaches  have  been  applied  including  sun-drying,  freeze-drying

(lyophilization),  spray-drying,  and  oven-drying  (convective-drying)
[110]. Among various drying methods, sun-drying is the cheapest and
simplest method. However, the sun-drying method requires huge area to
spread  microalgal  biomass  for  sun-drying.  Also,  the  natural  drying  is
time-consuming and significantly depends on the presence of sunlight.
Thus, the drying efficiency is highly influenced by outdoor conditions (e.
g.,  temperature,  humidity,  weather,  and  climate)  [110].  The  use  of
lyophilization (freeze-drying) is limited to a laboratory equipped with
an  expensive  apparatus,  vacuum  freezing  dryer.  The  lyophilization
operates under the low temperature and absence of liquid water. Thus,
the freeze-drying helps to delay the deterioration and microbiological
reactions of microalgae, making the quality of the final product better
than other drying methods [192]. However, energy consumption for the
operation  of  the  freezing  dryer  is  several  times  higher  compared  to
sun-drying method [193]. The lyophilization is considered a desirable
method  for  production  of  expensive  products.  Spray-drying  has  been
widely used in the biomedical field to convert fluid materials into dried
powders [194]. The fluid materials are sprayed onto a chamber, and the
droplets  are  rapidly  dried  with  hot  gas  within  a  few  seconds  [195].
However,  spray-drying  is  not  suitable  for  microalgae,  because  the
method  can  damage  to  microalgae  [196].  Oven-drying  (con-
vective-drying) is considered a popular drying method for microalgae.
This method can be readily done by using different types of convection
oven. A wide range of drying temperature (room temperature to around
100  ̊C)  and  time  can  be  chosen  to  remove  water  from  harvested
microalgae. Also, the scale-up can be easily done by using large-scale
oven. Although it costs more than sun-drying method, the oven-drying
is  not  sensitive  to  outdoor  conditions.  Thus,  this  method  has  been
widely used in the most of countries for biomass drying.

3.3. Extraction of microalgae lipid

Prior  to  the  conversion  of  dried  microalgae  into  BD,  the  lipid  in
microalgae  is  needed  to  be  extracted.  because  the  lipid  is  used  as  a
feedstock for BD production [197]. Since the rigid microalgal cell wall is
composed  of  polysaccharide  complex  [198,199],  cell  disruption  is
required  to  extract  lipid  from  microalgae.  In  general,  cell  disruption
methods are divided into three types (mechanical, chemical, and bio-
logical methods). In mechanical cell disruption, various forms of energy
such  as  shear  force,  wave  energy,  and  heat  energy  can  be  applied  to
microalgae to decompose the cell walls [195]. The external energies are
introduced  to  cell  walls  in  different  ways  such  as  bead  milling,
high-pressure  homogenization,  ultrasound,  microwave,  steam  explo-
sion, radio-frequency heating, and hydrothermal treatment [200,201].
The  main  goal  of  mechanical  cell  disruption  is  to  destroy  rigid  cell
barriers  for  releasing  lipid  from  cell  body.  The  primary  advantage  of
mechanical  approach  is  its  outstanding  scalability  [197],  while  me-
chanical cell disruption methods intensively destroy cell wall, resulting
in accumulation of lipid residue onto cell walls. Thus, there could be loss
of lipid recovery during the extraction process [202]. To recover lipid
residue from cell walls, additional solvent extraction for lipid separation
could  be  required  to  improve  lipid  recovery  yield  as  summarized  in
Table 6.

Biological cell disruption uses algicidal treatments or cell lysis en-
zymes  for  cell  disruption  [197].  The  methods  remove  cellulose  and
pectin in cell wall of microalgae, and then extract lipid from microalgae
[203]. The major advantages of these approaches include mild operating
conditions and low energy consumption [200]. It was reported that use
of immobilized cellulase was efficient to extract lipid from C. vulgaris
[204]. However, the long process time and high cost of enzymes were
considered as challenges in biological cell disruption process [203]. This
approach  also  requires  additional  solvent  extraction  to  improve  lipid
recovery yield. At the current level of technical development, however,
lipid  yield  from  biological  cell  disruption  was  lower  than  other  cell
disruption methods (Table 6).

Solvent  extraction,  also  referring  to  chemical  cell  disruption,  is  a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)1010209

J.Y. Kim et al.

Table 6
Lipid recovery yield from C. vulgaris sing different cell disruption (lipid extraction) methods.

Cell disruption

Solvent extraction
(by volume)

Solvent to C. vulgaris
(by weight)

Extraction
condition

Lipid yield from dried
microalgae, [wt.%]a

Lipid content in
extract, [wt.%]a

Chloroform:methanol (2:1 by volume)

Hexane:methanol (2:1)

Homogenizer and ultrasound

Microwave

Ultrasound

Acid catalyzed hot water (sodium dodecyl

benzene sulfonate and H2SO4)

Ionic liquid ([Emim]DEP)

Super critical CO2:methanol (3:1)

Supercritical CO2:ethanol (13:1)
Enzyme (Celluclast:Novozym)

19:1

19:1

20:1

-

30:1

19:1

19:1

5.5:1 (v/w)

17:1 (v/w)
-

Chloroform:
methanol (2:1)
Heptane:iso-
propanol (2:1)
Hexane:iso-propanol
(2:1)
Hexane:methanol
(7:3)
Hexane

Chloroform:
methanol (2:1)

Room temp. for 6
h
Room temp. for 6
h
Room temp. for 1h

Room temp. for 40
min
◦
60

C for 3h

Room temp. for 6
h
Room temp. for 4
h
85
5.5 MPa
◦
50
C, 3.5 h
Room temp., 6 h

C for 0.5 h at

◦

20.5

18.5

23.8

22.9

21.0

25.6

23.5

17.6

9.8
8.5

54.2

95.1

65.9

76.2

-

96.1

94.0

84.8

40.3
97.3

Ref.

[212]

[212]

[213]

[214]

[215]

[216]

[212]

[210]

[211]
[204]

a Lipid content is estimated based on the amount of fatty acid methyl esters derivatized from transesterification reaction of fatty acids on lipid.

broadly  used  method  for  lipid  extraction  from  various  types  of  lipid
containing materials [20,205]. It is either solely used for lipid extraction
or  can  be  incorporated  with  mechanical/cell  disruption  processes  as
summarized in Table 6. Lipid recovery using the chemical cell disruption
is attractive due to its low energy demand and convenience in terms of
usage, storage, and transportation [206]. Different organic solvents such
as methanol, hexane, chloroform, dichloromethane, and their mixtures
have  been  commonly  utilized  for  lipid  extraction  considering  the  po-
larity of lipid types [207]. There are two types of microalgal lipids (e.g.,
neutral and polar lipids) existing in microalgae. Thus, selection of proper
solvents,  having  similar  polarity  with  lipids  is  of  great  importance  to
increase lipid recovery yield from microalgae [208]. One of the widely
used  solvent  mixtures  for  lipid  extraction  from  microalgae  has  been
chloroform  and  methanol  (2:1  by  volume)  co-solvent,  suggested  by
Folch [209].  This solvent mixture has been adapted for estimation of
lipid  content  in  microalgae.  However,  the  lipid  recovery  yield  using
chloroform/methanol co-solvent significantly varied depending on the
types  of  microalgae  and  the  operating  conditions.  In  case  of  lipid
extraction  from  C.  vulgaris,  other  solvents  such  as  hexane  or  hex-
ane/methanol  co-solvent  also  showed  higher  lipid  recovery  yield,
comparing  to  lipid  extraction  using  chloroform/methanol  as  summa-
rized in Table 6. To enhance the lipid recovery yield using the solvent
extraction,  the  effects  of  supercritical  CO2  [210,211]  or  ionic  liquids
[212] on lipid extraction yield were also studied. The combination of
mechanical/biological cell disruption with solvent extraction resulted in
up to 26 wt.% of lipid recovery (dry basis) when C. vulgaris was used as a
reactant (Table 6). However, the modification of solvent mixture and
cell disruption method should be carefully chosen for each microalga.

3.4. Conversion techniques of biodiesel (BD)

BD  is  a  mixture  of  fatty  acid  alkyl  esters,  and  it  can  be  produced
through alcoholysis of lipids, namely esterification of FFAs and trans-
esterification  of  glycerolipids,  mainly  triacylglycerols  (TAGs:  tri-
glycerides) in the presence of alcohols [217,218]. In general, biodiesel
consists of C12-C22  fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) or fatty acid ethyl
esters (FAEEs), because either methanol or ethanol is used as an alcohol
for  (trans)esterification  reactions.  For  BD  synthesis,  homogeneous
acid/base catalysts, heterogeneous acid/base catalysts, and enzymatic
catalysts have been used as conventional catalysts for (trans)esterifica-
tion of lipids extracted from microalgae [219]. Recently, non-catalytic
(trans)esterification  and  in  situ  transesterification  of  microalgae
without lipid extraction have been reported. Detailed discussions are in

the following sections.

3.4.1. BD production using homogeneous catalysts

In the current industry, 1st generation BD is commercially produced
using edible lipids that are extracted from oil-bearing crops and seeds (e.
g., soybean, rapeseed, corn, and palm oil). This is because high purity
TAG  (over  99.5%,  low  content  of  FFAs)  can  be  obtained  from  edible
lipids [220], and mass production of edible lipids is available from the
current  agricultural  industry.  The  edible  lipids  can  be  converted  into
FAMEs in the presence of methanol and homogeneous base catalysts (i.
◦
e., KOH and NaOH) at < 65
C [221]. Base-catalyzed transesterification
is broadly used method for conversion of TAGs into FAMEs, because the
reaction kinetics for base-catalyzed reaction is a few times faster than
acid-catalyzed  transesterification.  However,  homogeneous  base  cata-
lysts such as KOH and NaOH may suffer from saponification reaction
(soap formation) when the lipid feedstock contains high content of FFAs
[222]. Also, the reaction rate and BD yield from base-catalyzed trans-
esterification are vulnerable to the presence of impurities (water, and
other inorganic/organic species).

It  has  been  known  that  microalgal  lipids  contain  the  considerable
amount of FFAs and impurities (water, chlorophyll, etc.) [193]. Nguyen
et al. reported the content of FFAs (2.7 wt.%) in lipids extracted from
Chlorella vulgaris. Because of the low FFA content, they performed both
base-catalyzed and acid-catalyzed transesterifications for BD production
to compare the reaction efficiency between two methods [223]. At the
best conditions, acid-catalyzed reaction showed higher BD yield (96.6
wt.%) than base-catalyzed reaction (90.4 wt.%). However, the required
amount of acidic catalyst for the high BD yield at the same reaction time
was 10 times more than the required amount of base catalyst [223].

Direct  transesterification  (i.e.,  in  situ  transesterification)  without
lipid  extraction  pretreatment  step  has  an  advantage  of  simultaneous
lipid extraction and conversion of lipid into BD. The simpler unit oper-
ations have economically feasibility when the same reaction efficiency
can be achieved [224]. In this regard, in situ transesterification of lipid in
Chlorella  vulgaris  without  lipid  extraction  was  also  performed  [223].
However, the BD yields from in situ transesterification were remarkably
lower. Base-catalyzed reaction only showed 70.5 wt.% BD yield, using 8
times  more  KOH  catalyst  in  reference  to  base-catalyzed  trans-
esterification of Chlorella vulgaris after lipid extraction. Acid-catalyzed
reaction  had  94.6  wt.%  BD  yield  from  in  situ  transesterification,  but
the  reaction  utilized  16  times  more  acid  catalyst,  comparing  to
base-catalyzed  reaction  of  extracted  lipid  [223].  Other  studies  for
acid-catalyzed  reactions  of  microalgae,  Nannochloropsis  gaditana  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102010

J.Y. Kim et al.

Nannochloropsis salina, also showed that sulfuric acid enabled to achieve
higher  than  96  wt.%  BD  yield  from  microalgal  lipids  [225,226].  Kim
et al., compared in situ transesterification of wet N. gaditana using both
H2SO4  and  HCl  as  homogeneous  catalysts  [227].  This  study  reported
that HCl was less susceptible to the presence of moisture during in situ
transesterification. Even with 80 wt.% of water, the higher than 90 wt.%
of BD yield was observed for 2 h reaction at 95  ̊C using HCl as a catalyst.
At the same reaction conditions with a H2SO4 catalyst, more than 10 %
lower BD yield was shown [227]. This study also confirmed that chlo-
roform is an effective co-solvent for in situ transesterification of micro-
algae  in  the  presence  of  water.  The previous  studies  showed  that the
conversion of microalgal lipids using homogeneous acid catalysts is an
approach  to  achieve  the  highest  BD  yield  from  microalgae  [228].
However, the reaction kinetics for acid catalyzed transesterification was
slower than that for base catalyzed transesterification when the same
amount of catalyst was used [223,229]. Also, in situ transesterification
required up to 15 – 20 times more amount of catalysts.

To improve the reaction kinetics with lower content of acid and base
catalysts,  two-step  transesterifications  combining  both  acid  and  base-
catalyzed reactions were employed.  Suganya et al. reported that two-
step  transesterifications using H2SO4  and NaOH had up  to 90.6 wt.%
of  BD  yield  from  lipid  of  Enteromorpha  compressa  [230].  From
acid-catalyzed esterification, FFA concentration was reduced from 6.3 to
0.3  wt.%,  and  base-catalyzed  reaction  was  performed  for  trans-
esterification.  Another study produced BD from a two-step process of
Spirulina maxima using H2SO4 and KOH catalysts (86.1 wt.% BD yield)

[231]. At the current stage of technical developments for BD production
from  microalgal  lipids,  reaction  conditions  need  to  be  selectively
controlled based on the balances between cost (reaction time, amount
and  time of  homogeneous catalyst)  and  BD  yield.  Nevertheless,  more
vigorous  requirement  of  lipid  extraction  steps  of  microalgae  than  1st
generation oil-bearing crops make hard to use microalgae as promising
feedstocks for BD production. Therefore, the significant efforts should be
made  to  develop  efficient  catalysts  and  reaction  conditions  that  can
work for direct transesterification of microalgal lipids. The 1st  genera-
tion oil-bearing lipids show more than 95 wt.% BD yield at 65  ̊C with
homogeneous  base  catalysts  within  1  h.  To  make  microalgal  BD
economically  competitive,  the  similar  BD  yield  and  reaction  kinetics
should  be  achieved  through  direct  transesterification  of  microalgae
without lipid extraction process.

Acid-catalyzed  and  two-step  reactions  can  be  considerable  ap-
proaches until now (Table 7), but more studies using different feedstocks
and reaction conditions are suggested.

3.4.2. BD production using heterogeneous catalysts

The  use  of  solid  catalyst  (heterogeneous  catalyst)  is  considered  a
greener process than the use of homogeneous catalyst. It is noted that
wastewater is  generated from the washing process that is required to
remove  salts  derived  from  homogeneous  acid/base  catalysts  [232].
Because  solid catalysts  can be  easily  separated  from BD  reagents  and
reusable, the generation of wastewater can be avoided. Thus, there has
been  growing  interest  in  the  use  of  heterogeneous  catalysts  (solid

Table 7
Conversion methods of microalgal lipid into biodiesel.

Type of reaction

Species

Base-catalyzed

(Homogeneous)

Acid-catalyzed

(Homogeneous)

Base-catalyzed

(Heterogeneous)

Acid-catalyzed

(Heterogeneous)
Two-step catalyzed

Enzyme-catalyzed

Chlorella vulgaris
Chlorella Vulgaris a
Chlorella vulgaris
Chlorella vulgaris a
Nannochloropsis
gaditana a
Nannochloropsis
gaditana a
Nannochloropsis
salina
Chlorella vulgaris
Chlorella vulgaris
Chlorella vulgaris

Nannochloropsis
oculata
Nannochloropsis
oculata
Microalgae mixture a
Scenedesmus obliquus
Scenedesmus obliquus
Enteromorpha
compressa
Spirulina maxima

Nannochloropsis
oceanica
Scenedesmus sp.

Reaction conditions
Biomass to methanol
ratio (g/mL)

1:79
1:15
1:79
1:15
1:3.3

1:10 (80 wt.%
moisture)
1:10

1:8
1:10
1:8

1:12
1:12 (molar ratio)
1:20 (molar ratio)
1:12 (molar ratio)
1:9 (molar ratio)
1:12 (Molar ratio)
1:9 (molar ratio)
1:12 (molar ratio)

1:3 (molar ratio)

Non-Catalytic

Chlorella vulgaris a

1:8

Chlorella
protothecoides
Nannochloropsis sp. a
Spirulina platenisis

Nannochloropsis
salina a
Euglena gracilis a

1:19 (molar ratio)

1:8
1:12 (methanol/hexane
mixture)
1:10

1:10

Catalyst

Conversion

BD Yield
(wt.%)

Ref.

2.5 KOH/lipid by mole
19.9 KOH/lipid by mole
25.4 H2SO4/lipid by mole
40.4 H2SO4/lipid by mole
3 vol.% H2SO4 to ethanol

20 vol. % HCl to methanol/chloroform

2.5 vol.% H2SO4 to methanol

10 wt.% of KOH/Al2O3 to lipid
10 wt.% KF/CaO to biomass
12 wt.% KF/CaO to biomass

4 wt.% KOH/Fe2O3-Al2O3 to biomass
15 wt.% of WO3/ZrO2 to lipid
15 wt.% of Cr-Al oxide to lipid
1.5 wt.% H2SO4
1 wt.% KOH
1 wt.% H2SO4
0.75 wt.% of KOH
20 % of Novozym ® 435 to alcohol mixture
(methanol and butanol)
10 wt.% of Immobilized Pseudomonas
fluorescence lipase to lipid
Supercritical methanol (Hexane as a co-
solvent (6:1, v/w))
Supercritical methanol

Supercritical methanol
Supercritical methanol

Silica

Silica

◦

◦

◦

60
60
60
60
125

C, 2 h
C, 2 h
C, 2 h
C, 2 h
◦
C, 2h

◦

◦

95

C, 2h

◦

100

C, 1h

◦

60
C, 5h
60  ̊C, 0.5 h
60  ̊C, 1h with ultrasound
and microwave
60
C, 3h

◦

◦

◦

65
100
◦
80
60
60
60
65
25

◦

◦

◦

◦

C, 2 – 7 h
◦
C, 3 h

C, 6 h
C, 90 min
C, 70 min
C, 1.5 h
C, 20 min
C, 4 h

◦

35

C, 12 h

90.4
70.5
96.6
94.6
96.4

> 90

99.7

89.5
76.5
93.1

75.2

85.3

45.6 – 95.9
94.6
98.3
90.6

86.1

99.1

91.7

[223]
[223]
[223]
[223]
[225]

[227]

[226]

[245]
[246]
[246]

[247]

[247]

[248]
[249]
[238]
[230]

[231]

[259]

[249]

◦

290

C, 0.5 h, 7.2 Mpa

102.2

[260]

◦

320

C, 31 min 15.2 MPa

90.8

[261]

◦

C, 25 min, 8.3 Mpa
250
300  ̊C, 30 min, 6.61 MPa

◦

◦

380

380

C, 1.5 min

C, 1 min

84.2
99.3

95.1

≥ 96

[262]
[263]

[264]

[95]

1:60 (molar ratio)

20 wt.% CaMgO to lipid

1:60 (molar ratio)

10 wt.% CaMgO/Al2O3 to lipid

◦

60

C, 3h

a This study directly used microalgal biomass without extraction for FAME conversion (In-situ transesterification).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102011

J.Y. Kim et al.

catalysts)  for  BD  synthesis  [233].  Acidic/basic  sites  on  the  surface  of
solid catalysts can enable to esterify FFAs and to transesterify AGs (TAG,
DAG,  and  MAG).  Examples  of  solid  base  catalysts  include  metal  hy-
droxides, metal complexes, and metal oxides such as zirconium oxide
and alkaline earth metal oxides [234–236]. Alkaline earth metal oxides
(CaO,  MgO,  CaMgO,  SrO,  and  BaO)  are  of  great  interests  in  BD  pro-
duction  considering  their  cheap  price  [237,238].  However,  the  solid
base  catalysts  in  reference  to  homogeneous  base  catalysts  have  some
technical  demerits  such  as  mass  transfer  limitation  in  line  with  low
availability of activity sites per unit mass. To overcome these technical
drawbacks, various types of support (Al2O3, SiO2  and ZnO) for disper-
sion of active catalysts were used for evaluation of BD production per-
formances  [239].  Solid  base  catalysts  containing  potassium-based
compounds (KNO3, KOH, K2CO3, KF, and KI) on solid supports were also
studied in many papers for BD production from edible lipids [240–244].
The solid base catalysts also have been used for conversion of microalgal
lipids.

Ma et al. reported BD production from Chlorella vulgaris in presence
of KOH supported on Al2O3  [245]. The solid catalyst was made at the
◦
calcination temperature of 700
C for 2 h with 35 wt.% loading of KOH
on Al2O3. At the best condition (10 wt.% of KOH/Al2O3  at 60  ̊C), BD
yield was 89.5 ± 1.6 wt.% after 5 h of reaction (13.7 wt.% of BD yield
per  dried Chlorella vulgaris).  When KF/CaO catalyst  was used in  their
following  study,  BD  yield  was  76.5  wt.%  from  transesterification  of
Chlorella vulgaris at 60  ̊C for 30 min of reaction [246]. With an assistance
of ultrasound and microwave, BD yield enhanced to 93.1 wt.% [246].
Teo et al. utilized calcium magnesium oxide (CaMgO) and CaMgO/Al2O3
catalysts  for  conversion  of  Nannochloropsis  oculate  [247].  BD  yield
reached 75.2 wt.% with 20 wt.% of CaMgO catalyst loading at 60  ̊C for 3
h  of  reaction.  When  supported  catalyst  (10  wt.%  CaMgO/Al2O3)  was
used, the BD yield increased to 85.3 wt.% at the same reaction condition.
Kazemifard  et  al.  performed  in  situ  transesterification  of  mixed
microalgae  using  supported  KOH  catalyst  (KOH/Fe2O3-Al2O3)  at
different catalyst loading, methanol to biomass ratio, and reaction time
[248]. The reaction kinetics was proportionate to the catalyst loading
and  methanol  to  biomass  ratio.  At  the  optimized  condition,  BD  yield
increased from 45.6 to 95.9 wt.% as the reaction time increased from 2
to 7 h at 65  ̊C [248]. The result confirmed the possibility of high BD yield
from in situ transesterification of microalgae using solid base catalyst.
However, the required amount of catalyst was noticeably higher (4 wt.%
basis  on  biomass  content)  in  comparison  with  catalytic  trans-
esterification of microalgal lipids (Table 7).

Solid acid materials were also considered heterogeneous catalysts for
BD production from microalgal lipids. They are often comprised of ze-
olites, heteropoly acids, pure or modified oxides of transition metals like
tungsten and molybdenum [233]. Brønsted and Lewis acid sites on the
solid catalysts have catalytic capability for transesterification reaction.
Guldhe et al. used tungstated zirconia (WO3/ZrO2) as solid acid catalyst
for transesterification of Scenedesmus obliquus. BD yield using tunstated
zirconia  reached to 94.6 wt.% per lipid (26.73 wt.% per dried Scene-
desmus obliquus) at 100  ̊C for 3 h of reaction [249]. They also utilized
Cr-Al mixed oxide catalyst for conversion of lipids in Scenedesmus obli-
quus into BD. The catalyst exhibited 98.3 wt.% BD yield at 80  ̊C after 6 h
of reaction [238].

Solid  acid/base  catalysts  showed  up  to  98  wt.%  BD  yield  as  sum-
marized in Table 7. Nevertheless, the reuse of heterogeneous catalysts is
a still matter of concern. Also, reaction time required for heterogeneous
reaction was 5 times more than that for homogeneous transesterification
5 h in heterogeneous catalysis. For example, the stability of catalyst was
tested  after  in  situ  transesterification  of  mixed  microalgae  using  sup-
ported KOH catalyst (KOH/Fe2O3-Al2O3) [248]. After 6 cycles of 4 h in
situ  transesterification,  catalyst  performance  was  dropped  by  10  %.
Metal catalysts suffer from deactivation as the reaction time increases.
Indeed, impurities presented and reaction intermediates in feedstocks
result in the poisoning and leaching of active sites on catalyst surfaces
[250].  Also,  the  catalysts  could  have  deactivation  issues  due  to  the

destruction of their pore structure, which inhibits the diffusion of lipids
through the pores of solid catalysts [251]. Thus, catalyst regeneration is
required  [252].  In  some  cases,  catalyst  activation  is  done  through
thermal treatment at high temperature, but the activation process may
be difficult in other cases [253]. Although alkaline earth metal oxides
are considered as cheap catalysts, they are susceptible to leaching due to
their  hygroscopicity  [254].  In  addition,  extensive  washing  of  BD  is
required to remove residual alkaline earth elements to improve purity of
BD  [255].  Nevertheless,  the  studies  for  catalyst  stability  from  trans-
esterification  of  microalgal  biomass  are  not  vigorously  investigated.
Thus, the development of stable solid catalysts for the reaction is sug-
gested. Note that the price of heterogeneous catalysts is a few times more
expensive  than  homogeneous  ones  such  as  HCl,  H2SO4,  NaOH,  KOH,
etc.,  due  to  complicated  synthesis  procedures  of  supported  heteroge-
neous  catalysts  [233].  Thus,  the  required  lifetime  of  stable  catalysts
should  be  at  least  a  few  weeks  to  use  them  commercially,  but  ideal
lifetime could be a few hundred days of transesterification.

3.4.3. BD production using enzyme catalysts

The  transesterification  of  microalgal  lipids  using  enzymes  can  be
considered alternative process for BD production [220]. The enzymes
used  for  transesterification  can  be  physically  separated  from  BD  and
glycerol, and they can be also reused several times [256]. Most enzymes
are  sensitive  to  the  presence  of  concentrated  alcohols  in  the  medium
reaction. However, Novozym® 435 (Candida antarctica lipase immobi-
lized on microporous resin) and Lipozyme TL IM (Thermomyces lanugi-
nosus lipase immobilized on acrylic resin) show a high tolerance toward
to the deactivation regardless of presence of the methanol and ethanol
respectively  [257].  Therefore,  they  have  been  broadly  known  as  en-
zymes  for  BD  production  with  high  BD  yield  (> 91  wt.%)  [257].  An
important  parameters  for  the  transesterification  reaction  include  the
alcohol to oil (A/O: 3 to 4 by mole) ratio [256] and reaction temperature
(30 to 60  ̊C) [258]. Considering the operation conditions for BD pro-
duction with high yield from edible lipids, enzymatic transesterification
of  microalgal  lipids  was  studied  from  several  researchers.  Novozym®
435 [259] and pseudomonas fluorescence lipase [249] showed higher
than  91.7  wt.%  BD  yield  from  transesterification  of  Nannochloropsis
oceanica and Scenedesmus sp. at room temperature. To achieve high BD
yield from enzymatic reaction, the total reaction time required is 3 to 6
times
longer  than  transesterifications  using  acid/base  catalysts
(Table  7).  In  addition,  the  alcohol  tolerant  enzymes  including  Novo-
zym® 435 are a few times more expensive than other types of enzymes
and acid/base catalysts. Thus, the development of cheap and novel en-
zymes tolerant to alcohols is required to improve reaction kinetics of BD
production and economic viability of this process.

3.4.4. BD production using non-catalytic reaction

To avoid concerns about salt separation from homogeneous reactions
and  catalyst  deactivation  from  heterogeneous  reactions,  non-catalytic
transesterifications  have  gained  considerable  attentions.  For  realizing
transesterification  without  a  catalyst,  supercritical  methanol  was
introduced  [265].  Lipids  and  alcohols  are  not  miscible  at  normal
transesterification conditions due to their different dielectric constant
[266]. At supercritical conditions, methanol and ethanol make a single
phase of lipid/alcohol mixture because dielectric constant of methanol is
lowered enough to be mixed with lipid [267]. The increasing miscibility
of alcohols with lipids improves the collision frequency between them,
resulting  in  the  complete  transesterification  without  catalyst.  Trans-
esterification  using  supercritical  methanol  has  simpler  purification
process  because  no  separation  of  catalyst  is  needed.  To  offer  the  su-
percritical conditions, temperature and pressure beyond critical point of
methanol  (239
C  and  8.1  MPa)  are  needed  [268].  In  general,  the
non-catalytic  transesterification  was  performed  in  the  temperature
◦
range  of  250–400
C  and  the  pressure  range  of  20–65  MPa  [269].  To
increase  contact frequency  between  methanol  and  lipid [270],  excess
amount of methanol was used (methanol/lipid > 8.4 mole/mole) [271,

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102012

J.Y. Kim et al.

◦

272].  Saka  and  Kusdiana  reported  95%  yield  of  BD  produced  from
◦
transesterification of rapeseed oil in a batch reactor operating at 350
C
in  4  min  [268].  Ghoreishi  and  Moein  systematically  investigated  the
relationships between yield of FAMEs and various reaction conditions
such as temperature (240 – 280 C), methanol/oil ratio (10 – 50 by mole),
and reaction time (5 – 25 min) [273]. They reported the specific reaction
conditions to reach the highest yield of BD in light of various parame-
ters. The best result from their studies was 95.3 wt.% yield of BD from
waste vegetable oil at 271
C and 23.1 MPa for 20 min of reaction [273].
For  transesterification  of  microalgae  without  catalyst,  multiple
research teams studied the BD production using lipids extracted from
Chlorella  vulgaris  [260],  Chlorella  protothecoides  [261],  and  Nanno-
chloropsis sp. [262] under supercritical conditions (> 250  ̊C and 7.2 MPa)
(Table 7). The highest BD yield reached around 100 wt.% BD per lipid
after a half hour of reaction. Jazzar et al. utilized supercritical methanol
for in situ transesterification of a microalgae (Nannochloropsis gaditana)
for  BD  production  with  alteration  of  reaction  parameters  to  seek  the
optimal  reaction  condition.  The  yield  of  BD  from  direct  trans-
esterification of Nannochloropsis gaditana was 47.8 wt.% (8.7 wt.% of BD
◦
yield per dried microalgae) at 255
C and 21 MPa for 50 min [274]. Patil
et al. also used Nannochloropsis sp. as a model microalgal biomass for
transesterification with supercritical methanol. They reported 84.2 wt.
% of BD yield per lipid (42.1 wt.% of BD yield per dried biomass) at 250
◦
C  and  8.3  MPa  for  30  min [262]. Shirazi  et al.  added  n-hexane as  a
co-solvent for direct transesterification of Spirulina platenisis (methanol:
hexane: biomass = 8:4:1 (vol./vol./wt.)) [263]. BD yield from the re-
action was reached to 99.3 wt.% per lipid (15.89 wt.% of BD yield per
dried biomass) at 300

C and 6.61 MPa for 30 min.
To expedite the reaction kinetics for non-catalytic transesterification,
Kwon et al. used porous media [275]. Higher than 98 wt.% of BD yield
per lipid was achieved in transesterification of soybean oil in the pres-
◦
ence  of  porous  Al2O3  at  > 350
C  in  1  min.  Non-catalytic  trans-
esterification  with  porous  media  also  showed  high  yield  and  fast
reaction kinetics regardless of the existence of impurities [276–278]. In
situ transesterification of lipids containing feedstocks is indeed highly
practical, because this approach does not require lipid extraction from
oil-bearing  feedstocks  as  a  pretreatment  process.  Thus,  the  overall
operating costs can be significantly reduced.

◦

From their following studies, in situ non-catalytic transesterification
was  applied  to  a  variety  of  lipid-containing  waste  materials.  Sewage
sludge from wastewater treatment facilities was directly converted into
BD  with  95.1  wt.%  of  BD  yield  per  lipid  (13.3  wt.%  yield  per  dried
◦
sewage sludge) when SiO2 was used as porous material (380
C in 1 min)
[279].  Kim  et  al.  investigated  direct  transesterification  of  Nanno-
chloropsis oceanica, showing 14.4 wt.% of BD yield per dried microalgae
◦
at 380
C in 1.5 min [264]. Also, BD was produced from Euglena gracilis
using  non-catalytic  transesterification  in  the  presence  of  silica.  The
maximum yield of BD was higher than 96 wt.% per lipid and 24.8 wt.%
per  dried  Euglena  gracilis  after  1  min  of  reaction  at  380  ̊C  [95].
Non-catalytic  transesterification  showed  the  opportunity  to  convert
lipids  in  organic  feedstocks  into  BD  without  lipid  extraction.  In  the
presence of porous material, the non-catalytic transesterification, also
referring to pseudo-catalytic transesterification, expedited the reaction
rate, showing the maximum BD yield after 1 min of reaction [276–278].
For  more  practical  applications  of  non-catalytic  transesterification,
various biomass feedstocks having other impurities and different lipid
contents  should  be  studied.  Also,  the  large-scale  experiments  using
non-catalytic  transesterification  should  be  conducted  to  confirm  the
economic feasibility of this process for its commercialization.

4. Life cycle assessment (LCA) of BD production from microalgae

The BD production from microalgae has a potential to improve the
environmental benefits in reference to petrodiesel and 1st/2nd  genera-
tion BD. To evaluate the benefits of microalgae-derived BD, life cycle
assessment (LCA) studies have been mainly done in the last two decades

by different research groups. LCA studies were performed through the
upstream and downstream processes of microalgal BD production such
as  cultivation,  harvesting,  drying,  lipid  extraction,  transesterification
reaction,  recycling  of  residues  and  reactants,  final  disposal  of  waste
materials, and combustion of BD using internal combustion engine [280,
281].

Different environmental impacts such as global warming potential
(GWP), acidification and eutrophication potential, and energy require-
ment  from  each  process  were  measured  to  quantify  the  emissions  of
environmentally hazardous chemicals and their impacts into the envi-
ronment. GWP of a greenhouse gas accounts for its relative contribution
to the global warming resulting from the emission of the greenhouse gas.
GWP of CO2 is assigned a value of 1 as a reference. Thus, GWP and the
amount of CO2  emission to the environment from each BD production
process were important results for measurement of carbon neutrality of
microalgae-derived BD. The cultivation, drying of microalgae, and lipid
extraction from the dried microalgae are highly contributing factors to
GWP  and  CO2  emissions,  and  the  contribution  of  each  process  was
significantly  contingent  on  the  process  design.  In  LCA  studies,  four
cultivation techniques such as open raceway pond, open pond, photo-
bioreactor  (PBR),  and  hybrid  photobioreactor/raceway  pond  were
mainly considered for phototropic/heterotopic/mixotrophic growth of
microalgae [282].

Considering  that  phototrophic  cultivation  of  microalgae  consumes
CO2 as a carbon substrate for growth of microalgae, open pond was used
as a place for cultivation of microalgae. According to Sun et al., carbon
emission from the cultivation stage of Chlorella vulgaris in open raceway
(cid:0) 1 BD). In detail, CO2 emission was
pond was negative (- 104.8 g CO2 MJ
originated  from  the  use of  electricity,  nutrients, fertilizers,  and  water
supply  for  the  growth  of  microalgae,  but  the  consumed  CO2  for  the
growth of microalgae was more than generation of CO2 from the energy
supply. As such, the net CO2 emission was negative [283]. However, the
major drawbacks of cultivation in open systems are sensitivity to natural
environmental conditions. Thus, LCA comparing open pond systems and
closed photobioreactors were studied by different research teams. GWP
of airlift photobioreactor was 3.7-fold higher than open raceway pond at
the best weather condition for growth of microalgae, while open race-
way pond had up to 9.4 times higher GWP than that of photobioreactors
in a fall season in the Netherland [284]. Adesayanya et al., performed
LCA  studies  using  a  hybrid  cultivation  system  (photobioreactor  and
open raceway pond) for growth of Chlorella vulgaris and BD production.
At the scale of 1 ton BD production process, the hybrid cultivation sys-
tem integrated with pretreatment of microalgae, transesterification of
lipid,  post-treatment,  BD  combustion,  and  waste  recycling  processes
reduced up to 42% of CO2 emissions comparing to the entire petrodiesel
production  and  combustion  process  [280,285].  The  schematic  of  the
hybrid  cultivation  system  and  following  processes  for  BD  production
from Chlorella vulgaris is drawn in Fig 7. In addition, the requirement of
fossil  energy  for  microalgal  BD  production  was  fallen  by  38  %,
comparing to that of petrodiesel [280,285]. Nevertheless, the mitigation
of  GWP  from  microalgal  BD  production  was  not  comparative  to  that
from soybean oil BD (78 % GWP reduction), a commercially used BD
production  process.  As  summarized  in  Table  8,  the  cultivation  of
microalgae and their pretreatment processes require additional energy
input. Note that microalgae are cultivated in water. Thus, the manage-
ment  of  habitat conditions,  harvesting  and  drying  of  microalgae, and
lipid extraction from wet feedstocks necessitate energy input into the
multiple  processes  [280,282,286].  In  contrast,  BD  production  from
edible  crops  does  not  require  the  additional  energy  input  (Table  8).
Considering that the electricity production comes from the combustion
of fossil fuels, microalgae-derived BD can provide more CO2 production
into the environment comparing with the process for 1st generation BD
production. Thus, the use of renewable electricity derived from renew-
able energy sources can further reduce GWP of microalgae-derived BD.
Except for GWP and energy requirement, abiotic depletion, acidifi-
cation and eutrophication of lands and water, ozone layer depletion, and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102013

J.Y. Kim et al.

Fig. 7. Schematic of process flow diagram showing the material flow for microalgal cultivation in the hybrid system and the various stages in the downstream
processing of algal slurry to biodiesel. Reprinted from Ref. [280] with permission of Elsevier.

Table 8
Inputs of energy (electricity, heat, steam, etc.) for the microalgae to BD process.

Species

Unit

Cultivation

Harvesting

Drying

Extraction

Conversion

Ref.

(cid:0) 1 y

(cid:0) 1

(cid:0) 1 ha
toea kgBD
(cid:0) 1
toe tonbiomass
(cid:0) 1
toe y
-
toe kgBD
toe tonbiomass
(cid:0) 1
toe ha
toe tonCRO

(cid:0) 1 y
(cid:0) 1

(cid:0) 1

(cid:0) 1

d-1 y

1.79.E-04
5.46 E-04
0.207
3.56b
9.21.E-05
5.85.E-02
4.60.E-03
9.55.E-02

3.27 E-05
876
-
1.74.E-03
1.55.E-02
-
-

6.23.E-03
3.42.E-04
8.60
4.49b
2.58.E-03

2.16.E-03
5.40.E-04
1910
2.65b
3.51.E-03
8.43.E-02
-
-

2.60.E-03
4.79.E-02

2.15.E-05
2.93.E-04
2.18
5.28.E-05c
5.16.E-06
4.30.E-03
1.98.E-03
3.49.E-02

[288]
[291]
[292]
[293]
[294]
[295]
[296]
[297]

Chlorella
Chlorella vulgaris
Dunaliella salina
Nannochloropsis salina
Phaeodactylum tricornutum
Scenedesmus dimorphus
Soybean
Rapeseed

a ton of oil equivalent.
(cid:0) 1.
b unit: toe ha
(cid:0) 1.
c unit: toe kgBD
d crude rapeseed oil.

(cid:0) 1 y
(cid:0) 1 y

human  toxicity  are  important  environmental  impacts  that  should  be
considered. Acidification, eutrophication, and human toxicity of algal
BD are superior or comparable to those of BD derived from rape and
palm  oil  [287,288].  In  addition,  the  requirement  of  arable  lands  for
equivalent  amount  of  BD  production  using  microalgae  was  up  to  10
times lower than that using edible bio-oils [287,288].

To  make  microalgal  BD  production  process  more  environmentally
benign,  it  is  necessary  to  improve  the  process  efficiency  of  drying
microalgae  and  lipid  extraction  from  them  because  these  processes
contributed to more than 70 % of GWP [280,282,286]. As suggested in
Section  3.4,  direct  transesterification  of  microalgae  into  BD  without
lipid extraction could be considered a useful solution, because it can cost
down drying and lipid extraction processes. Note that LCA studies adapt
conventional  homogeneous  transesterification  reactions,  but  the  ho-
mogeneous reactions are currently not optimized process for conversion
of microalgal lipids. Through the previous sections, it was discussed that

other approaches such as processes at supercritical  conditions or/and
non-catalytic  transesterification  could  be  more  beneficial  in  terms  of
process  efficiency  and  environmental  impacts.  It  was  shown  that  the
non-catalytic transesterification conducted by Kwon et at., was highly
tolerant  to  water  and  organic/inorganic  impurities  in  biomass  [289,
290]. Thus, in situ non-catalytic transesterification can have the poten-
tial  to  significantly  reduce  CO2  emissions  and  energy  consumption
avoiding lipid extraction step during BD production using microalgae.
However, LCA studies using other approaches have not yet been carried
out to our best knowledge. Thus, it is suggested performing LCA studies
of microalgal BD formation at supercritical conditions and non-catalytic
transesterification.

Along  with  the  development  of  more  efficient  transesterification
process  tolerant  to  water  and  impurities,  the  enhancement  of  lipid
productivity  in  different  microalgae  can  be  considered  promising
studies.  The  improvement  of  lipid  productivity  can  significantly  save

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102014

J.Y. Kim et al.

costs and environmental impacts from cultivation and drying processes
of microalgae per unit amount of BD production.

A  recent  study  investigated  the  relationships  between  cultivation
conditions and lipid yield/productivity during cultivation of E. gracilis
[95]. E. gracilis accumulates lipid and paramylon, a particular form of
carbohydrate,  under  aerobic  condition.  The  paramylon  is  then  con-
verted into lipid under anaerobic condition through wax ester fermen-
tation reaction. To maximize lipid productivity, E. gracilis was cultivated
under  aerobic  condition,  and  then  grown  under  anaerobic  condition
after 7 days of cultivation. In addition, different cultivation techniques
(phototrophic,  heterotrophic,  and  mixotrophic  cultivations)  and  con-
centrations of nutrients (glucose as C substrate, asparagine/glycine/urea
as  N  substrates,  and  potassium  phosphate  monobasic  as  P  substrate)
[95].  In  different  cultivation  conditions,  the  lipid  yield  followed  the
order:  heterotrophic  > mixotrophic  > phototrophic  mode  (Fig.  8(a)).
This means that the photobioreactor is not necessary to obtain high lipid
yield, thereby suggesting the reduction of electricity cost arising from
(cid:0) 1)
light source. The maximum lipid productivity (0.0984 g L
was achieved at 6 d of E. gracilis cultivation under nitrogen rich condi-
tion and heterotrophic mode (Fig. 8(b)). Indeed, the lipid productivity is
9  times  faster  than  lipid  productivity  (0.011  to  0.014)  from  other
microalgae  such  as  Chlorella  vulgaris,  Tetraselmis  suecica,  and  Nanno-
chloropsis sp. [298].

(cid:0) 1  lipid d

However,  the  price  of  nitrogen-containing  substrate  needs  to  be
further  reduced  to  make  the  heterotrophic  cultivation  more  practical
[34]. Carbon and nitrogen rich waste such as food and biomass waste
could  be  considered  essential  nutrients  for  cultivation  of  microalgae
[128],  also  conducting  waste  management.  At  the  current  level  of
technical development, this approach has not been intensively studied.
Thus, there are still many rooms to improve the process efficiency of
microalgae-derived BD production.

5. Techno-economic analysis of BD production from microalgae

Several studies carried out techno-economic analysis to estimate the
cost  of  the  microalgal  BD  production  [205,298-300].  At  the  scale  of
500-ton annual lipid production from Chlorella vulgaris, the operation
cost  using  phototrophic  (autotrophic)  cultivation  was  65  times  more
expensive than phototrophic cultivation system [205]. The production
cost of 1 kg lipid from heterotrophic cultivation of Chlorella vulgaris was
$7.5, while that from phototrophic mode was $480, respectively. This
result was ascribed to the slower growth rate of Chlorella vulgaris under

phototrophic mode, thereby requiring additional water supply and en-
ergy  input  for  light  sources.  Although,  heterotrophic  cultivation  of
Chlorella  vulgaris  showed  better  economic  feasibility  than  the  photo-
trophic cultivation, the current production costs of lipid and BD from
microalgae  were  not  competitive  with  those  from  edible  crops  and
petrodiesel. For example, the sale price of commercially used BD is less
(cid:0) 1  BD  including  tax  and  all  expenses,  and  the  estimated
than  $2  kg
(cid:0) 1  BD  [301].  However,  the  cost  of
production  cost  was  around  $1  kg
microalgal BD is estimated to be a few times more expensive. Consid-
ering that cultivation, harvesting, drying, and lipid extraction processes
account for about 80% of operation cost during microalgal BD produc-
tion, it can be estimated that BD production cost is in the range of $4 to
$5 at the current level of technical development. Lam et al. reported that
microalgal BD prices cultivated from phototrophic mode in open pond
and closed-photobioreactor could be 2.5 and 4.1 times expensive than
petroldiesel, respectively [302]. Another study estimated the production
cost of BD from Botryococcus braunii reflecting the recycling of solvents
from lipid extraction and transesterification reaction [303]. When the
annual BD production capacity was 50 ton, the best BD production cost
(cid:0) 1  BD using base-catalyzed transesterification with NaOH.
was $3.5 kg
The production cost was heavily relied on BD yield (1 – 65 wt.%), sol-
(cid:0) 1).
vent  recycling  (0  –  90  %),  and  plant  capacity  (1  –  500  ton  yr
Although the recovery of catalyst can reduce the production cost of BD,
it could not be reflected in this estimation, because the separation of
homogeneous base catalyst (NaOH) from glycerol, methanol, and water
was rarely achieved [303].

The  techno-economic  analysis  results  suggested  that  the  improve-
ment  of  BD  yield  and  lipid  productivity,  and  the  use  of  non-catalytic
transesterification  without  lipid  extraction  can  significantly  lower  BD
production cost. As summarized in Table 7, BD yield using microalgae
can  reach  higher  than  95  wt.%  from  transesterifications  with  hetero-
geneous  catalysts  and  without  catalyst.  However,  the  current  techno-
economic  analysis  studies  adapted  homogeneous  base-catalyzed  re-
actions.  The  homogeneous  base-catalyzed  reaction  has  been  widely
adapted for 1st generation BD production, but the approach may not be
the most appropriate one for microalgal BD formation in terms of eco-
nomic viability and energy consumption.

Cultivation  of  edible  crops  has  long  been  established,  while  the
microalgae cultivation process has not yet been optimized. Therefore,
there are many rooms to improve the microalgae yield and lipid pro-
ductivity, contributing to the cost of microalgal BD production process.
For  example,  the  development  of  cost-effective  C/N/P-containing

Fig. 8. (a) Lipid content of E. gracilis from three trophic modes, and (b) lipid productivity of E. gracilis under high nitrogen concentration condition. Reprinted from
[95] with permission of Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102015 Cultivation time, [d]12345678910FAs Productivity, [gFA L-1 d-1]0.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.14Average value : 0.0984 g FA L-1 d-1Maximum value : 0.131 g FAL-1d-1(6 d)LipidProductivity,[g lipidL-1d-1](a)(b)

J.Y. Kim et al.

substrates  for  microalgae  growth can help  to mitigate  the production
cost of microalgal BD.

6. Large scale microalgae production

For  the  practical implementation of  microalgae  as  feedstocks  (i.e.,
lipids)  of  commercial  BD,  it  is  of  great importance  to  carry  out  large
scale microalgae production and their conversion into BD. Scale-up of
microalgae  cultivation  is  not  a  facile  process  due  to  the  changes  of
numerous cultivation conditions such as light intensity, dissolved oxy-
gen  concentration,  mixing  speed,  etc.  The  geological  location  of  the
cultivation  system  also  significantly  influences  microalgae  and  lipid
productivity  when  phototrophic  cultivations  are  used  for  growth  of
microalgae.  According  to  a  model  study  for  estimation  of  microalgae
production and lipid productivity in the USA, south western states such
as  New  Mexico,  Texas,  Florida,  and  Hawaii  showed  higher  lipid  pro-
ductivity  potential  comparing  to  northeastern  and  mountain  western
states due to higher degree solar irradiance and moderate temperatures
[304]. Also, the previous studies for large scale microalgae production
have mainly used phototrophic cultivation systems using natural sun-
light as a light source in different locations, where solar irradiation can
be applied in plenty, such as China, India, Iran, Malaysia, Italy, Portugal,
and United Kingdom (Table 9).

Comparing  to  heterotrophic  and  mixotrophic  cultivation  systems,
biomass productivity and lipid productivity were lower in phototrophic
mode (Table 9). The results of large-scale production well agreed with
results  from  small  scale  microalgae  cultivation  systems  mentioned  in
Sections 2.3 and 3.4. Although the microalgae and lipid productivities
were higher under heterotrophic condition compared to phototrophic
condition, only a few studies have been conducted under heterotrophic
cultivation  in  large-scale  (>100  L)  until  now.  Thus,  the  large-scale
production  of  microalgae  under  heterotrophic  conditions  needs  to  be
done for practical use of microalgal BD.

One  of the main  hurdles for  mass production of microalgae  is the
supply  of  resources  such  water,  nutrients,  and  wide  cultivation  sites
[317]. To circumvent these issues, diverse strategies have been applied.
In detail, the cultivation sites for microalgae should not compete with

(cid:0) 2  d

(cid:0) 1  d

(cid:0) 1  d

(cid:0) 2  day

(cid:0) 2  day

(cid:0) 1  (0.042 g L

(cid:0) 1  (0.085  g  L

(cid:0) 1  (0.026 and 0.027 g L

(cid:0) 1) and Micractinium sp. (2.28 g m

arable lands and water reservoirs for cultivation of food crops. Several
studies cultivated different types of microalgae in open ponds located in
the desert area, where edible crops cannot be cultivated [311,314,318].
The average  microalgae productivity  of  Monoraphidium dybowskii and
(cid:0) 1) in 1,000 L scale
Micractinium sp. were 8 g m
production in desert area of China. However, Podohedriella falcata could
not  be  cultured  outdoors.  The  lipid  productivity  of  Monoraphidium
(cid:0) 1)
dybowskii (2.6 g m
were  similar  in  1,000  L  scale  production,  and  the  productivity  was
comparable  with  other  results  obtained  from  freshwater  and  arable
lands (Table 9). The maximum biomass productivity of Monoraphidium
(cid:0) 1)  from
(cid:0) 2  d
dybowskii  reached  to  17  g  m
semi-continuous cultivation system in 40,000 L scale production [311].
In the open raceway pond using underground water from the desertifi-
cation area, the lipid productivities of Chlorella sp. and Monoraphidium
(cid:0) 1),
(cid:0) 2  d
dybowskii were 5.15 and 5.35 g m
respectively [314]. It was also reported that Chlorella pyrenoidosa was
cultivated in desert region using domestic wastewater as a cultivation
media  [318].  During  the  growth  of  Chlorella  pyrenoidosa  in  19  days,
chemical  oxygen  demand,  NH4-N,  and  total  phosphorous  were
consumed by 78, 95, and 81 %, respectively, for growth of the micro-
alga. The highest concentration of Chlorella pyrenoidosa in the outdoor
(cid:0) 1  [318]. The concentration is com-
open raceway pond was 1.17 g L
parable to other results summarized in Table 9. Biondi et al. also used
industrial wastewater from the syngas plant as nutrients for cultivation
of  Nannochloropsis  sp.  and  Scenedesmus  sp.  [310].  Prior  to  use  of  the
wastewater as nutrients, inorganic species in the wastewater such as Ni,
V, and Fe were removed. The productivity of Nannochloropsis sp. grown
in wastewater was nearly 90% of the productivity from artificial culti-
vation medium (control). Scenedesmus sp. showed 80% of productivity
when  it  was  grown  in  10%  wastewater.  The  highest  productivity  of
(cid:0) 1  [310].
Nannochloropsis  sp.  in  wastewater  was  about  0.35  g  L
Therefore,  it  was  of  indicative  that  the  cultivation  of  microalgae  in
desert area using wastewater as nutrients could be considered to miti-
gate the hurdles for mass production of microalgae. Nevertheless, only a
few  studies  were  previously  carried  out  to  evaluate  the  feasibility  of
waste  materials  and  non-arable  lands  for  cultivation  of  microalgae.

(cid:0) 1  d

(cid:0) 1  d

Table 9
Mass production of microalgae (working volume: > 500 L).

Species

Working
volume (L)

Cultivation
system

Trophic mode

Microalgae
concentration (g
(cid:0) 1)
L

Microalgae
productivity (g
(cid:0) 1)
(cid:0) 1 d
L

Lipid
content
(%)

Lipid
productivity (g
(cid:0) 1)
(cid:0) 1 d
L

Facility
location
(country)

Ref.

Tetraselmis sp.

100,000

Graesiella sp.

40,000

Neochloris
aquatica

2,500

Nannochloropsis

800

oceanica
Scenedesmus

quadricauda
Nannochloropsis

sp.

800

2,000

Nannochloropsis

590

sp.

Monoraphidium
dybowskii
Nannochloropsis

oceanica
Botryococcus
braunii

Monoraphidium
dybowskii
Scenedesmus
acuminatus

Chlorella

protothecoides

40,000

8,000

5,000

40,000

5,300

8,000

Tubular
photobioreactor
Open raceway
pond
Open tank

Tubular
photobioreactor
Tubular
photobioreactor
Open raceway
pond
Wall panel
photobioreactor
Open raceway
pond
Open raceway
pond
Open raceway
pond
Open raceway
pond
Tubular
photobioreactor
Stirred tank
bioreactor

Phototrophic

Phototrophic

Phototrophic

-

-

-

Phototrophic

1.73

Phototrophic

2.03

Phototrophic

-

Phototrophic

0.38

0.08 ± 0.01

10

-

Portugal

[305]

0.044

31.8

0.015

China

[306]

3.9 ± 0.002

-

-

-

-

-

0.11

0.027

India

[307]

United
Kingdom
United
Kingdom
Iran

Italy

[308]

[308]

[309]

[310]

China

[311]

20.4-30.8

12.6-21.5

52

64

30

0.12

0.11

-

-

Phototrophic

-

0.09

Phototrophic

0.323 ± 0.015

-

28 ± 1

0.005

China

[312]

Phototrophic

Phototrophic

Heterotrophic &
phototrophic
Heterotrophic

-

-

-

12.8

0.169

0.089

-

-

-

-

Malaysia

[313]

29.9

0.027

China

[314]

35.68

0.045

China

[315]

44.3

-

China

[316]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102016

J.Y. Kim et al.

Thus, there is a high probability of further improvement in large-scale
production of microalgae.

7. Integrated processes for valorization of microalgae

Lipid  part  of  microalgae  is  used  as  a  feedstock  for  biodiesel  pro-
duction. As discussed in Table 2, lipid contents in different microalgae
are  varied  between  6  and  63  wt.%.  In  addition  to  lipid,  microalgae
contain carbohydrate, protein and other organic compounds as a result
of their metabolisms. Thus, the conversion of all the organic compart-
ments  in  microalgae  into  the  value-added  products  will  be  of  great
importance  to  make  microalgae  more  promising  feedstocks  for
biorefineries.

For biodiesel production, lipid in microalgae is used as a feedstock
through transesterification reaction. Remained solid residues after bio-
diesel production are carbohydrate- and protein-rich solid waste mate-
rials. To upgrade the solid residues into value-added products, already
established biological/chemical processes for biomass conversion can be
also  used  such  as  fermentation,  pyrolysis,  gasification,  hydrothermal
liquefaction,  anaerobic  digestion  (AD),  and  other  biological/chemical
processes (Fig. 9). This section briefly introduces the conversion plat-
forms and discusses advantages of microalgae to be used as feedstocks in
the  conversion  platforms,  comparing  to  1st  and  2nd  generation
biomasses.

7.1. Fermentation

Carbohydrate  in  solid  residues  can  be  fermented,  resulting  in  for-
mations  of  bioalcohols  (i.e.,  bioethanol  and  biobutanol),  biogas,  and
other short-chained organic compounds including acetone [319]. The
fermentation is an advantageous approach when microalgal biomass is
used as a feedstock due to relatively lower lignin content in microalgae
in reference to other biomass-derived waste materials. Lignin has a rigid
and complex structure, which is rarely degraded through fermentation
reaction. In addition, bacteria and yeast are attached on the lignin, not
working  for  conversion  of  (hemi)cellulosic  carbohydrates  and  sugars
into biofuels [320]. As such, additional pretreatment processes such as
acidic hydrolysis and separation of lignin are required, increasing the
entire cost of the fermentation processes [321]. However, lower lignin
content  in  microalgae  can  improve  reaction  kinetics  of  fermentation
reaction  and  yield  of  biofuels,  not  requiring  vigorous  pretreatment
processes.

For bioalcohol production, yeast fermentation is used. Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is a broadly adapted and commercial yeast to convert glucose
and  starch  into  bioethanol  [322].  One  step  reaction  for  simultaneous
saccharification  of  carbohydrate  and  fermentation  of  sugary  com-
pounds,  or  two  step  reactions  in  a  series  of  saccharification  and
fermentation can be used [322]. Ethanol yield from saccharification and
fermentation of microalgal biomass using Saccharomyces cerevisiae has

been  studied  by  different  research  groups  [323].  From  simultaneous
saccharification and fermentation processes without acidic hydrolysis,
bioalcohol yields reached up to 86 wt.% from fermentation of Chlamy-
(cid:0) 1
domonas mexicana [324]. A volumetric productivity was 0.22 g L
during 48 h of reaction, which was highly compatible result in refence to
fermentation  of  sugar-containing  1st  generation  biomass.  Higher  bio-
ethanol yield was also reported from different research groups (≥ 92 wt.
%), but the studies used sulfuric acid for hydrolysis of carbohydrate in
microalgae  (Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii  and  Mychonastes  afer)  [325].
During  the  conversion  of  sugar  into  ethanol,  CO2  is  evolved  as  a
byproduct.  When  the  bioethanol  production  facility  recycles  evolved
CO2  for growth of microalgae under phototrophic cultivation, the pro-
cess can be more sustainable.

(cid:0) 1 h

Bacterial fermentation is studied for hydrogen gas production using
hydrogenase and/or nitrogenases [319]. High-nitrogen content existing
in protein-rich solid residues of microalgae can be used as an nutrient for
anaerobic production  of hydrogen  (H2) through  the bacterial  fermen-
tation.  At  the  current  level  of  technological  development,  the  bio-
hydrogen production from microalgae has a few advantages yet in terms
of  process  efficiency  and  commercialization,  requiring  more  process
improvement studies.

7.2. Thermochemical processes (pyrolysis, gasification, and hydrothermal
liquefaction)

Both  pyrolysis  and  gasification  are  thermochemical  processes  that
convert solid residues of microalgae into three phase products (biochar,
bio-oil, and permanent gas). In contrast, hydrothermal liquefaction uses
wet biomass (i.e., microalgae slurry) to produce energy denser bio-oil.
Reaction  mechanisms  for  them  are  similar,  but  target  products,  reac-
tion  conditions,  and  conditions  of  feedstocks  are  different.  Pyrolysis
applies heat energy to solid microalgae under anoxic conditions, thereby
thermally degrading solid material into liquid (bio-oil) and gas (syngas)
[326].  Also,  biochar formation occurs  through  carbonization reaction
due to deoxygenation and dehydrogenation of biomass [327,328]. The
operating temperatures for pyrolysis are in the ranges of 300 to 800  ̊C
[329].  To  selectively  obtain  high  yield  of  biochar,  bio-oil  or  syngas,
operating temperature and heating rate are controlled. In general, more
than 50 wt.% of biochar [330] or bio-oil [331] can be produced. Heating
values of bio-oil and biochar can be more than doubled in reference to
that of microalgal solid residues [332]. Thus, energy balance of biofuels
obtained  from  pyrolysis  is  positive.  Pyrolysis  does  not  require  pre-
treatment of residual solid obtained after biodiesel production process,
because water content in microalgae can be readily dried in a pyrolysis
reactor.

Gasification aims to produce syngas from microalgae. For the gasi-
fication,  oxidant  such  as  steam,  air,  or  carbon  dioxide  is  used  for
oxidation of solid carbon-based material, resulting in H2, CO, and CO2
formation. In reference to pyrolysis, higher temperature (up to 1,300  ̊C)

Fig. 9. Conversion platforms for microalgae into value-added products.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102017 MicroalgaeWaterCO2SunlightNutrientCarbohydrateEsterification/TransesterificationFermentationPyrolysisLiquefactionGasificationAnaerobic digestionBiodieselBio-oil, Syngas, charBio-oilSyngasBiogas (CH4, CO2, etc.,)Bioalcoholand hydrogenLipidPhotobiological reactionBio hydrogen

J.Y. Kim et al.

is  required.  Syngas,  mainly  composed  of  H2  and  CO  with  CO2,  is
currently  acquired  from  chemical  processes  of  fossil  fuels  [333,334].
When microalgae are used as feedstocks for syngas formation, the con-
sumption  of  fossil  fuels  can  be  reduced,  and  CO2  evolved  from  the
gasification can be reused for growth of microalgae.

Hydrothermal liquefaction is an aqueous phase reaction for thermal
conversion of microalgae slurry into higher energy density bio-oil. At
near critical conditions (≥ 300  ̊C and ≥ 10 MPa) and more harsh con-
ditions, wet feedstocks become bio-oil. At milder conditions, solid bio-
coal  also  can  be  obtained  [335].  Currently,  this  process  is  used  for
direct  conversion  of  microalgae  slurry  into  bio-oil,  because  aqueous
phase  reaction does  not  require  harvesting and  water  drying process,
making  hydrothermal  liquefaction  more  economically  feasible  [336].
When  this  process  is  incorporated  with  biodiesel  production  process
using  base-/acid-catalyzed  (trans)esterification,  above  mentioned  ad-
vantages could be disappeared. Thus, the development of water-tolerant
in situ  (trans)esterification is  desirable study. Nevertheless, integrated
(trans)esterification and thermo-chemical processes could be economi-
cally  beneficial,  considering  that  lipid,  carbohydrate,  and  protein  in
microalgae are fully valorized instead of its disposal. Thus, integrated
biodiesel  and  pyrolysis  processes  could  be  considered  more  effective
conversion platforms.

7.3. Anaerobic digestion (AD)

AD is a broadly used biochemical process for treatment of a variety of
organic  waste  materials.  It  uses  bacterial  and  archaeal  consortia  to
transform organic compartments of waste materials into biogas, largely
composed of CH4  and CO2  under anoxic conditions [337]. The target
product  from  the  AD  of  organic  waste  is  CH4  through  four  steps  of
biochemical  reactions  such  as  hydrolysis,  acidogenesis,  acetogenesis,
and methanogenesis [244]. H2 gas is also generated as an intermediate,
but  it  is  ultimately  converted  into  CH4.  CH4  and  CO2  can  be  further
upgraded into syngas (H2 and CO) through a chemical reaction, namely
methane dry reforming reaction [334,338]. In addition to biogas, AD
generates solid digestate which can be directly used a fertilizer [337].
AD  does  not  necessarily  require  pretreatment  process,  making  this
process  universally  available.  However,  high  nitrogen  content  in
microalgal  protein  inhibits  methanogenesis  during  AD  process  [339].
Considering  that  microalgal  protein  is  a  promising  and  valuable
nutrient, the separation of microalgal protein prior to AD process could
be beneficial. There have been vigorous recent efforts to develop effi-
cient process for extraction of protein from microalgae [340,341].

8. Challenges and future prospects

Production of BD from microalgae can have environmental benefits
in terms of GWP, acidification and eutrophication of cultivation sites,
and human toxicity in comparison with BD derived from rape and palm
oil [287,288]. In addition, the requirement of arable lands for equivalent
amount  of  BD  production  using  microalgae  could  be  fallen  by  90  %
comparing  to 1st  generation BD production [287,288]. At the current
level of technical development, however, the overall production cost of
microalgal BD is 2 to 4 times expensive than petrodiesel [342]. To make
the microalgal BD commercially available, the further improvement of
process efficiency should be considered.

The development of microalgal BD has emerged in the last two de-
cades,  but  the  studies  have  mainly  focused  on  the  conversion  of
microalgal lipids using already established processes in 1st  generation
BD  production.  In  comparison  with  edible  crops,  microalgae  include
higher water content and more organic/inorganic impurities. To achieve
high  BD  yield  from  microalgae,  more  energy  intensive  pretreatment
processes such as vigorous dewatering, drying of microalgae and lipid
extraction as well as additional esterification reaction have been sug-
gested to remove the water and impurities prior to homogeneous base-
catalyzed  transesterification  (BD  production  process).  This  was

because  the  performance  of  homogeneous  base-catalyzed  reaction  is
significantly dropped  in  the  presence  of  the  impurities. However,  the
suggested  complicated  and  energy-intensive  processes  increased  the
microalgal  BD  production  cost  more  than  doubled,  comparing  to  1st
generation  BD,  because  the  energy  requirement  and  cost  of  the  pre-
treatment  processes  account  for  more  than  half  of  entire  production
process. Therefore, the development of impurity tolerant BD conversion
process should be considered one of promising future studies. One of
examples  include  thermally  induced  non-catalytic  transesterification
reaction using porous media, which allowed the transesterification in
the  presence  of  high  concentration  of  water  and  other  impurities.
However, this process showed the best BD production yield (> 95 wt.%)
around 350  ̊C, requiring further process development to have the high
yield at lower temperature as discussed in Section 3.4.

The selection of proper microalgal species and improvement of their
lipid productivity can improve the cultivation efficiency. In the previous
studies, microalgae including high lipid content have been used as BD
feedstocks. In addition to high lipid content, the growth rate of species
and  the  best  cultivation  conditions  also  need  to  be  considered  to
improve  the  overall  production  efficiency  and  cost.  Nevertheless,  the
studies for lipid productivity and growth rate of microalgae were not
widely  studied  in  the  previous  microalgal  BD  production  studies.  As
discussed in previous sections, the cultivation systems (hetero/photo/
mixotrophic  modes),  locations,  and  nutrients  have  significantly
contributed  to  growth  rate  of  microalgae  and  lipid  as  well  as  overall
production  cost.  However,  the  comprehensive  and  systematical  in-
vestigations  of  relationships  between processes  and  lipid productivity
have not yet been completely done. In the previous studies, phototrophic
cultivation systems were mainly used for mass scale growth of micro-
algae, while heterotrophic cultivation seems to have higher lipid pro-
ductivity and possibly lower production cost (Table 9 and Fig. 8). Thus,
there are still many rooms to improve lipid productivity and to lower
product cost in terms of cultivation process as discussed in Sections 4
and 6.

The studies for further comprehensive economic and environmental
analyses of microalgal BD can help to speed up the commercialization of
microalgal  BD.  In  the  previous  studies,  a  variety  of  LCA  and  techno-
economic studies have focused on only a few parts of the whole pro-
cess. Also, the parameters of the analysis were adapted from processes of
1st generation BD production process, which may be not the proper for
microalgal BD production. For these reasons, the environmental impacts
and economic viability of microalgal BD are still debating. Although it is
very  difficult  to  consider  the  whole  process,  from  cultivation  to  BD
production, in-depth analysis that covers all these processes should be
carried out, reflecting the best processes for microalgal BD production.

9. Conclusions

The  present  review  shed  light  on  the  potential  of  microalgae  as  a
biodiesel (BD) feedstock and suggested strategies to achieve economic
feasibility  of  microalgal  BD  for  their  commercialization.  The  major
technical  challenges  in  microalgal  BD  production  processes  include
energy-intensive and expensive pretreatment processes: (1) cultivation,
(2) dewatering, and (3) drying of microalgae, (4) lipid extraction from
lipid, (5) removal of free fatty acids and inorganic impurities. Since the
current  microalgal  BD  production  processes  generally  use  base-
catalyzed  transesterification  process,  which  is  known  as  fast  process
for  conversion  of  lipids  in  edible  crops  into  BD.  Since  the  trans-
esterification processes are vulnerable to high concentrations of water
and  impurities  in  microalgae,  vigorous  dewatering/drying  of  BD  and
lipid  extraction  were  required  to  prepare  high  purity  lipids  from
microalgae. Instead of using the techniques established for 1st  genera-
tion BD, a novel transesterification process, namely non-catalytic reac-
tion  could be  used as  alternative  due to  its  tolerant to impurities.  To
improve the overall process efficiency, the enhancement of cultivation
systems was also suggested, because there are many rooms to improve

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102018

J.Y. Kim et al.

hydrodeoxygenation of biomass-derived oxygenates over heterogeneous
catalysts. Green Chem 2019;21:3715–43.

[42]

microalgae and lipid productivity.

Declaration of Competing Interest

There is no competing interest.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea  (NRF)  grant  funded  by  the  Korea  government  (MSIT)
(2019R1A2C2087449  and  2020R1A2C1010748).  This  work  was  also
supported  by  Korea  Environment  Industry  &  Technology  Institute
(KEITI)  through  Project  to  develop  eco-friendly  new  materials  and
processing technology derived from wildlife, funded by Korea Ministry
of Environment (MOE) (2021003280004).

References

[1] Speight JG. Chapter 2 - refinery feedstocks. In: Speight JG, editor. Fouling in

refineries. Boston: Gulf Professional Publishing; 2015. p. 31–64.

[2] Huber GW, Iborra S, Corma A. Synthesis of transportation fuels from biomass:

chemistry, catalysts, and engineering. Chem Rev 2006;106:4044–98.

[3] Berner RA. The long-term carbon cycle, fossil fuels and atmospheric composition.

Nature 2003;426:323–6.

[4] Dresselhaus MS, Thomas IL. Alternative energy technologies. Nature 2001;414:

332–7.

[5] Mathews JA. Carbon-negative biofuels. Energy Policy 2008;36:940–5.
[6] Kim S, Kwon EE, Kim YT, Jung S, Kim HJ, Huber GW, et al. Recent advances in

[7] Darshini D, Dwivedi P, Glenk K. Capturing stakeholders views on oil palm-based
biofuel and biomass utilisation in Malaysia. Energy Policy 2013;62:1128–37.
[8] Demirbas A. Political, economic and environmental impacts of biofuels: a review.

Appl Energy 2009;86:S108–SS17.

[9] Aditiya HB, Mahlia TMI, Chong WT, Nur H, Sebayang AH. Second generation

bioethanol production: a critical review. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev
2016;66:631–53.

[10] Lee D-J, Yim JH, Jung S, Jang M-S, Jeong G-T, Jeong K-H, et al. Valorization of
animal manure: a case study of bioethanol production from horse manure. Chem
Eng J 2021;403:126345.

[11] Alexander MA, Jeffries TW. Respiratory efficiency and metabolite partitioning as
regulatory phenomena in yeasts. Enzyme Microb Technol 1990;12:2–19.

[12] Zhang Y, Xia C, Lu M, Tu M. Effect of overliming and activated carbon
detoxification on inhibitors removal and butanol fermentation of poplar
prehydrolysates. Biotechnol Biofuels 2018;11:178.

[13] IEA I. Transport biofuels. Paris: IEA; 2020.
[14] Sakai T, Kawashima A, Koshikawa T. Economic assessment of batch biodiesel
production processes using homogeneous and heterogeneous alkali catalysts.
Bioresour Technol 2009;100:3268–76.

[15] Dias JM, Alvim-Ferraz MC, Almeida MF. Comparison of the performance of

different homogeneous alkali catalysts during transesterification of waste and
virgin oils and evaluation of biodiesel quality. Fuel 2008;87:3572–8.

[16] Bankovi ́c-Ili ́c IB, Stamenkovi ́c OS, Veljkovi ́c VB. Biodiesel production from non-
edible plant oils. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2012;16:3621–47.
[17] Atabani A, Silitonga A, Ong H, Mahlia T, Masjuki H, Badruddin IA, et al. Non-

edible vegetable oils: a critical evaluation of oil extraction, fatty acid
compositions, biodiesel production, characteristics, engine performance and
emissions production. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2013;18:211–45.
[18] Sims REH, Mabee W, Saddler JN, Taylor M. An overview of second generation

biofuel technologies. Bioresour Technol 2010;101:1570–80.

[19] Naik SN, Goud VV, Rout PK, Dalai AK. Production of first and second generation
biofuels: a comprehensive review. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2010;14:
578–97.

[20] Jung S, Shetti NP, Reddy KR, Nadagouda MN, Park Y-K, Aminabhavi TM, et al.
Synthesis of different biofuels from livestock waste materials and their potential
as sustainable feedstocks – a review. Energy Convers Manage 2021;236:114038.

[21] Mofijur M, Rasul MG, Hassan NMS, Nabi MN. Recent development in the

production of third generation biodiesel from microalgae. Energy Procedia 2019;
156:53–8.

[22] Goh BHH, Ong HC, Cheah MY, Chen W-H, Yu KL, Mahlia TMI. Sustainability of
direct biodiesel synthesis from microalgae biomass: a critical review. Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev 2019;107:59–74.

[23] Yin Z, Zhu L, Li S, Hu T, Chu R, Mo F, et al. A comprehensive review on

cultivation and harvesting of microalgae for biodiesel production: environmental
pollution control and future directions. Bioresour Technol 2020:122804.
[24] Bach Q-V, Chen W-H. Pyrolysis characteristics and kinetics of microalgae via

thermogravimetric analysis (TGA): a state-of-the-art review. Bioresour Technol
2017;246:88–100.

[25] Chen J, Li J, Dong W, Zhang X, Tyagi RD, Drogui P, et al. The potential of

microalgae in biodiesel production. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2018;90:
336–46.

[26] Ma X, Gao M, Gao Z, Wang J, Zhang M, Ma Y, et al. Past, current, and future

research on microalga-derived biodiesel: a critical review and bibliometric
analysis. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2018;25:10596–610.

[27] Andersen R. Diversity of eukaryotic algae. Biodivers Conserv 1992;1:267–92.
[28] Sajjadi B, Chen W-Y, Raman AAA, Ibrahim S. Microalgae lipid and biomass for
biofuel production: a comprehensive review on lipid enhancement strategies and
their effects on fatty acid composition. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2018;
97:200–32.

[29] Woese CR, Kandler O, Wheelis MLJPotNAoS. Towards a natural system of

organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and Eucarya. 1990;87:
4576-9.

[30] Saccone C, Gissi C, Lanave C, Pesole G. Molecular classification of living

organisms. J Mol Evol 1995;40:273–9.

[31] Ruggiero MA, Gordon DP, Orrell TM, Bailly N, Bourgoin T, Brusca RC, et al. A

higher level classification of all living organisms. 2015;10:e0119248.

[32] Levasseur W, Perr ́e P, Pozzobon VJBA. A review of high value-added molecules

production by microalgae in light of the classification. 2020:107545.

[33] Huisman J, Codd GA, Paerl HW, Ibelings BW, Verspagen JM, Visser PM.

Cyanobacterial blooms. Nat Rev Microbiol 2018;16:471–83.

[34] Sharma YC, Singh B, Korstad J. A critical review on recent methods used for

economically viable and eco-friendly development of microalgae as a potential
feedstock for synthesis of biodiesel. Green Chem 2011;13:2993–3006.
[35] Hamed I. The evolution and versatility of microalgal biotechnology: a review.

Comprehensive Rev Food Sci Food Saf 2016;15:1104–23.

[36] Metting FJJoim. Biodiversity and application of microalgae. 1996;17:477-89.
[37] Cavalier-Smith TJN. The origin of nuclei and of eukaryotic cells. 1975;256:463-8.
[38] Chen M, Blankenship REJTips. Expanding the solar spectrum used by

photosynthesis. 2011;16:427-31.

[39] Chen M, Li Y, Birch D, Willows RDJFl. A cyanobacterium that contains
chlorophyll f–a red-absorbing photopigment. 2012;586:3249-54.

[40] Kühl M, Chen M, Ralph PJ, Schreiber U, Larkum AW. A niche for cyanobacteria

containing chlorophyll d. Nature 2005;433:820.

[41] Bach Q-V, Chen W-H. A comprehensive study on pyrolysis kinetics of microalgal

biomass. Energy Convers Manage 2017;131:109–16.
ˇ
Santek B, Felski M, Friehs K, Lotz M, Flaschel E. Production of paramylon, a β-1,
3-glucan, by heterotrophic cultivation of Euglena gracilis on potato liquor. Eng Life
Sci 2010;10:165–70.

[43] Tasi ́c MB, Pinto LFR, Klein BC, Veljkovi ́c VB, Maciel Filho R. Botryococcus braunii

for biodiesel production. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2016;64:260–70.

[44] Gong J, You F. Value-added chemicals from microalgae: greener, more

economical, or both? ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2015;3:82–96.

[45] Kaur S, Khattar J, Singh Y, Singh D, Ahluwalia A. Extraction, purification and
characterisation of Phycocyanin from Anabaena fertilissima PUPCCC 410.5: as a
natural and food grade stable pigment. J Appl Phycol 2019;31:1685–96.

[46] Minkova K, Tchernov A, Tchorbadjieva M, Fournadjieva S, Antova R,

Busheva MC. Purification of C-phycocyanin from Spirulina (Arthrospira) fusiformis.
J Biotechnol 2003;102:55–9.

[47] Hidasi N, Belay A. Diurnal variation of various culture and biochemical

parameters of Arthrospira platensis in large-scale outdoor raceway ponds. Algal
Res 2018;29:121–9.

[48] Park W-K, Yoo G, Moon M, Kim CW, Choi Y-E, Yang J-W. Phytohormone

supplementation significantly increases growth of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
cultivated for biodiesel production. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 2013;171:1128–42.
[49] Arora N, Patel A, Pruthi PA, Pruthi VJBT. Synergistic dynamics of nitrogen and

phosphorous influences lipid productivity in Chlorella minutissima for biodiesel
production. Bioresour Technol 2016;213:79–87.

[50] Miao X, Wu Q. Biodiesel production from heterotrophic microalgal oil. Bioresour

Technol 2006;97:841–6.

[51] Wu Z-Y, Shi C-L, Shi X-M. Modeling of lutein production by heterotrophic

Chlorella in batch and fed-batch cultures. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 2007;23:
1233–8.

[52] Negi S, Barry AN, Friedland N, Sudasinghe N, Subramanian S, Pieris S, et al.

Impact of nitrogen limitation on biomass, photosynthesis, and lipid accumulation
in Chlorella sorokiniana. J Appl Phycol 2016;28:803–12.

[53] Ge S, Qiu S, Tremblay D, Viner K, Champagne P, Jessop PG. Centrate wastewater
treatment with Chlorella vulgaris: simultaneous enhancement of nutrient removal,
biomass and lipid production. Chem Eng J 2018;342:310–20.

[54] Sun N, Wang Y, Li Y-T, Huang J-C, Chen F. Sugar-based growth, astaxanthin
accumulation and carotenogenic transcription of heterotrophic Chlorella
zofingiensis (Chlorophyta). Process Biochem 2008;43:1288–92.

[55] Ma RY-N, Chen F. Enhanced production of free trans-astaxanthin by oxidative
stress in the cultures of the green microalga Chlorococcum sp. Process Biochem
2001;36:1175–9.

[56] Borowitzka MA, Borowitzka LJ, Kessly D. Effects of salinity increase on

carotenoid accumulation in the green alga Dunaliella salina. J Appl Phycol 1990;2:
111–9.

[57] Carballo-C ́ardenas EC, Tuan PM, Janssen M, Wijffels RH. Vitamin E

(α-tocopherol) production by the marine microalgae Dunaliella tertiolecta and
Tetraselmis suecica in batch cultivation. Biomol Eng 2003;20:139–47.

[58] Kobayashi M, Kurimura Y, Tsuji Y. Light-independent, astaxanthin production by

the green microalga Haematococcus pluvialis under salt stress. Biotechnol Lett
1997;19:507–9.

[59] Boussiba S, Vonshak A. Astaxanthin accumulation in the green alga
Haematococcus pluvialis. Plant Cell Physiol 1991;32:1077–82.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102019

J.Y. Kim et al.

[60] Del Campo JA, Moreno J, Rodrı́guez H, Vargas MA, Jn Rivas, Guerrero MG.
Carotenoid content of chlorophycean microalgae: factors determining lutein
accumulation in Muriellopsis sp.(Chlorophyta). J Biotechnol 2000;76:51–9.

[61] Qin S, Liu G-X, Hu Z-Y. The accumulation and metabolism of astaxanthin in

Scenedesmus obliquus (Chlorophyceae). Process Biochem 2008;43:795–802.
[62] Mandal S, Mallick N. Microalga Scenedesmus obliquus as a potential source for

biodiesel production. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2009;84:281–91.

[63] Kottuparambil S, Thankamony RL, Agusti S. Euglena as a potential natural source

of value-added metabolites. A review. Algal Res 2019;37:154–9.

[93] Asadi P, Rad HA, Qaderi F. Lipid and biodiesel production by cultivation isolated

strain Chlorella sorokiniana pa.91 and Chlorella vulgaris in dairy wastewater
treatment plant effluents. J Environ Health Sci Eng 2020;18:573–85.

[94] Sinha SK, Gupta A, Bharalee R. Production of biodiesel from freshwater

microalgae and evaluation of fuel properties based on fatty acid methyl ester
profile. Biofuels 2016;7:69–78.

[95] Jung J-M, Kim JY, Jung S, Choi Y-E, Kwon EE. Quantitative study on lipid
productivity of Euglena gracilis and its biodiesel production according to the
cultivation conditions. J Cleaner Prod 2021;291:125218.

[64] Kings AJ, Raj RE, Miriam LM, Visvanathan MA. Cultivation, extraction and

[96] Ma Y, Wang Z, Yu C, Yin Y, Zhou G. Evaluation of the potential of 9

optimization of biodiesel production from potential microalgae Euglena
sanguinea using eco-friendly natural catalyst. Energy Convers Manage 2017;141:
224–35.

[65] Hamilton ML, Powers S, Napier JA, Sayanova O. Heterotrophic production of

omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids by trophically converted marine
diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Mar Drugs 2016;14:53.

[66] Kim SM, Jung Y-J, Kwon O-N, Cha KH, Um B-H, Chung D, et al. A potential

commercial source of fucoxanthin extracted from the microalga Phaeodactylum
tricornutum. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 2012;166:1843–55.

[67] d’Ippolito G, Sardo A, Paris D, Vella FM, Adelfi MG, Botte P, et al. Potential of
lipid metabolism in marine diatoms for biofuel production. Biotechnol Biofuels
2015;8:28.

[68] Kim HM, Oh CH, Bae H-J. Comparison of red microalgae (Porphyridium cruentum)
culture conditions for bioethanol production. Bioresour Technol 2017;233:44–50.

[69] Soanen N, Da Silva E, Gardarin C, Michaud P, Laroche C. Improvement of

exopolysaccharide production by Porphyridium marinum. Bioresour Technol 2016;
213:231–8.

[70] Radakovits R, Jinkerson RE, Darzins A, Posewitz MC. Genetic engineering of
algae for enhanced biofuel production. Eukaryotic Cell 2010;9:486–501.
[71] Sun X-M, Ren L-J, Zhao Q-Y, Ji X-J, Huang H. Microalgae for the production of
lipid and carotenoids: a review with focus on stress regulation and adaptation.
Biotechnol Biofuels 2018;11:272.

[72] Teslovich TM, Musunuru K, Smith AV, Edmondson AC, Stylianou IM, Koseki M,

et al. Biological, clinical and population relevance of 95 loci for blood lipids.
Nature 2010;466:707–13.

[73] Klok A, Lamers P, Martens D, Draaisma R, Wijffels R. Edible oils from microalgae:

insights in TAG accumulation. Trends Biotechnol 2014;32:521–8.

[74] Halim R, Danquah MK, Webley PA. Extraction of oil from microalgae for biodiesel

production: a review. Biotechnol Adv 2012;30:709–32.

[75] Guschina IA, Harwood JL. Complex lipid biosynthesis and its manipulation in

plants. Improvement of Crop Plants for Industrial End Uses. Springer; 2007.
p. 253–79.

Nannochloropsis strains for biodiesel production. Bioresour Technol 2014;167:
503–9.

[97] Mandotra SK, Kumar P, Suseela MR, Nayaka S, Ramteke PW. Evaluation of fatty
acid profile and biodiesel properties of microalga Scenedesmus abundans under
the influence of phosphorus, pH and light intensities. Bioresour Technol 2016;
201:222–9.

[98] Salama E-S, Kurade MB, Abou-Shanab RA, El-Dalatony MM, Yang I-S, Min B, et al.
Recent progress in microalgal biomass production coupled with wastewater
treatment for biofuel generation. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2017;79:
1189–211.

[99] Liu T, Wang J, Hu Q, Cheng P, Ji B, Liu J, et al. Attached cultivation technology of
microalgae for efficient biomass feedstock production. Bioresour Technol 2013;
127:216–22.

[100] Ciferri O. Spirulina, the edible microorganism. Microbiol Rev 1983;47:551.
[101] Borowitzka MA, Moheimani NR. Open pond culture systems. Algae for biofuels

and energy. Springer; 2013. p. 133–52.

[102] Moheimani NR, Borowitzka MA. Limits to productivity of the alga Pleurochrysis
carterae (Haptophyta) grown in outdoor raceway ponds. Biotechnol Bioeng 2007;
96:27–36.

[103] Kumar K, Mishra SK, Shrivastav A, Park MS, Yang J-W. Recent trends in the mass
cultivation of algae in raceway ponds. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2015;
51:875–85.

[104] Slegers P, L ̈osing M, Wijffels R, Van Straten G, Van Boxtel A. Scenario evaluation

of open pond microalgae production. Algal Res 2013;2:358–68.

[105] Pulz O. Photobioreactors: production systems for phototrophic microorganisms.

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2001;57:287–93.

[106] Zhu L. Microalgal culture strategies for biofuel production: a review. Biofuels,

Bioprod Biorefin 2015;9:801–14.

[107] Yousuf A. Microalgae cultivation for biofuels production. Academic Press; 2019.
[108] Sharma AK, Sharma A, Singh Y, Chen W-H. Production of a sustainable fuel from
microalgae Chlorella minutissima grown in a 1500 L open raceway ponds. Biomass
Bioenergy 2021;149:106073.

[76] Durrett TP, Benning C, Ohlrogge J. Plant triacylglycerols as feedstocks for the

[109] Mohler DT, Wilson MH, Fan Z, Groppo JG, Crocker M. Beneficial reuse of

production of biofuels. Plant J 2008;54:593–607.

[77] Liu B, Benning C. Lipid metabolism in microalgae distinguishes itself. Curr Opin

Biotechnol 2013;24:300–9.

[78] Fan J, Andre C, Xu C. A chloroplast pathway for the de novo biosynthesis of
triacylglycerol in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. FEBS Lett 2011;585:1985–91.
[79] Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J, Prifti E, Hildebrand F, Falony G, et al. Richness of

human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers. Nature 2013;500:
541–6.

[80] Creamer AE, Gao B, Zimmerman A, Harris W. Biomass-facilitated production of
activated magnesium oxide nanoparticles with extraordinary CO2  capture
capacity. Chem Eng J 2018;334:81–8.

[81] Khozin-Goldberg I. Lipid metabolism in microalgae. The physiology of

microalgae. Springer; 2016. p. 413–84.

[82] Mashima T, Seimiya H, Tsuruo T. De novo fatty-acid synthesis and related

pathways as molecular targets for cancer therapy. Br J Cancer 2009;100:
1369–72.

[83] Harwood JL. Fatty acid biosynthesis. Plant lipids: Biology, utilisation and

manipulation. 2005;27:66.

industrial CO2  emissions using a microalgae photobioreactor: waste heat
utilization assessment. Energies 2019:12.

[110] Hamed IJCRiFS, Safety F. The evolution and versatility of microalgal

biotechnology: a review. 2016;15:1104-23.

[111] Sierra E, Aci ́en F, Fern ́andez J, García J, Gonz ́alez C, Molina E. Characterization of
a flat plate photobioreactor for the production of microalgae. Chem Eng J 2008;
138:136–47.

[112] Nagappan S, Devendran S, Tsai P-C, Dahms H-U, Ponnusamy VK. Potential of two-
stage cultivation in microalgae biofuel production. Fuel 2019;252:339–49.
[113] Yoon SY, Hong ME, Chang WS, Sim SJ. Enhanced biodiesel production in
Neochloris oleoabundans by a semi-continuous process in two stage
photobioreactors. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 2015;38:1415–21.

[114] Zeriouh O, Reinoso-Moreno JV, L ́opez-Rosales L, MdC Cer ́on-García, S ́anchez-
Mir ́on A, García-Camacho F, et al. Biofouling in photobioreactors for marine
microalgae. Crit Rev Biotechnol 2017;37:1006–23.

[115] Banerjee S, Ramaswamy SJBTR. Comparison of productivity and economic
analysis of microalgae cultivation in open raceways and flat panel
photobioreactor. Bioresour Technol Rep 2019;8:100328.

[84] Voelker T, Kinney AJ. Variations in the biosynthesis of seed-storage lipids. Annu

[116] Xu L, Weathers PJ, Xiong XR, Liu CZ. Microalgal bioreactors: challenges and

Rev Plant Biol 2001;52:335–61.

opportunities. Eng Life Sci 2009;9:178–89.

[85] Radakovits R, Eduafo PM, Posewitz MC. Genetic engineering of fatty acid chain

[117] Yin S, Wang J, Chen L, Liu T. The water footprint of biofilm cultivation of

length in Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Metab Eng 2011;13:89–95.

[86] Z ̈auner S, Jochum W, Bigorowski T, Benning C. A cytochrome b5-containing
plastid-located fatty acid desaturase from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
Eukaryotic Cell 2012;11:856–63.

[87] Moellering ER, Miller R, Benning C. Molecular genetics of lipid metabolism in the
model green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Lipids in photosynthesis. Springer;
2009. p. 139–55.

[88] Tan KWM, Lee YK. The dilemma for lipid productivity in green microalgae:
importance of substrate provision in improving oil yield without sacrificing
growth. Biotechnol Biofuels 2016;9:255.

[89] Pandit PR, Fulekar MH, Karuna MSL. Effect of salinity stress on growth, lipid
productivity, fatty acid composition, and biodiesel properties in Acutodesmus
obliquus and Chlorella vulgaris. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2017;24:13437–51.
[90] Choi G-G, Kim B-H, Ahn C-Y, Oh H-M. Effect of nitrogen limitation on oleic acid

biosynthesis in Botryococcus braunii. J Appl Phycol 2011;23:1031–7.
[91] Karpagam R, Preeti R, Ashokkumar B, Varalakshmi P. Enhancement of lipid

production and fatty acid profiling in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, CC1010 for
biodiesel production. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2015;121:253–7.

[92] Rai MP, Nigam S, Sharma R. Response of growth and fatty acid compositions of
Chlorella pyrenoidosa under mixotrophic cultivation with acetate and glycerol for
bioenergy application. Biomass Bioenergy 2013;58:251–7.

Haematococcus pluvialis is greatly decreased by using sealed narrow chambers
combined with slow aeration rate. Biotechnol Lett 2015;37:1819–27.

[118] Zhuang L-L, Yu D, Zhang J, Liu F-f, Wu Y-H, Zhang T-Y, et al. The characteristics
and influencing factors of the attached microalgae cultivation: a review.
Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2018;94:1110–9.

[119] Hu J, Nagarajan D, Zhang Q, Chang J-S, Lee D-J. Heterotrophic cultivation of
microalgae for pigment production: a review. Biotechnol Adv 2018;36:54–67.

[120] Nagarajan D, Lee D-J, Chang J-s. Heterotrophic microalgal cultivation.

Bioreactors for microbial biomass and energy conversion. Springer; 2018.
p. 117–60.

[121] Morales-S ́anchez D, Martinez-Rodriguez OA, Martinez A. Heterotrophic

cultivation of microalgae: production of metabolites of commercial interest.
J Chem Technol Biotechnol 2017;92:925–36.

[122] Li T, Zheng Y, Yu L, Chen S. Mixotrophic cultivation of a Chlorella sorokiniana
strain for enhanced biomass and lipid production. Biomass Bioenergy 2014;66:
204–13.

[123] Xu H, Miao X, Wu Q. High quality biodiesel production from a microalga

Chlorella protothecoides by heterotrophic growth in fermenters. J Biotechnol
2006;126:499–507.

[124] Hoornweg D, Bhada-Tata P. What a waste: a global review of solid waste

management. Urban Dev Ser 2012.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102020

J.Y. Kim et al.

[125] Lin CSK, Pfaltzgraff LA, Herrero-Davila L, Mubofu EB, Abderrahim S, Clark JH,
et al. Food waste as a valuable resource for the production of chemicals, materials
and fuels. Current situation and global perspective. Energy Environ Sci 2013;6:
426–64.

[126] Schanes K, Dobernig K, G ̈ozet B. Food waste matters-a systematic review of
household food waste practices and their policy implications. J Cleaner Prod
2018;182:978–91.

[127] Thyberg KL, Tonjes DJ. Drivers of food waste and their implications for

sustainable policy development. Resour Conserv Recycl 2016;106:110–23.

[155] Xia L, Huang R, Li Y, Song S. The effect of growth phase on the surface properties

of three oleaginous microalgae (Botryococcus sp. FACGB-762, Chlorella sp. XJ-
445 and Desmodesmus bijugatus XJ-231). PLoS One 2017;12:e0186434.
[156] Kadir WNA, Lam MK, Uemura Y, Lim JW, Lee KT. Harvesting and pre-treatment
of microalgae cultivated in wastewater for biodiesel production: a review. Energy
Convers Manage 2018;171:1416–29.

[157] Cheirsilp B, Torpee S. Enhanced growth and lipid production of microalgae under
mixotrophic culture condition: effect of light intensity, glucose concentration and
fed-batch cultivation. Bioresour Technol 2012;110:510–6.

[128] Zhang R, El-Mashad HM, Hartman K, Wang F, Liu G, Choate C, et al.

[158] Schwarzhans J-P, Cholewa D, Grimm P, Beshay U, Risse J-M, Friehs K, et al.

Characterization of food waste as feedstock for anaerobic digestion. Bioresour
Technol 2007;98:929–35.

Dependency of the fatty acid composition of Euglena gracilis on growth phase and
culture conditions. J Appl Phycol 2015;27:1389–99.

[129] Cho JK, Park SC, Chang HN. Biochemical methane potential and solid state

[159] Richmond A. Handbook of microalgal culture: biotechnology and applied

anaerobic digestion of Korean food wastes. Bioresour Technol 1995;52:245–53.

phycology. John Wiley & Sons; 2008.

[130] Lam WC, Pleissner D, Lin CSK. Production of fungal glucoamylase for glucose

[160] Ho S-H, Chen C-Y, Chang J-S. Effect of light intensity and nitrogen starvation on

production from food waste. Biomolecules 2013;3:651–61.

[131] Kim JH, Lee JC, Pak D. Feasibility of producing ethanol from food waste. Waste

Manage (Oxford) 2011;31:2121–5.

[132] Pleissner D, Lam WC, Sun Z, Lin CSK. Food waste as nutrient source in

heterotrophic microalgae cultivation. Bioresour Technol 2013;137:139–46.
[133] Lenihan P, Orozco A, O’neill E, Ahmad M, Rooney D, Walker G. Dilute acid
hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass. Chem Eng J 2010;156:395–403.

[134] Kumar VB, Pulidindi IN, Gedanken A. Glucose production from potato peel waste

under microwave irradiation. J Mol Catal A: Chem 2016;417:163–7.

CO2 fixation and lipid/carbohydrate production of an indigenous microalga
Scenedesmus obliquus CNW-N. Bioresour Technol 2012;113:244–52.

[161] Feng P, Deng Z, Fan L, Hu Z. Lipid accumulation and growth characteristics of

Chlorella zofingiensis under different nitrate and phosphate concentrations.
J Biosci Bioeng 2012;114:405–10.

[162] Xin L, Hong-Ying H, Ke G, Ying-Xue S. Effects of different nitrogen and

phosphorus concentrations on the growth, nutrient uptake, and lipid
accumulation of a freshwater microalga Scenedesmus sp. Bioresour Technol 2010;
101:5494–500.

[135] Li A, Antizar-Ladislao B, Khraisheh M. Bioconversion of municipal solid waste to

[163] Zhou X, Ge H, Xia L, Zhang D, Hu C. Evaluation of oil-producing algae as potential

glucose for bio-ethanol production. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 2007;30:189–96.

biodiesel feedstock. Bioresour Technol 2013;134:24–9.

[136] Mtui G, Nakamura Y. Bioconversion of lignocellulosic waste from selected

[164] Zimorski V, Rauch C, van Hellemond JJ, Tielens AG, Martin WF. The

dumping sites in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Biodegradation 2005;16:493.
[137] Sasaki C, Takada R, Watanabe T, Honda Y, Karita S, Nakamura Y, et al. Surface
carbohydrate analysis and bioethanol production of sugarcane bagasse pretreated
with the white rot fungus, Ceriporiopsis subvermispora and microwave
hydrothermolysis. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:9942–6.

[138] Chosdu R, Hilmy N, Erlinda T. Abbas B. Radiation and chemical pretreatment of

cellulosic waste. Radiat Phys Chem 1993;42:695–8.

[139] Qi B, Vu A, Wickramasinghe SR, Qian X. Glucose production from lignocellulosic
biomass using a membrane-based polymeric solid acid catalyst. Biomass
Bioenergy 2018;117:137–45.

[140] Kupiainen L, Ahola J, Tanskanen J. Hydrolysis of organosolv wheat pulp in formic

acid at high temperature for glucose production. Bioresour Technol 2012;116:
29–35.

[141] Narayanaswamy N, Faik A, Goetz DJ, Gu T. Supercritical carbon dioxide

pretreatment of corn stover and switchgrass for lignocellulosic ethanol
production. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:6995–7000.

[142] Chen W, Sommerfeld M, Hu Q. Microwave-assisted Nile red method for in vivo

quantification of neutral lipids in microalgae. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:
135–41.

[143] Chen B, Wan C, Mehmood MA, Chang J-S, Bai F, Zhao X. Manipulating
environmental stresses and stress tolerance of microalgae for enhanced
production of lipids and value-added products–A review. Bioresour Technol 2017;
244:1198–206.

[144] Ghosh A, Khanra S, Mondal M, Halder G, Tiwari O, Saini S, et al. Progress toward
isolation of strains and genetically engineered strains of microalgae for
production of biofuel and other value added chemicals: a review. Energy Convers
Manage 2016;113:104–18.

[145] Dunahay TG, Jarvis EE, Dais SS, Roessler PG. Manipulation of microalgal lipid
production using genetic engineering. Appl Biol Sci Branch 1996;57:223.
[146] Abdullah B, SAFaS Muhammad, Shokravi Z, Ismail S, Kassim KA, Mahmood AN,

et al. Fourth generation biofuel: a review on risks and mitigation strategies.
Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2019;107:37–50.

[147] Liao Q, Chang H-X, Fu Q, Huang Y, Xia A, Zhu X, et al. Physiological-phased

kinetic characteristics of microalgae Chlorella vulgaris growth and lipid synthesis
considering synergistic effects of light, carbon and nutrients. Bioresour Technol
2018;250:583–90.

[148] Torzillo G, Vonshak A. Environmental stress physiology with reference to mass

cultures. Handbook of microalgal culture: applied phycology and biotechnology.
New Jersey: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2013. p. 90–113.

mitochondrion of Euglena gracilis. Euglena: biochemistry, cell and molecular
biology. Springer; 2017. p. 19–37.

[165] Cho D-H, Ramanan R, Heo J, Lee J, Kim B-H, Oh H-M, et al. Enhancing microalgal
biomass productivity by engineering a microalgal–bacterial community.
Bioresour Technol 2015;175:578–85.

[166] Kim JY, Oh J-J, Jeon MS, Kim G-H, Choi Y-E. Improvement of Euglena gracilis
paramylon production through a cocultivation strategy with the indole-3-acetic
acid-producing bacterium Vibrio natriegens. Appl Environ Microbiol 2019;85.
e01548-19.

[167] Kouzuma A, Watanabe K. Exploring the potential of algae/bacteria interactions.

Curr Opin Biotechnol 2015;33:125–9.

[168] Singh P, Kumari S, Guldhe A, Misra R, Rawat I, Bux F. Trends and novel strategies
for enhancing lipid accumulation and quality in microalgae. Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev 2016;55:1–16.

[169] Vandamme D, Foubert I, Muylaert K. Flocculation as a low-cost method for

harvesting microalgae for bulk biomass production. Trends Biotechnol 2013;31:
233–9.

[170] Fasaei F, Bitter J, Slegers P, Van Boxtel A. Techno-economic evaluation of
microalgae harvesting and dewatering systems. Algal Res 2018;31:347–62.

[171] Barros AI, Gonçalves AL, Sim ̃oes M, Pires JC. Harvesting techniques applied to

microalgae: a review. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2015;41:1489–500.
[172] Ummalyma SB, Gnansounou E, Sukumaran RK, Sindhu R, Pandey A, Sahoo D.

Bioflocculation: an alternative strategy for harvesting of microalgae–an overview.
Bioresour Technol 2017;242:227–35.

[173] Kadir WNA, Lam MK, Uemura Y, Lim JW, Lee KTJEC. Harvesting and pre-

treatment of microalgae cultivated in wastewater for biodiesel production: a
review. Management 2018;171:1416–29.

[174] Papazi A, Makridis P, Divanach P. Harvesting Chlorella minutissima using cell

coagulants. J Appl Phycol 2010;22:349–55.

[175] Bratby J. Coagulation and flocculation in water and wastewater treatment. IWA

publishing; 2016.

[176] Jung S, Cho S-H, Kim K-H, Kwon EE. Progress in quantitative analysis of

microplastics in the environment: a review. Chem Eng J 2021;422:130154.
[177] Rahul R, Kumar S, Jha U, Sen G. Cationic inulin: a plant based natural biopolymer

for algal biomass harvesting. Int J Biol Macromol 2015;72:868–74.
[178] Xu Y, Purton S, Baganz F. Chitosan flocculation to aid the harvesting of the

microalga Chlorella sorokiniana. Bioresour Technol 2013;129:296–301.
[179] Nazari MT, Freitag JF, Cavanhi VAF, Colla LM. Microalgae harvesting by fungal-

assisted bioflocculation. Rev Environ Sci Bio/Technol 2020:1–20.

[149] Sirisuk P, Ra C-H, Jeong G-T, Kim S-K. Effects of wavelength mixing ratio and

[180] Alam MA, Vandamme D, Chun W, Zhao X, Foubert I, Wang Z, et al.

photoperiod on microalgal biomass and lipid production in a two-phase culture
system using LED illumination. Bioresour Technol 2018;253:175–81.

[150] Teo CL, Atta M, Bukhari A, Taisir M, Yusuf AM, Idris A. Enhancing growth and

lipid production of marine microalgae for biodiesel production via the use of
different LED wavelengths. Bioresour Technol 2014;162:38–44.

[151] Xin L, Hong-Ying H, Yu-Ping Z. Growth and lipid accumulation properties of a
freshwater microalga Scenedesmus sp. under different cultivation temperature.
Bioresour Technol 2011;102:3098–102.

[152] Costa JAV, Freitas BCB, Santos TD, Mitchell BG, Morais MG. Open pond systems
for microalgal culture. Biofuels from algae. Elsevier; 2019. p. 199–223.
[153] Liang Y, Kashdan T, Sterner C, Dombrowski L, Petrick I, Kr ̈oger M, et al. Algal

biorefineries. Industrial biorefineries & white biotechnology. Elsevier; 2015.
p. 35–90.

[154] Ferreira GF, Pinto LFR, Carvalho PO, Coelho MB, Eberlin MN, Maciel Filho R,

et al. Biomass and lipid characterization of microalgae genera Botryococcus,
Chlorella, and Desmodesmus aiming high-value fatty acid production. Biomass
Convers Biorefinery 2019:1–15.

Bioflocculation as an innovative harvesting strategy for microalgae. Rev Environ
Sci Bio/Technol 2016;15:573–83.

[181] Ramanan R, Kim B-H, Cho D-H, Oh H-M, Kim H-S. Algae–bacteria interactions:
evolution, ecology and emerging applications. Biotechnol Adv 2016;34:14–29.

[182] Nie C, Pei H, Jiang L, Cheng J, Han F. Growth of large-cell and easily-

sedimentation microalgae Golenkinia SDEC-16 for biofuel production and campus
sewage treatment. Renewable Energy 2018;122:517–25.

[183] Griffiths MJ, van Hille RP, ST Harrison. Lipid productivity, settling potential and

fatty acid profile of 11 microalgal species grown under nitrogen replete and
limited conditions. J Appl Phycol 2012;24:989–1001.

[184] Milledge JJ, Heaven S. A review of the harvesting of micro-algae for biofuel

production. Rev Environ Sci Bio/Technol 2013;12:165–78.

[185] Suzuki K. Large-scale cultivation of Euglena. Euglena: Biochemistry, Cell and

Molecular Biology. Springer; 2017. p. 285–93.

[186] Burton T, Lyons H, Lerat Y, Stanley M, Rasmussen MB. A review of the potential of

marine algae as a source of biofuel in Ireland. 2009.

[187] Geada P, Rodrigues R, Loureiro L, Pereira R, Fernandes B, Teixeira JA, et al.

Electrotechnologies applied to microalgal biotechnology–applications, techniques
and future trends. 2018;94:656-68.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102021

J.Y. Kim et al.

[188] Gao S, Du M, Tian J, Yang J, Yang J, Ma F, et al. Effects of chloride ions on

electro-coagulation-flotation process with aluminum electrodes for algae
removal. 2010;182:827-34.

[189] Johnson MB, ZJAm Wen. Development of an attached microalgal growth system

for biofuel production. Biotechnology 2010;85:525–34.

[190] Lee S-H, Oh H-M, Jo B-H, Lee S-A, Shin S-Y, Kim H-S, et al. Higher biomass
productivity of microalgae in an attached growth system, using wastewater.
2014;24:1566-73.

[191] Brennan L, Owende P. Biofuels from microalgae—a review of technologies for
production, processing, and extractions of biofuels and co-products. Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev 2010;14:557–77.

[192] Ratti C. Hot air and freeze-drying of high-value foods: a review. J Food Eng 2001;

49:311–9.

[193] Guldhe A, Singh B, Rawat I, Ramluckan K, Bux F. Efficacy of drying and cell

disruption techniques on lipid recovery from microalgae for biodiesel production.
Fuel 2014;128:46–52.

[221] Vicente G, Martınez M, Aracil J. Integrated biodiesel production: a comparison of

different homogeneous catalysts systems. Bioresour Technol 2004;92:297–305.
[222] Tariq M, Ali S, Khalid N. Activity of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts,
spectroscopic and chromatographic characterization of biodiesel: a review.
Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2012;16:6303–16.

[223] Nguyen TT, Uemura Y, Lam MK, Mansor N, Lim JW. Revealing the effect of

reaction parameters towards alkyl group distribution in in-situ transesterification
of Chlorella vulgaris. Energy Convers Manage 2019;185:223–31.

[224] Sathish A, Marlar T, Sims RC. Optimization of a wet microalgal lipid extraction

procedure for improved lipid recovery for biofuel and bioproduct production.
Bioresour Technol 2015;193:15–24.

[225] Im H, Kim B, Lee JW. Concurrent production of biodiesel and chemicals through
wet in situ transesterification of microalgae. Bioresour Technol 2015;193:386–92.
[226] Kim T-H, Suh WI, Yoo G, Mishra SK, Farooq W, Moon M, et al. Development of
direct conversion method for microalgal biodiesel production using wet biomass
of Nannochloropsis salina. Bioresour Technol 2015;191:438–44.

[194] Santos D, Maurício AC, Sencadas V, Santos JD, Fernandes MH, Gomes PS. Spray

[227] Kim B, Im H, Lee JW. In situ transesterification of highly wet microalgae using

drying: an overview. Biomaterials-Physics and Chemistry-New Edition.
Intechopen; 2017.

[195] Show K-Y, Lee D-J, Tay J-H, Lee T-M, Chang J-S. Microalgal drying and cell

disruption–recent advances. Bioresour Technol 2015;184:258–66.
[196] Grima EM, Belarbi E-H, Fern ́andez FA, Medina AR, Chisti Y. Recovery of

microalgal biomass and metabolites: process options and economics. Biotechnol
Adv 2003;20:491–515.

[197] Lee SY, Cho JM, Chang YK, Oh Y-K. Cell disruption and lipid extraction for

microalgal biorefineries: a review. Bioresour Technol 2017;244:1317–28.
[198] Salme ́an AA, Duffieux D, Harholt J, Qin F, Michel G, Czjzek M, et al. Insoluble
(1→ 3),(1→ 4)-β-D-glucan is a component of cell walls in brown algae
(Phaeophyceae) and is masked by alginates in tissues. Sci Rep 2017;7:1–11.
[199] Zhang Z, Volkman JK. Algaenan structure in the microalga Nannochloropsis
oculata characterized from stepwise pyrolysis. Org Geochem 2017;104:1–7.
[200] Günerken E, D’Hondt E, Eppink MHM, Garcia-Gonzalez L, Elst K, Wijffels RH. Cell
disruption for microalgae biorefineries. Biotechnol Adv 2015;33:243–60.
[201] Ma Y, Liu S, Wang Y, Adhikari S, Dempster TA, Wang Y. Direct biodiesel

production from wet microalgae assisted by radio frequency heating. Fuel 2019;
256:115994.

[202] Lee AK, Lewis DM, Ashman PJ. Disruption of microalgal cells for the extraction of
lipids for biofuels: processes and specific energy requirements. Biomass Bioenergy
2012;46:89–101.

[203] Wang M, Chen S, Zhou W, Yuan W, Wang D. Algal cell lysis by bacteria: a review

and comparison to conventional methods. Algal Res 2020;46:101794.

[204] Cho H-S, Oh Y-K, Park S-C, Lee J-W, Park J-Y. Effects of enzymatic hydrolysis on

lipid extraction from Chlorella vulgaris. Renewable Energy 2013;54:156–60.

[205] Kreft J, Moe E, Garcia N, Ross A, Seames W. Comparative scoping study report for
the extraction of microalgae oils from two subspecies of Chlorella vulgaris. Clean
Energy; 2020.

hydrochloric acid. Bioresour Technol 2015;185:421–5.

[228] Di Serio M, Tesser R, Dimiccoli M, Cammarota F, Nastasi M, Santacesaria E.

Synthesis of biodiesel via homogeneous Lewis acid catalyst. J Mol Catal A: Chem
2005;239:111–5.

[229] Soriano Jr NU, Venditti R, Argyropoulos DS. Biodiesel synthesis via homogeneous

Lewis acid-catalyzed transesterification. Fuel 2009;88:560–5.

[230] Suganya T, Gandhi NN, Renganathan S. Production of algal biodiesel from marine

macroalgae Enteromorpha compressa by two step process: optimization and
kinetic study. Bioresour Technol 2013;128:392–400.

[231] Rahman MA, Aziz MA, RA Al-khulaidi, Sakib N, Islam M. Biodiesel production
from microalgae Spirulina maxima by two step process: optimization of process
variable. J Radiat Res Appl Sci 2017;10:140–7.

[232] Wang Y, Ou S, Liu P, Zhang Z. Preparation of biodiesel from waste cooking oil via

two-step catalyzed process. Energy Convers Manage 2007;48:184–8.

[233] Galadima A, Muraza O. Biodiesel production from algae by using heterogeneous

catalysts: a critical review. Energy 2014;78:72–83.

[234] Kulkarni MG, Dalai AK. Waste cooking oil an economical source for biodiesel: a

review. Ind Eng Chem Res 2006;45:2901–13.

[235] Granados ML, Poves MDZ, Alonso DM, Mariscal R, Galisteo FC, Moreno-Tost R,
et al. Biodiesel from sunflower oil by using activated calcium oxide. Appl Catal, B
2007;73:317–26.

[236] Wang L, Yang J. Transesterification of soybean oil with nano-MgO or not in

supercritical and subcritical methanol. Fuel 2007;86:328–33.

[237] Abd Rahman NJ, Ramli A, Jumbri K, Uemura Y. Biodiesel production from
N. oculata microalgae lipid in the presence of Bi2O3/ZrO2  catalysts. Waste
Biomass Valorization 2020;11:553–64.

[238] Guldhe A, Moura CV, Singh P, Rawat I, Moura EM, Sharma Y, et al. Conversion of
microalgal lipids to biodiesel using chromium-aluminum mixed oxide as a
heterogeneous solid acid catalyst. Renewable Energy 2017;105:175–82.

[206] Pragya N, Pandey KK, Sahoo P. A review on harvesting, oil extraction and biofuels

[239] Uprety BK, Chaiwong W, Ewelike C, Rakshit SK. Biodiesel production using

production technologies from microalgae. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev
2013;24:159–71.

[207] Wahidin S, Idris A, Shaleh SRM. Rapid biodiesel production using wet microalgae

via microwave irradiation. Energy Convers Manage 2014;84:227–33.
[208] Iverson SJ, Lang SL, Cooper MH. Comparison of the Bligh and Dyer and Folch
methods for total lipid determination in a broad range of marine tissue. Lipids
2001;36:1283–7.

[209] Folch J, Lees M, Stanley GS. A simple method for the isolation and purification of

total lipides from animal tissues. J Biol Chem 1957;226:497–509.

[210] Yang Y-H, Klinthong W, Tan C-S. Optimization of continuous lipid extraction from
Chlorella vulgaris by CO2-expanded methanol for biodiesel production. Bioresour
Technol 2015;198:550–6.

heterogeneous catalysts including wood ash and the importance of enhancing
byproduct glycerol purity. Energy Convers Manage 2016;115:191–9.
[240] Soetaredjo FE, Ayucitra A, Ismadji S, Maukar AL. KOH/bentonite catalysts for
transesterification of palm oil to biodiesel. Appl Clay Sci 2011;53:341–6.

[241] Vyas AP, Subrahmanyam N, Patel PA. Production of biodiesel through

transesterification of Jatropha oil using KNO3/Al2O3 solid catalyst. Fuel 2009;
88:625–8.

[242] Luki ́c I, Krsti ́c J, Jovanovi ́c D, Skala D. Alumina/silica supported K2CO3 as a

catalyst for biodiesel synthesis from sunflower oil. Bioresour Technol 2009;100:
4690–6.

[243] Xie W, Huang X. Synthesis of biodiesel from soybean oil using heterogeneous KF/

ZnO catalyst. Catal Lett 2006;107:53–9.

[211] Obeid S, Beaufils N, Camy S, Takache H, Ismail A, Pontalier P-Y. Supercritical

[244] Jung S, Kim H, Fai Tsang Y, Andrew Lin K-Y, Park Y-K, Kwon EE. A new

carbon dioxide extraction and fractionation of lipids from freeze-dried microalgae
Nannochloropsis oculata and Chlorella vulgaris. Algal Res 2018;34:49–56.
[212] Choi S-A, Oh Y-K, Jeong M-J, Kim SW, Lee J-S, Park J-Y. Effects of ionic liquid
mixtures on lipid extraction from Chlorella vulgaris. Renewable Energy 2014;65:
169–74.

biorefinery platform for producing (C2-5) bioalcohols through the biological/
chemical hybridization process. Bioresour Technol 2020:123568.

[245] Ma G, Hu W, Pei H, Jiang L, Ji Y, Mu R. Study of KOH/Al2O3 as heterogeneous
catalyst for biodiesel production via in situ transesterification from microalgae.
Environ Technol 2015;36:622–7.

[213] Park J-Y, Lee K, Choi S-A, Jeong M-J, Kim B, Lee J-S, et al. Sonication-assisted

[246] Ma G, Hu W, Pei H, Jiang L, Song M, Mu R. In situ heterogeneous

homogenization system for improved lipid extraction from Chlorella vulgaris.
Renewable Energy 2015;79:3–8.

transesterification of microalgae using combined ultrasound and microwave
irradiation. Energy Convers Manage 2015;90:41–6.

[214] Dai Y-M, Chen K-T, Chen C-C. Study of the microwave lipid extraction from
microalgae for biodiesel production. Chem Eng J 2014;250:267–73.

[215] Ferreira AF, Dias APS, Silva CM, Costa M. Effect of low frequency ultrasound on

microalgae solvent extraction: analysis of products, energy consumption and
emissions. Algal Res 2016;14:9–16.

[216] Park J-Y, Nam B, Choi S-A, Oh Y-K, Lee J-S. Effects of anionic surfactant on

extraction of free fatty acid from Chlorella vulgaris. Bioresour Technol 2014;166:
620–4.

[217] Borges ME, Díaz L. Recent developments on heterogeneous catalysts for biodiesel
production by oil esterification and transesterification reactions: a review.
Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2012;16:2839–49.

[218] Bittman R. Glycerolipids: Chemistry. In: Roberts GCK, editor. Encyclopedia of

biophysics. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2013. p. 907–14.

[219] Petrus L, Noordermeer MA. Biomass to biofuels, a chemical perspective. Green

Chem 2006;8:861–7.

[220] Lam MK, Lee KT, Mohamed AR. Homogeneous, heterogeneous and enzymatic

catalysis for transesterification of high free fatty acid oil (waste cooking oil) to
biodiesel: a review. Biotechnol Adv 2010;28:500–18.

[247] Teo SH, Taufiq-Yap YH, Ng FL. Alumina supported/unsupported mixed oxides of
Ca and Mg as heterogeneous catalysts for transesterification of Nannochloropsis
sp. microalga’s oil. Energy Convers Manage 2014;88:1193–9.

[248] Kazemifard S, Nayebzadeh H, Saghatoleslami N, Safakish E. Application of

magnetic alumina-ferric oxide nanocatalyst supported by KOH for in-situ
transesterification of microalgae cultivated in wastewater medium. Biomass
Bioenergy 2019;129:105338.

[249] Guldhe A, Singh P, Ansari FA, Singh B, Bux F. Biodiesel synthesis from microalgal
lipids using tungstated zirconia as a heterogeneous acid catalyst and its
comparison with homogeneous acid and enzyme catalysts. Fuel 2017;187:180–8.
[250] S ́adaba I, Granados ML, Riisager A, Taarning E. Deactivation of solid catalysts in
liquid media: the case of leaching of active sites in biomass conversion reactions.
Green Chem 2015;17:4133–45.

[251] Mansir N, Taufiq-Yap YH, Rashid U, Lokman IM. Investigation of heterogeneous
solid acid catalyst performance on low grade feedstocks for biodiesel production:
a review. Energy Convers Manage 2017;141:171–82.

[252] Argyle MD, Bartholomew CH. Heterogeneous catalyst deactivation and

regeneration: a review. Catalysts 2015;5:145–269.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102022

J.Y. Kim et al.

[253] Guo F, Fang Z. Biodiesel production with solid catalysts. Biodiesel Feedstocks

[254]

Process Technol 2011:1–21.
ˇ
Capek L, H ́ajek M, Kut ́alek P, Smol ́akov ́a L. Aspects of potassium leaching in the
heterogeneously catalyzed transesterification of rapeseed oil. Fuel 2014;115:
443–51.

[255] MacLeod CS, Harvey AP, Lee AF, Wilson K. Evaluation of the activity and stability
of alkali-doped metal oxide catalysts for application to an intensified method of
biodiesel production. Chem Eng J 2008;135:63–70.

[256] Liu C-H, Huang C-C, Wang Y-W, Lee D-J, Chang J-S. Biodiesel production by

enzymatic transesterification catalyzed by Burkholderia lipase immobilized on
hydrophobic magnetic particles. Appl Energy 2012;100:41–6.
[257] Norjannah B, Ong HC, Masjuki HH, Juan JC, Chong WT. Enzymatic

transesterification for biodiesel production: a comprehensive review. RSC Adv
2016;6:60034–55.

[258] Zhang Y, Kong X, Wang Z, Sun Y, Zhu S, Li L, et al. Optimization of enzymatic
hydrolysis for effective lipid extraction from microalgae Scenedesmus sp.
Renewable Energy 2018;125:1049–57.

[259] Wang Y, Liu J, Gerken H, Zhang C, Hu Q, Li Y. Highly-efficient enzymatic

conversion of crude algal oils into biodiesel. Bioresour Technol 2014;172:143–9.

[260] Abedini Najafabadi H, Vossoughi M, Pazuki G. The role of co-solvents in
improving the direct transesterification of wet microalgal biomass under
supercritical condition. Bioresour Technol 2015;193:90–6.

[261] Nan Y, Liu J, Lin R, Tavlarides LL. Production of biodiesel from microalgae oil

(Chlorella protothecoides) by non-catalytic transesterification in supercritical
methanol and ethanol: process optimization. J Supercrit Fluids 2015;97:174–82.
[262] Patil PD, Gude VG, Mannarswamy A, Deng S, Cooke P, Munson-McGee S, et al.
Optimization of direct conversion of wet algae to biodiesel under supercritical
methanol conditions. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:118–22.

[263] Shirazi HM, Karimi-Sabet J, Ghotbi C. Biodiesel production from Spirulina

microalgae feedstock using direct transesterification near supercritical methanol
condition. Bioresour Technol 2017;239:378–86.

[264] Kim J, Jung J-M, Lee J, Kim K-H, Choi TO, Kim J-K, et al. Pyrogenic

transformation of Nannochloropsis oceanica into fatty acid methyl esters without
oil extraction for estimating total lipid content. Bioresour Technol 2016;212:
55–61.

[265] Demirbas A. Biodiesel from waste cooking oil via base-catalytic and supercritical

methanol transesterification. Energy Convers Manage 2009;50:923–7.

[266] Guan G, Kusakabe K, Moriyama K, Sakurai N. Transesterification of sunflower oil

with methanol in a microtube reactor. Ind Eng Chem Res 2009;48:1357–63.

[267] Kusdiana D, Saka S. Effects of water on biodiesel fuel production by supercritical

methanol treatment. Bioresour Technol 2004;91:289–95.

[284] P ́erez-L ́opez P, de Vree JH, Feijoo G, Bosma R, Barbosa MJ, Moreira MT, et al.
Comparative life cycle assessment of real pilot reactors for microalgae cultivation
in different seasons. Appl Energy 2017;205:1151–64.

[285] Transport Df. Carbon and Sustainability Reporting Within the Renewable

Transport Fuel Obligation Requirements and Guidance. 2008.

[286] Pragya N, Pandey KK. Life cycle assessment of green diesel production from

microalgae. Renewable Energy 2016;86:623–32.

[287] Collet P, H ́elias A, Lardon L, Ras M, Goy R-A, Steyer J-P. Life-cycle assessment of
microalgae culture coupled to biogas production. Bioresour Technol 2011;102:
207–14.

[288] Lardon L, H ́elias A, Sialve B, Steyer J-P, Bernard O. Life-cycle assessment of

biodiesel production from microalgae. Environ Sci Technol 2009;43:6475–81.
[289] Jung J-M, Lee J, Oh J-I, Kim H-W, Kwon EE. Estimating total lipid content of
Camelina sativa via pyrolysis assisted in-situ transesterification with dimethyl
carbonate. Bioresour Technol 2017;225:121–6.

[290] Lee J, Tsang YF, Jung J-M, Oh J-I, Kim H-W, Kwon EE. In-situ pyrogenic

production of biodiesel from swine fat. Bioresour Technol 2016;220:442–7.
[291] Xu L, Brilman DWF, Withag JAM, Brem G, Kersten S. Assessment of a dry and a
wet route for the production of biofuels from microalgae: energy balance analysis.
Bioresour Technol 2011;102:5113–22.

[292] Khanum F, Giwa A, Nour M, Al-Zuhair S, Taher H. Improving the economic

feasibility of biodiesel production from microalgal biomass via high-value
products coproduction. Int J Energy Res 2020;44:11453–72.

[293] Batan L, Quinn J, Willson B, Bradley T. Net energy and greenhouse gas emission

evaluation of biodiesel derived from microalgae. Environ Sci Technol 2010;44:
7975–80.

[294] Branco-Vieira M, Costa D, Mata TM, Martins AA, Freitas MAV, Caetano NS. A life

cycle inventory of microalgae-based biofuels production in an industrial plant
concept. Energy Rep 2020;6:397–402.

[295] Yuan J, Kendall A, Zhang Y. Mass balance and life cycle assessment of biodiesel

from microalgae incorporated with nutrient recycling options and technology
uncertainties. GCB Bioenergy 2015;7:1245–59.

[296] Esteves VPP, Esteves EMM, Bungenstab DJ, DGdSW Loebmann, de Castro

Victoria D, Vicente LE, et al. Land use change (LUC) analysis and life cycle
assessment (LCA) of Brazilian soybean biodiesel. Clean Technol Environ Policy
2016;18:1655–73.

[297] Yee KF, Tan KT, Abdullah AZ, Lee KT. Life cycle assessment of palm biodiesel:

Revealing facts and benefits for sustainability. Appl Energy 2009;86:S189–SS96.

[298] Kang S, Heo S, Lee JH. Techno-economic analysis of microalgae-based lipid

production: considering influences of microalgal species. Ind Eng Chem Res 2018;
58:944–55.

[268] Kusdiana D, Saka S. Kinetics of transesterification in rapeseed oil to biodiesel fuel

[299] Khanum F, Giwa A, Nour M, Al-Zuhair S, Taher H. Improving the economic

as treated in supercritical methanol. Fuel 2001;80:693–8.

[269] Saka S, Kusdiana D. Biodiesel fuel from rapeseed oil as prepared in supercritical

methanol. Fuel 2001;80:225–31.

[270] Patil P, Deng S, Isaac Rhodes J, Lammers PJ. Conversion of waste cooking oil to
biodiesel using ferric sulfate and supercritical methanol processes. Fuel 2010;89:
360–4.

[271] Hawash S, Kamal N, Zaher F, Kenawi O, Diwani GE. Biodiesel fuel from Jatropha

oil via non-catalytic supercritical methanol transesterification. Fuel 2009;88:
579–82.

[272] Son J, Kim B, Park J, Yang J, Lee JW. Wet in situ transesterification of spent coffee

grounds with supercritical methanol for the production of biodiesel. Bioresour
Technol 2018;259:465–8.

[273] Ghoreishi SM, Moein P. Biodiesel synthesis from waste vegetable oil via

transesterification reaction in supercritical methanol. J Supercrit Fluids 2013;76:
24–31.

[274] Jazzar S, Olivares-Carrillo P, P ́erez de los Ríos A, Marzouki MN, Aci ́en-

Fern ́andez FG, Fern ́andez-Sevilla JM, et al. Direct supercritical methanolysis of
wet and dry unwashed marine microalgae (Nannochloropsis gaditana) to
biodiesel. Appl Energy 2015;148:210–9.

[275] Kwon EE, Kim S, Jeon YJ, Yi H. Biodiesel production from sewage sludge: new

paradigm for mining energy from municipal hazardous material. Environ Sci
Technol 2012;46:10222–8.

[276] Jung S, Kim M, Moon H, Park Y-K, Rinklebe J, Park C-J, et al. Valorization of

phytoremediation byproduct via synthesis of biodiesel from cockspur grass
(Echinochloa crus-galli) seed. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2020;8:11588–95.
[277] Jung S, Kim M, Jung J-M, Kwon EE. Valorization of swine manure biochar as a
catalyst for transesterifying waste cooking oil into biodiesel. Environ Pollut 2020;
266:115377.

[278] Kim M, Jung S, Lee D-J, Lin K-YA, Jeon YJ, Rinklebe J, et al. Biodiesel synthesis

from swine manure. Bioresour Technol 2020;317:124032.

[279] Jung J-M, Oh J-I, Kim J-G, Kwon H-H, Park Y-K, Kwon EE. Valorization of sewage
sludge via non-catalytic transesterification. Environ Int 2019;131:105035.
[280] Adesanya VO, Cadena E, Scott SA, Smith AG. Life cycle assessment on microalgal
biodiesel production using a hybrid cultivation system. Bioresour Technol 2014;
163:343–55.

[281] Passell H, Dhaliwal H, Reno M, Wu B, Ben Amotz A, Ivry E, et al. Algae biodiesel
life cycle assessment using current commercial data. J Environ Manage 2013;129:
103–11.

[282] Dasan YK, Lam MK, Yusup S, Lim JW, Lee KT. Life cycle evaluation of microalgae
biofuels production: effect of cultivation system on energy, carbon emission and
cost balance analysis. Sci Total Environ 2019;688:112–28.

[283] Sun C-H, Fu Q, Liao Q, Xia A, Huang Y, Zhu X, et al. Life-cycle assessment of
biofuel production from microalgae via various bioenergy conversion systems.
Energy 2019;171:1033–45.

feasibility of biodiesel production from microalgal biomass via high-value
products coproduction. Int J Energy Res 2020.

[300] Sui Y, Jiang Y, Moretti M, Vlaeminck SE. Harvesting time and biomass

composition affect the economics of microalgae production. J Cleaner Prod 2020:
120782.

[301] Abo El-Enin SA, Attia NK, El-Ibiari NN, El-Diwani GI, El-Khatib KM. In-situ
transesterification of rapeseed and cost indicators for biodiesel production.
Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2013;18:471–7.

[302] Lam MK, Khoo CG, Lee KT. Chapter 19 - scale-up and commercialization of algal
cultivation and biofuels production. In: Pandey A, Chang J-S, Soccol CR, Lee D-J,
Chisti Y, editors. Biofuels from Algae. Second Edition. Elsevier; 2019. p. 475–506.

[303] Lee J-C, Lee B, Heo J, Kim H-W, Lim H. Techno-economic assessment of

conventional and direct-transesterification processes for microalgal biomass to
biodiesel conversion. Bioresour Technol 2019;294:122173.

[304] Quinn JC, Catton K, Wagner N, Bradley TH. Current large-scale US biofuel

potential from microalgae cultivated in photobioreactors. BioEnergy Res 2012;5:
49–60.

[305] Pereira H, P ́aramo J, Silva J, Marques A, Barros A, Maurício D, et al. Scale-up and
large-scale production of Tetraselmis sp. CTP4 (Chlorophyta) for CO2 mitigation:
from an agar plate to 100-m3 industrial photobioreactors. Sci Rep 2018;8:5112.

[306] Wen X, Du K, Wang Z, Peng X, Luo L, Tao H, et al. Effective cultivation of

microalgae for biofuel production: a pilot-scale evaluation of a novel oleaginous
microalga Graesiella sp. WBG-1. Biotechnol Biofuels 2016;9:123.

[307] Tamil Selvan S, Velramar B, Ramamurthy D, Balasundaram S, Sivamani K. Pilot
scale wastewater treatment, CO2 sequestration and lipid production using
microalga, Neochloris aquatica RDS02. Int J Phytorem 2020:1–18.

[308] Silkina A, Zacharof M-P, Ginnever NE, Gerardo M, Lovitt RW. Testing the waste
based biorefinery concept: pilot scale cultivation of microalgal species on spent
anaerobic digestate fluids. Waste Biomass Valorization 2020;11:3883–96.
[309] Moazami N, Ashori A, Ranjbar R, Tangestani M, Eghtesadi R, Nejad AS. Large-

scale biodiesel production using microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis. Biomass
Bioenergy 2012;39:449–53.

[310] Biondi N, Bassi N, Chini Zittelli G, De Faveri D, Giovannini A, Rodolfi L, et al.
Nannochloropsis sp. F&M-M24: oil production, effect of mixing on productivity
and growth in an industrial wastewater. Environ Prog Sustainable Energy 2013;
32:846–53.

[311] Yang H, He Q, Hu C. Feasibility of biodiesel production and CO2 emission

reduction by Monoraphidium dybowskii LB50 under semi-continuous culture
with open raceway ponds in the desert area. Biotechnol Biofuels 2018;11:82.

[312] Zhu B, Sun F, Yang M, Lu L, Yang G, Pan K. Large-scale biodiesel production using
flue gas from coal-fired power plants with Nannochloropsis microalgal biomass in
open raceway ponds. Bioresour Technol 2014;174:53–9.

[313] Ashokkumar V, Agila E, Sivakumar P, Salam Z, Rengasamy R, Ani FN.

Optimization and characterization of biodiesel production from microalgae

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102023

J.Y. Kim et al.

Botryococcus grown at semi-continuous system. Energy Convers Manage 2014;
88:936–46.

[314] He Q, Yang H, Hu C. Culture modes and financial evaluation of two oleaginous

microalgae for biodiesel production in desert area with open raceway pond.
Bioresour Technol 2016;218:571–9.

[315] Jin H, Zhang H, Zhou Z, Li K, Hou G, Xu Q, et al. Ultrahigh-cell-density

heterotrophic cultivation of the unicellular green microalga Scenedesmus
acuminatus and application of the cells to photoautotrophic culture enhance
biomass and lipid production. Biotechnol Bioeng 2020;117:96–108.
[316] Li X, Xu H, Wu Q. Large-scale biodiesel production from microalga Chlorella

protothecoides through heterotrophic cultivation in bioreactors. Biotechnol
Bioeng 2007;98:764–71.

[317] Pate RC. Resource requirements for the large-scale production of algal biofuels.

Biofuels 2013;4:409–35.

[318] Dahmani S, Zerrouki D, Ramanna L, Rawat I, Bux F. Cultivation of Chlorella

pyrenoidosa in outdoor open raceway pond using domestic wastewater as medium
in arid desert region. Bioresour Technol 2016;219:749–52.

[319] Wicker RJ, Kumar G, Khan E, Bhatnagar A. Emergent green technologies for cost-
effective valorization of microalgal biomass to renewable fuel products under a
biorefinery scheme. Chem Eng J 2021;415:128932.

[320] Saini JK, Patel AK, Adsul M, Singhania RR. Cellulase adsorption on lignin: a

roadblock for economic hydrolysis of biomass. Renewable Energy 2016;98:29–42.

[321] Demichelis F, Laghezza M, Chiappero M, Fiore S. Technical, economic and
environmental assessement of bioethanol biorefinery from waste biomass.
J Cleaner Prod 2020;277:124111.

[322] Phwan CK, Ong HC, Chen W-H, Ling TC, Ng EP, Show PL. Overview: comparison

of pretreatment technologies and fermentation processes of bioethanol from
microalgae. Energy Convers Manage 2018;173:81–94.

[323] de Farias Silva CE, Bertucco A. Bioethanol from microalgae and cyanobacteria: a

review and technological outlook. Process Biochem 2016;51:1833–42.
[324] El-Dalatony MM, Kurade MB, Abou-Shanab RAI, Kim H, Salama E-S, Jeon B-H.

Long-term production of bioethanol in repeated-batch fermentation of microalgal
biomass using immobilized Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Bioresour Technol 2016;
219:98–105.

[325] Sanchez Rizza L, Sanz Smachetti ME, Do Nascimento M, Salerno GL, Curatti L.
Bioprospecting for native microalgae as an alternative source of sugars for the
production of bioethanol. Algal Res 2017;22:140–7.

[326] Lee T, Nam I-H, Jung S, Park Y-K, Kwon EE. Synthesis of nickel/biochar

composite from pyrolysis of Microcystis Aeruginosa and its practical use for syngas
production. Bioresour Technol 2020;300:122712.

[327] Kwon D, Lee SS, Jung S, Park Y-K, Tsang YF, Kwon EE. CO2 to fuel via pyrolysis of

banana peel. Chem Eng J 2020;392:123774.

[328] Bolan N, Hoang SA, Beiyuan J, Gupta S, Hou D, Karakoti A, et al. Multifunctional
applications of biochar beyond carbon storage. Int Mater Rev 2021:1–51.
[329] Jung S, Park Y-K, Kwon EE. Strategic use of biochar for CO2  capture and

sequestration. J CO2 Utiliz 2019;32:128–39.

[330] Lee J, Sarmah AK, Kwon EE. Chapter 1 - production and formation of biochar. In:
Ok YS, Tsang DCW, Bolan N, Novak JM, editors. Biochar from Biomass and Waste.
Elsevier; 2019. p. 3–18.

[331] Yang C, Li R, Zhang B, Qiu Q, Wang B, Yang H, et al. Pyrolysis of microalgae: a

critical review. Fuel Process Technol 2019;186:53–72.

[332] Jung S, Park Y-K, Kwon EE. 7 - Catalytic hydrodeoxygenation for upgrading of

lignin-derived bio-oils. In: Bhaskar T, Pandey A, editors. Biomass, Biofuels,
Biochemicals. Elsevier; 2021. p. 129–45.

[333] Pakhare D, Spivey J. A review of dry (CO2) reforming of methane over noble

metal catalysts. Chem Soc Rev 2014;43:7813–37.

[334] Jung S, Lee J, Moon DH, Kim K-H, Kwon EE. Upgrading biogas into syngas

through dry reforming. Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev 2021;143:110949.

[335] Heilmann SM, Davis HT, Jader LR, Lefebvre PA, Sadowsky MJ, Schendel FJ, et al.
Hydrothermal carbonization of microalgae. Biomass Bioenergy 2010;34:875–82.

[336] Ou L, Thilakaratne R, Brown RC, Wright MM. Techno-economic analysis of

transportation fuels from defatted microalgae via hydrothermal liquefaction and
hydroprocessing. Biomass Bioenergy 2015;72:45–54.

[337] Sol ́e-Bund ́o M, Passos F, Romero-Güiza MS, Ferrer I, Astals S. Co-digestion
strategies to enhance microalgae anaerobic digestion: a review. Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev 2019;112:471–82.

[338] Kohn MP, Castaldi MJ, Farrauto RJ. Biogas reforming for syngas production: the

effect of methyl chloride. Appl Catal, B 2014;144:353–61.

[339] Yenigün O, Demirel B. Ammonia inhibition in anaerobic digestion: a review.

Process Biochem 2013;48:901–11.

[340] Chew KW, Chia SR, Lee SY, Zhu L, Show PL. Enhanced microalgal protein

extraction and purification using sustainable microwave-assisted multiphase
partitioning technique. Chem Eng J 2019;367:1–8.

[341] Chia SR, Chew KW, Show PL, Yap YJ, Ong HC, Ling TC, et al. Analysis of
economic and environmental aspects of microalgae biorefinery for biofuels
production: a review. Biotechnol J 2018;13:1700618.

[342] Milano J, Ong HC, Masjuki HH, Chong WT, Lam MK, Loh PK, et al. Microalgae
biofuels as an alternative to fossil fuel for power generation. Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev 2016;58:180–97.

Mr. Jee Young Kim: Jee Young Kim is currently a Ph.D. candidate under the supervision
of Prof. Yoon-E Choi at the Biomass Utilization Laboratory, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.
His research interests are focused on the utilization of microalgal biomass and metabolites.

Mr. Jong-Min Jung: Jong-Min Jung received a Ph.D. degree from Department of Envi-
ronment and Energy at Sejong University, Korea, under the supervision of Prof. Eilhann E.
Kwon. He is currently working as a postdoctoral researcher under the guideline of Prof. E.
E. Kwon.

Dr. Sungyup Jung: Dr. Sungyup Jung received a PhD degree in chemical engineering from
the City College of New York at CUNY, USA in 2018, where he worked for electrochemical
upgrading of biomass-derived oxygenates. He was a postdoctoral fellow at Simon Fraser
University (2018 – 2019) and Sejong University (2019-2022). He is currently working as a
research assistant professor at Hanyang University. His research areas include thermal and
electrochemical upgrading of waste materials into value-added chemicals and fuels. He
has published more than 80 SCI(E) papers in the peer-reviewed international journals.

Prof. Young-Kwon Park: Prof. Young-Kwon Park received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. from
the Chemical Engineering of Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 1992,
1994, and 1999, respectively. Then Prof. Park worked at Industrial Technology Institute of
Hyundai  Heavy  Industries  as  a  senior  researcher.  Since  2002,  Prof.  Park  has  been
employed as a Professor in the School of Environmental Engineering of The University of
Seoul,  Korea.  His  current  research  interests include  environmental  catalysis,  pyrolysis/
gasification of biomass wastes and catalytic process for renewable energy. Prof. Park has
published more than 600 journal articles. Prof. Park has served as deputy editor of Korean
Journal of Chemical Engineering (SCIE listed) and editor of Applied Chemistry for Engi-
neering (ESCI listed). Currently, he was also serving as the chairman of the division of
Energy & Environment of the Korea Institute of Chemical Engineers.

Prof. Yiu Fai Tsang: Dr. Yiu Fai Tsang is an Associate Professor of the Department of
Science and Environmental Studies and Assistant Dean of Graduate School at The Edu-
cation University of Hong Kong (EdUHK). He received his BEng and PhD in Environmental
Engineering from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). Prior to joining EdUHK,
he was a Visiting Scholar in the Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering at
the  University  of  Illinois  at  Urbana-Champaign  (UIUC)  and  a  Research  Fellow  in  the
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at PolyU. Currently, he is the Editor-
in-Chief  of  Energy  &  Environment  (SAGE),  Associate  Editor  of  Chemical  Engineering
Journal  (Elsevier),  and  Subject  Editor  of  Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection
(Elsevier).  He  also  received  the  President’s  Award  for  Outstanding  Performance  in
Research (Research Excellent Award) in 2017/18.

Prof. Kun-Yi Andrew Lin: Prof. Lin received his master degree in Environmental Engi-
neering  &  Sciences  at  National  Taiwan  University  in  2005.  After  one  and  half  year  of
military service in Taiwan, he worked as a research assistant in National Yunlin University
and executed a hydrological project prior to his enrollment to Columbia University in the
city  of  New  York  in  2008.  In  Columbia,  Prof.  Lin  was  a  full-time  research  assistant  in
Lenfest Center for Sustainable Energy under supervision of Professor Ah-Hyung Alissa Park
and Professor Klaus Lackner.  Prof. Lin’s primary project in Columbia University was to
develop Nanoparticle Organic Hybrid Materials for CO2 capture and conversion. In 2011,
Prof.  Lin  successfully  defended  his  dissertation  "Design,  Synthesis  and  Evaluation  of
Nanoparticle Organic Hybrid Materials for CO2 Capture" and moved to University of Notre
Dame to work as a postdoctoral research associate funded by Center of Sustainable Energy
at Notre Dame (cSEND). His work focused on inter-facial chemistry of carbon-based ma-
terials  (e.g.,  CNTs,  Graphene)  in  water  and  oils.  Since  February  2013,  he  joined  the
department of environmental engineering at National Chung-Hsing University as an As-
sistant Professor; his research interests include sustainable energy, the control of Green
House  Gases,  nanoscale  carbonaceous  chemistry  and  application,  polymeric  nano-
composites, etc.

Prof. Y-E Choi: Prof. Yoon-E Choi was at Pohang University of Science and Technology for
an M.S. (2000-2002) and at the Texas A&M University for a Ph.D. (2002-2008). He con-
ducted  postdoctoral  research  at  Purdue  University  (2008-2009)  and  USDA-ARS  (2009-
2010) in U.S.A. Then, he moved to Korea and joined at Advanced Biomass R&D Center,
KAIST  as  a  research  assistant  professor  (2010-2012).  In  2012,  he  became  an  assistant
professor  at Chonbuk National University and  moved to  Korea University in 2015.  His
research  focuses  on  the  study  of  microalgae,  from  cultivation  to  biorefinery.  He  has
authored 80 publications in refereed international journals.

List of Top 6 publications (by the corresponding author: Y-E Choi) out of 80 peer-
reviewed SCI (international) journal articles (Full List of papers: http://eco.korea.ac.
kr/biomass) related to the proposed submitted topic:

(1)  Yao,  J.,  Kim,  H.S.,  Kim,  J.Y.,  Choi,  Y.E.  and  Park,  J.  (2020)  Mechanical  stress
induced astaxanthin accumulation of H. pluvialis on a chip. Lab on a Chip 20(3), 647-654.
(IF1⁄46.774)

(2) Han, S.I., Jeon,  M.S., Heo,  Y.M., Kim, S. and  Choi, Y.E. (2020). Effect  of Pseu-
doalteromonas  sp.  MEBiC  03485  on  biomass  production  and  sulfated  polysaccharide
biosynthesis in Porphyridium cruentum UTEX 161. Bioresource Technology 302, 122791.
(IF1⁄47.539)

(3) Kim, J.Y., Oh, J.J., Jeon, M.S., Kim, G.H. and Choi, Y.E. (2019) Improvement of
Euglena gracilis paramylon production through a cocultivation strategy with the indole-3-
acetic  acid-producing  bacterium  Vibrio  natriegens.  Applied  and  Environmental  Microbi-
ology 85(19), e01548-19. (IF1⁄44.016)

(4)  Jeon,  M.S.,  Oh,  J.J.,  Kim,  J.Y.,  Han,  S.I.,  Sim,  S.J.  and  Choi,  Y.E.  (2019)
Enhancement of growth and paramylon production of Euglena gracilis by co-cultivation
with Pseudoalteromonas sp. MEBiC 03485.

z Bioresource Technology 288, 121513. (IF1⁄47.539)
(5) Jung, J.M., Kim, S., Lee, J., Oh, J.I., Choi, Y.E. and Kwon, E.E. (2019) Tailoring
pyrogenic products from pyrolysis of defatted Euglena gracilis using CO2 as reactive gas
medium. Energy 174, 184-190. (IF1⁄46.082)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102024

J.Y. Kim et al.

(6)  Kim,  J.Y.,  Lee,  C.,  Jeon,  M.S.,  Park,  J.  and  Choi,  Y.E.  (2018)  Enhancement  of
microalga Haematococcus pluvialis growth and astaxanthin production by electrical treat-
ment. Bioresource Technology 268, 815-819. (IF1⁄47.539).

Prof. Eilhann E. Kwon: Prof. Kwon completed his Ph.D. in the Department of Earth and
Environmental  Engineering  (Interdisciplinary  department  between  chemical  and  envi-
ronmental engineering) at Columbia University in the City of New York, USA in 2008.
Immediately following, Prof. Kwon was appointed as Research Scientist at the Earth En-
gineering Center of the Earth Institute at Columbia University. Afterwards, Prof. Kwon
returned to South Korea and worked at the Research Institute of Industrial Science and
Technology (RIST) from 2010 to 2013. In 2013, Prof. Kwon joined as a faculty member in
the Department  of Environment and  Energy at Sejong  University.  In 2022,  Prof. Kwon
joined  as  a  faculty  member  in  the  Department  of  Earth  Resources  and  Environmental
Engineering at Hanyang University. His research interests are focused on Waste-to-Energy
(WtE), Combustion Chemistry, Air Pollution Controls, Thermo-Chemical Process (Pyrol-
ysis and Gasification), Catalysis, Biofuels, Biorefinery, CO2 Utilization, Waste Valorization,
Green Chemistry, and Environmental Sustainability. To date, Prof. Kwon has published
more than 400 articles in peer-reviewed international SCI(E) journals.

List of Top 8 publications (by the corresponding author: Eilhann E. Kwon) out of
400 peer-reviewed SCI (international) journal articles related to the proposed sub-
mitted topic:

(1) Kwon, E.E., Jeon, Y.J., Yi, H. (2013) Noncatalytic transformation of the crude lipid
of  Chlorella  vulgaris  into  fatty  acid  methyl  ester  (FAME)  with  charcoal  via  a  thermo-

chemical process. Bioresource Technology 129, 672-675. (IF1⁄47.539)

(2) Kim, J., Jung, J.-M., Lee, J., Kim, K-H., Choi, T.O., Kim, J.-K., Jeon, Y.J., Kwon, E.E.
(2016) Pyrogenic transformation of Nannochloropsis oceanica into fatty acid methyl esters
without oil extraction for estimating total lipid content. Bioresource Technology 212, 55-
61. (IF1⁄47.539)

(3) Jung, J.-M., Kim, J.Y., Jung, S., Choi, Y.-E., Kwon, E.E. (2020) Quantitative study
on  lipid  productivity  of  Euglena  gracilis  and  its  biodiesel  production  according  to  the
cultivation conditions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 125218. (IF1⁄47.246)

(4) Lee, T., Nam, I.-H., Jung, S., Park, Y.-K., Kwon, E.E. (2020) Synthesis of nickel/
biochar composite from pyrolysis of Microcystis aeruginosa and its practical use for syngas
production. Bioresource Technology 300, 122712. (IF1⁄47.539)

(5) Jung, S., Kim, J.-H., Jeon, Y.J., Park, Y.-K., Kwon, E.E. (2020) Synergistic use of
carbon dioxide in catalytic pyrolysis of Chlorella vulgaris over Ni and Co catalysts. Energy
211, 118710. (IF1⁄46.082)

(6) Jung, S., Kim, M., Moon, H., Park, Y.-K., Rinklebe, J., Park, C.-J., Kwon, E.E. (2020)
Valorization of phytoremediation byproduct via synthesis of biodiesel from cockspur grass
(Echinochloa crus-galli) seed 8(31), 11588-11595 (IF1⁄47.632)

(7) Lee, D.-J., Yim, J.H., Jung, S., Jang, M.-S., Jeong, G.-T., Jeong, K.-H., Lee, D.-H.,
Kim, J.K., Tsang, Y.F., Jeon, Y.J., Kwon, E.E. (2021) Valorization of animal manure: A
case study of bioethanol production from horse manure, 403, 126345. (IF1⁄410.652)

(8) Kwon, E.E., Seo, J., Yi, H., Transforming animal fats into biodiesel using charcoal

and CO2 (2012) Green Chemistry, 14(6), 1799-1804 (IF1⁄49.480).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience93(2022)10102025
