Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress  in  Energy  and  Combustion  Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Biomass-derived  aviation  fuels:  Challenges  and  perspective

Meng Wang a , Raf. Dewil b , Kyriakos Maniatis c , John Wheeldon d , Tianwei Tan a ,
Jan Baeyens f , g , ∗, Yunming Fang a , e , ∗∗
a
National Energy Research Center for Biorefinery, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 10 0 029, PR China
b
Department of Chemical Engineering, K.U. Leuven, Leuven 30 0 0, Belgium
c
Directorate General for Energy, European Commission, Brussels 1049, Belgium
d
Electric Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA, United States
e
Department of Chemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, PR China
f
Beijing Advanced Innovation Centre for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 10 0 029, PR China
g
School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry CV47AL, United Kingdom

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 17 September 2018
Accepted 29 April 2019
Available online 13 May 2019

Keywords:
Bio-aviation fuel
ASTM activities
Production technology
Carbohydrate/lignocellulosic biomass
Metabolic engineering
Bio-refinery

The worldwide utilization of fossil energy, including its specific application as transportation fuel, sig-
nificantly contributes to the continuous increase of the atmospheric CO 2 concentration. Several solutions
have been promoted or scheduled to reduce CO 2  emissions. Among these solutions, the development
of renewable energy resources, such as bio-fuels, offers im portant advantages as promoted by several
countries and institutions who disclosed their plans to partly or totally use alternative renewable energy
sources in the future. For the rapidly growing aviation sector, aviation fuel derived from fossil resources
is still the major available energy source. The development of renewable aviation fuel is considered to
be a promising future strategy to reduce related CO 2 emissions. The worldwide total aviation fuel con-
sumption by commercial airlines increased from about 260 million m 3/year in 2005 to over 340 million
m 3/year in 2018, and a further annual increase of about 5% is expected till 2050.

Worldwide actions have hence been undertaken with respect to bio-aviation fuel production, distri-
bution, and demonstration flying. As a relatively new topic, there are a lot of remaining challenges in
technology development, fuel certification and distribution. The production technology, policy and envi-
ronmental impact of bio-aviation fuel were comprehensively reviewed, including its production by the
catalytic conversion of lipids, by the conversion of carbohydrates or lignocellulosic biomass, and by de-
veloping bio-refinery concepts for bio-aviation fuel production. The future reduction of CO 2 emissions
in the aviation sector requires an improvement of the biomass to aviation fuel production technology
through the correct integration of biology, chemical engineering, and energy crops. The paper illustrates
this potential integration through reviewing the current research in the production of aviation fuels from
biomass, including the complete industrial chain from airplane manufacturer, aviation fuel producer and
provider, airline strategies, and ongoing R&D, bearing in mind that major efforts are required to foster
the development of the cost-effective production of renewable aviation fuel. The different topics of the
Table of contents will be subsequently dealt with.

© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Contents

1.

Introduction and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
1.1.  Fossil and biomass-based aviation fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
1.2.  Scope and objectives of the present review paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
2.  Production technology overview of bio-aviation fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
2.1.  Catalytic conversion of lipids into bio-aviation fuel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34

∗ Corresponding author at: Beijing Advanced Innovation Centre for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 10 0 029, PR

China.
∗∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Chemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, PR China.

E-mail addresses: baeyens.j@mail.buct.edu.cn (J. Baeyens), fangym@mail.buct.edu.cn (Y. Fang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.04.004
0360-1285/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

32

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

2.2.  Conversion of carbohydrate and lignocellulosic biomass into bio-aviation fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
2.2.1.  Production of bio-aviation fuel and oxygenate precursors from carbohydrates by metabolic engineering . . . . . . . . .  36
2.2.2.  Catalytic conversion of different bio-oxygenates into bio-aviation fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
2.2.3.  The bio-refinery concept to produce bio-aviation fuel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
2.3.  Pilot and industrialization production of bio-aviation fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
3.  Combustion chemistry, properties and environmental impacts of bio-aviation fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
4.  Life cycle assessment of both bio-aviation fuel production and uses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
5.  Policy studies for bio-aviation fuel production  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
6.  ASTM activities in bio-aviation fuel certification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
7.  Perspective: The evolution of costs and the required atom-efficient production of bio-aviation fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
8.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  45
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  45

Acronyms

Acetone-n-Butanol-Ethanol
Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Aqueous Phase Reforming
American Society for Testing Materials
Alcohol to Jet

ABE
AHCs
APR
ASTM
ATJ
ATJ-SPK  Alcohol to Jet-Synthetic Paraffinic Kerosene
DSHC
DW
ERS
EU
FAME
FASS
FP-7
F-T
FT-SPK
GHG
HDA
HDO
HEFA
HMF
HRJ
HY
IATA
JP-8
LCA
MEP
MSN
MVA
NASA
NHOC  Net Heat of Combustion
PAHs
PNNL
RED
RES
SAPO-11  SAPO-11 Zeolite
SGAB

Direct Sugar to Hydrocarbons
Dry Weight
Elevance Renewable Sciences Inc.
European Union
Fatty Acid Methyl Ester
Fatty Acid Synthesis System
7th EU Framework Program
Fischer-Tropsch synthesis
Fischer-Tropsch - Synthetic Paraffinic Kerosene
Greenhouse Gases
Hexadecylamine
Hydrodeoxygenation
Hydrogenated Ether and Fatty Acids
HydroxyMethylFurfural
Hydrotreated Renewable Jet Fuel
HY Zeolite
International Air Transport Association
Jet Propellant 8
Life-cycle Assessment
2-Methyl-Erythritol 4-Phosphate
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles
Mevalonate
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Renewable Energy Directive
Renewable Sources

Sub-group on Advanced Biofuel, within the Sustain-
able Transport Forum
Synthetic isoParaffins
Synthesized Kerosene
Sustainable Transport Forum
Universal Oil Products
Vegetable Oil Hydrogenation

SIP
SK
STF
UOP
VOH

1. Introduction and objectives

1.1. Fossil and biomass-based aviation fuel

The application of fossil fuels, including transportation fuel, has
2 concen-

resulted in a continuous increase of the atmospheric CO

tration [1–4] . A lot of solutions such as the application of renew-
able energy have been promoted or scheduled to reduce CO
2 emis-
sions [5] . Several countries and car manufacturers have disclosed
their  plans  to  partly  or  totally  substitute  gasoline  powered  cars
by hybrid or sole-electric alternatives [6,7] . The only current en-
ergy source for aviation fuel is a hydrocarbon mixture of paraffins,
isoparaffins, cycloalkanes and aromatics, with specific and desired
carbon chain lengths and properties, as shown in Fig. 1 [8–12] .

Biomass  inherently  contains  a  high  wt%  of  oxygen  and  the
structural constituents cover a broad range of low to high molar
weights. According to the ASTM and EU standards [13] , bio-aviation
fuels  must  be  hydrocarbons  without  oxygen  and  with  a  narrow
specification  of  carbon  chain  length  and  physical/chemical  prop-
erties, difficult to be produced by current biomass-conversion con-
cepts. These requirements and the biomass based limitations limit
the application to drop-in hydrocarbon fuels to bio-kerosene only.
The properties and conditions for use of these bio-fuels are defined
by ASTM standards, as discussed in Section 6 . The blended fuels
(i.e. fossil + bio-jet fuels) should also meet the regular fuel stan-
dards. According to IATA predictions, the demand of aviation fuel
will continuously increase during the coming years [14] . The fleet
size and number of passengers will be tripled within 20 years with
the highest increase in developing countries such as China [15–18] .
The demand of aviation fuel is expected to increase along with the
fleet size from 340 million m 3 per year in 2018 to over 500 million
m 3 per year in 2026 [19,20] .

Different from road transportation, the update of airplane tech-
2 emission,
nology and control systems can only partly reduce CO
hence only partly contribute to reverse the CO
2 emission tendency
[21] .  IATA  has  however  identified  that  the  development  of  bio-
aviation fuel has the highest potential to reduce aviation-related
2  emissions.  The  application  of  low  carbon  emission  fuels  is
CO
hence the only realistic solution to achieve the CO
2  emission re-
duction objectives of 2050 [22] .

Bio-aviation  fuel  is  furthermore  not  only  contributing  to  CO
2
emission control, but also to particulate matter reduction. Recently,
Moore et al. [23] sampled the engine exhausts from a DC-8 aircraft
when burning either Jet A fuel, or an equal vol% mix of Jet A fuel
and a bio-fuel obtained from Camelina oil. The bio-fuel mix sig-
nificantly reduced both the particle number concentration and the
mass flow by 50 to 70% immediately behind the aircraft when us-
ing the bio-fuel blend.

1.2. Scope and objectives of the present review paper

In view of the above observations, worldwide actions have been
and  are  undertaken  to  assess  and  enhance  the  production,  dis-
tribution, and demonstration flying of bio-aviation fuel. Scientific
contributions  are  numerous,  and  statistics  of  number  of  publi-
cations  are  shown  in  Fig.  2  according  to  targets  of  bio-aviation
(jet) fuel in general, and more specifically concerning production

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

33

Fig. 1.  Aviation fuel molecules with desired carbon numbers and properties.(For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)

Fig. 2.  Web of Science data ( > 1960) of bio-aviation fuel publications, with bio-aviation (jet) fuel as main index, and ‘technical, policy, economics, environmental, LCA,
combustion chemistry and properties as sub-indices.

technology,  policy,  economics,  environmental  aspects  and  LCA,
combustion chemistry and bio-aviation fuel properties.

The number of publications significantly increased since 2002.
Towards  the  production  technology,  research  covered  different
feedstock, diverse processing technologies (bio-chemical, thermo-
chemical and chemo-catalytic conversion) as well as product re-
covery. Besides the saccharide and lipid feedstock, the more com-
plex but the widely lignocellulosic biomass attracted research at-
tention as feedstock [24–27] . Also CO
2 -based processes for produc-
ing bio-aviation fuel emerged.

Towards  the  product  part,  discussions  dealt  with  isoparaffin
blends, aromatics or cycloalkanes with high density, while other
required aviation fuel properties were also discussed. In line with
the worldwide research, five production pathways for bio-aviation
fuel were successfully approved by the ASTM committee till 2019,
as discussed in Section 6 .

In addition to the numerous topic-related research papers, there
are several review papers summarizing the progress of bio-aviation
fuel, however not providing a complete image of the research field,
but with a limited review focus. Production technologies are dealt
with by Gutiérrez-Antonio et al. [28] , Kallio et al. [29] , Wang and
Tao  [30] ,  Richter  et  al.  [31] ,  Ramsum  H.  et  al.  [32]  Neuling  and
Kaltschmitt [33] summarized different aspects related to the over-
all supply chain of bio-kerosene as part of the global civil aviation
business. Classical and especially non-edible biomass feedstock are
assessed, together with the current processes of producing a liquid
biomass-based  fuel  fulfilling  the  specifications  for  kerosene.  Fur-
ther, given the growing interest of the aviation industry and air-
lines in bio-aviation fuel, the experiences of an air-carrier are pre-
sented.

Other  reviews  deal  with  the  performance  characteristics  of
bio-jet  fuels  [34,35] ,  the  potential  synergies  of  drop-in  biofuel

34

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

production with further co-refining at oil refineries [36] , emission
performances and LCA [37–39] , and the financial analyses of po-
tential bio-aviation fuel production [40] .

In the present review, the authors intend to deal with all im-
portant aspects related to the development of bio-aviation fuel in
a  concise  but  all-encompassing  manner.  They  aim  to  assess  and
discuss  the  technologies  and  perspectives  of  aviation  bio-fuels,
spanning from the feedstock to the fuel combustion as far as sci-
entific and technological aspects are concerned. From the exten-
sive list of papers on the renewable aviation fuel production to-
wards both technical and scientific improvements, the authors of
the present review summarize the latest progress in this area and
provide their personal perspectives on the feedstock, product and
conversion  technology.  The  associated  issues  of  a  cost  effective
production of bio-aviation fuel will be specifically discussed. En-
vironmental and policy issues will complete the review.

2. Production technology overview of bio-aviation fuel

precursors, and the hydro-processing [41] . The present section will
review the bio-aviation fuel production from lipids and lignocellu-
losic biomass. Pilot demonstration activities will be subsequently
summarized.

2.1. Catalytic conversion of lipids into bio-aviation fuel

Lipids  are  the  most  widely  studied  feedstock  for  bio-aviation
fuel production as shown in Table 1 . The hydro-processing of lipids
from vegetal oil, waste cooking oil, algae oil or fermented lipids
were used as feedstock [42–48] .

A  single-step  catalytic  process  for  the  production  of  jet  fuel
range alkanes from algae oil, with a 98% mass conversion to liquid
product and an 85% selectivity using Ce/ β-zeolite as catalyst was
e.g. investigated by Bala et al. [64] . Murata et al. produced green
aviation and diesel-type alkanes by hydrocracking of Botyococcus
braunii oil over Pt-Re/SiO
3 catalysts, obtaining a yield of avi-
ation fuel-range hydrocarbons (C10-C15) ≤ 50.2%, and ≤ 16.7% of
diesel-range hydrocarbons (C16 - C20) [65] .

2 -A1

2 O

The production of bio-aviation fuel from biomass resources can
be considered as a specific development of technologies that are
already used for the production of other typical bio-fuels such as:
bio-alcohol and biodiesel. It is an integration of different technolo-
gies such as thermo-chemical conversions, chemo-catalytic conver-
sion,  and  bio-chemical  conversion.  The  process  of  biomass  con-
version into bio-aviation fuel generally involves several inherently
connected steps including the generation of an intermediate state,
the adjustment of the carbon chain length to produce aviation fuel

Despite  the  vast  amount  of  studies,  the  yield  of  aviation  fu-
els from a common lipid-based oil, with mainly C18 fatty acid, is
rather low and about 40 wt% only [53,56] . The low yield of bio-
aviation fuel seriously hampers the large scale application of this
process, although research in this area tries to improve this pro-
cess from different aspects and detailed below.

The low yield of a lipid to bio-aviation fuel process is mainly
attributed to the necessity of hydrocracking to convert C16 or C18
alkanes into aviation fuel range paraffins (C9-C15) [47] . As shown

Table 1
Recent research on conversion of lipid to bio-aviation fuel (2010 to 2018).

Raw materials

Castor oil

Catalysts

Conversion/results/scale

Pt/Al 2 O 3 and Pt/ZSM-22

Macauba oils; almond oils
Sunflower oil
Jatropha oils

Pd/C
ZSM-5
BASF Nysofact 120

The castor oil to jet fuel process has a carbon selectivity of about 90% in laboratory scale
experiments [49] .
Hydrocarbon contents exceeded 65% in laboratory scale experiments [50] .
Yields of hydrocarbon fuels were 59.4% −73.9% in laboratory scale experiments [51] .
JP-8, naval distillate, and gasoline fractions were produced at a conservative total yield between 40
and 52% in laboratory scale experiments [52] .
Liquid hydrocarbon products were about 84 wt%, with 20% gasoline range hydrocarbons, about
40% diesel and about 40% aviation kerosene. Laboratory scale experiments [53] .

Jet-fuel range hydrocarbons were obtained at 40–45%. Laboratory scale experiments [54] .
A Ni-Mo catalyst demonstrated the highest C15–C18 hydrocarbon yield of about 97.9% in
laboratory scale experiments [55] .
Cracked products yield was 20 −45% in laboratory scale experiments [56] .
Conversions were between 43% and 93%. Yield losses were from 41% to 44%, ultimately 75%.
Laboratory scale experiments [57] .

Jet-fuel range hydrocarbons were obtained at 77% from algal oil in laboratory scale experiments
[54] .
The highest hydrocarbon was obtained at 76.5% in laboratory scale experiments [58] .

The selectivity of the hydrothermal decarboxylation of stearic acid reached 97% in laboratory scale
experiments [59] .
Fractionation resulted in 42–48 wt% of jet fuel with > 12% aromatics in laboratory scale
experiments [60] .
The maximum naphtha conversion was ∼65% and the highest naphtha selectivity was ∼50%. Pilot
scale experiments were performed [61] .

The deoxygenations of SBO and PFAD were 95.5% and 94.3%, respectively. Jet-fuel range
hydrocarbons reached 69.3% in laboratory scale experiments [45] .

Hydrodeoxygenation of enzymatically pre-treated waste cooking oil achieved a yield of ∼ 97% in
laboratory scale experiments [62] .
Jet range alkanes were produced using Ni/HY, Ni/SAPO-34 and Ni/Meso-Y catalysts in laboratory
scale experiments. The selectivities were 53%, 58% and 53%, respectively [63] .
The deoxygenations of SBO and PFAD were 95.5% and 94.3%, respectively. Jet-fuel range
hydrocarbons reached 69.3% in laboratory scale experiments [45] .

Sulphided NiMo and NiW
supported on hierarchical
mesoporous SAPO-11
Ni-W/ZSM-5
Ni-W/SiO 2 –Al 2 O 3 ;
Co - Mo/Al 2 O 3; Ni - Mo/Al 2 O 3
Sulfided Ni −Mo/Al 2 O 3
Pt/C and Pt/ Al 2 O 3 for HDO;
Pt/US-Y zeolite for
hydrocracking
Ni-W/ZSM-5

Pt/Al 2 O 3 ; Rh/Al 2 O 3 and
presulfided NiMo/Al 2 O 3
Pt/MWCNTs

Pt/Al 2 O 3 /SAPO-11 for HDO and
Ni 2 P/HY for hydrocracking
Commercial pre-sulphided
catalysts (not detailed by
author)
Pd/beta-zeolite catalyst

Sulfur-free Ni-Mo/ γ -Al 2 O 3

Ni/Meso-Y; Ni/SAPO-34; Ni/HY

Pd/beta-zeolite catalyst

Sulfur-free Ni-Mo/ γ -Al 2 O 3

Hydrodeoxygenation of enzymatically pre-treated waste cooking oil achieved a yield of ∼ 97% in
laboratory scale experiments [62] .

Algal oil

Microalgae oil

Soybean oil

Vacuum distillate and
vegetable oil mixtures

Waste soy bean oil (SBO)
and palm fatty acid
distillate (PFAD)
Waste cooking oil

Waste soy bean oil (SBO)
and palm fatty acid
distillate (PFAD)
Waste cooking oil

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

35

Fig. 3.  Bio-aviation fuel production from lipids without hydro-cracking.

in Fig. 3 , research in this area shows a clear tendency to avoid the
non-selective cracking of fatty acids and to improve the product
properties and process efficiency [29,66–69] .

In the current hydro-processing, catalysis mainly focuses upon
the acyl- group, while the skeleton isomerization and cracking oc-
cur  by  conventional  hydro-processing  [30,51,60,62,70] .  The  feed-
stock selection is critical in this respect, and a first solution is to
select lipids with defined functional groups in their carbon back-
bone.  The  development  of  catalytic  reactions  using  these  func-
tional groups can result in a more selective C –C cleavage, and cas-
tor oil can be considered as a target lipid candidate, with a hy-
droxyl  group  in  its  carbon  backbone.  A  high  yield  in  producing
bio-aviation  fuel  by  hydro-processing  was  reported  by  Liu  et  al.
[42] . A high isomer/n-alkane ratio (i/n) by Ni supported on acidic
zeolites  produced  the  highest  aviation  range  alkane  yields  (91.6
wt%), while different fuel range alkanes were obtained by combin-
ing  the  most  appropriate degrees of  hydro-deoxygenation (HDO)
and hydrocracking. Fang et al. also reported a high yield of castor
oil-based aviation fuel, as shown in Fig. 3 [49] . With a hydroxyl
group in the backbone, selective thermal cracking can occur, lead-
ing to the formation of medium chain FAME and heptanal, the lat-
ter easily converted into high quality aviation fuel through selec-
tive dimerization and hydro-deoxygenation. The produced medium
chain FAME can be further upgraded into bio-aviation fuel using
Ni-Mo/Al
3  or recently developed Fe/MSN catalysts where oxy-
2 [44,46,62] . When Fe/MSN was used
gen was removed through H
as catalyst, the overall carbon yield from castor oil to bio-aviation
fuel achieved 95%.

2 O

Lipids  with  a  fatty  acid  profile  between  C10  and  C16  can
be  converted  into  aviation  fuel  with  a  carbon  yield  as  high  as
90% through a hydro-isomerization mechanism. However, lipid re-
sources  with  carbon  chain  length  in  such  a  range  are  limited,
thus  necessitating  a  carbon  chain  length  control  by  selection  or
genetic  modification  of  energy  crops,  or  of  microbial  and  algae
strains. To produce middle- chain fatty acids, metabolic engineer-
ing of the carbohydrate to lipid process is necessary and will be

discussed in Section 2.2. After the fatty acid profile is controlled,
the  objective  of  the  hydro-processing  process  is  changed  from
hydro-cracking  into  hydro-isomerization  Shape-selective  mecha-
nisms for long-alkane hydro-isomerization could share light on the
bio-aviation fuel production from lipids with medium chain fatty
acid profile. Recent research by the authors of the present review
demonstrated that a careful engineering of the pore-structure of
the zeolite support could almost completely suppress the hydro-
cracking [47] . Zeolites such as ZSM-22, SAPO-11 were reported to
be effective supports for the lipid hydro-isomerization.

2 O

The  typical  bio-aviation  fuel  products  in  lipid  hydro-cracking
are paraffins or isoparaffins. Recently, several reports have emerged
on  the  direct  production  from  vegetable  oils  to  an  aviation  fuel
containing  aromatics.  The  Herskowitz  group  systematically  stud-
ied the influence of the catalyst and feedstock properties on the
aromatics  production  during  this  process  [71,72]  where  a  rela-
tively high aromatics yield requires an appropriate level of poly-
unsaturation  of  the  fatty  acids.  Poly-unsaturated  oils  from  soy-
bean,  sunflower  and  camelina  result  in  15  wt%  of  aromatics  in
the produced fuels, against 2 wt% only when hydro-treating palm
or  castor  oils.  The  selected  catalyst  is  very  important,  and  a
42–48  wt%  yield  of  aviation  fuel  is  obtained  by  using  a  novel
Pt/Al
3 /SAPO-11 catalyst [60] . The hydrothermal stability of this
catalyst, especially the SAPO-11 component, was further studied by
this group and was found significantly increased when amine sur-
factant hexadecylamine was added to the SAPO-11 crystallization
3 ratio of ∼ 0.6. A stable operation of the Pt/SAPO-
gel at HDA/Al
11-Al
3 catalyst in hydrotreating soybean oil was achieved, with
2 O
> 99% de-oxygenation producing an organic liquid with cloud point
<  -  35  C  and  with  15  wt%  mono-aromatics  [60] .  Xing  et  al.
[70]  studied  how  fatty  acids  could  be  converted  to  renewable
aromatic  hydrocarbons  (AHCs)  by  a  one-step  hydro-processing
over  Ni  /  HZSM-5  catalyst.  Considerable  amounts  of  AHCs  were
produced,  reaching  64.61  wt%  at  an  optimum  Ni  loading  of  10
wt%  [70] .  The  separation  of  bio-jet  fuel  and  green  diesel,  with
conventional  or  thermally  coupled  distillation  sequences  as  final

2 O

36

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

Fig. 4.  Intermediate phases in bio-aviation fuel production.

recommendation, was investigated [73] . Anand et al. furthermore
reported on the renewable lipid (Jatropha oil) hydrocracking con-
ditions for aviation bio-kerosene production as optimized using Ni-
3 catalyst which yielded 25–30% bio-kerosene mixes
W/SiO
that meet the ASTM D 7566 standards [74] .

2 - Al

2 O

Considering  both  feedstock  price  and  process  yield,  the  cur-
rently  produced  bio-aviation  fuel  from  vegetable  oil  is  economi-
cally unviable for large scale application. Several reports describe
methods to improve the process economics by the production of
high value by-products. The C –C double bond is a common func-
tion group in lipids. When the C –C double bond is involved in the
reaction, such as the metathesis reaction, lipid processing generally
proceeds [43,48] . A typical example is given by Elevance Renew-
able Sciences, Inc. (ERS), who developed an integrated bio-refinery
from renewable oils based on olefin metathesis technology to pro-
duce  high  value  special  chemicals  and  bio-fuels,  including  both
advanced bio-hydrocarbon renewable aviation or diesel fuels, and
conventional  biodiesel  by  fatty  acid  methanol  esterification  [43] .
The development of a catalyst with higher activity in the metathe-
sis reaction is very important for the commercial development of
such a technology.

2.2. Conversion of carbohydrate and lignocellulosic biomass into
bio-aviation fuel

The  use  of  lignocellulosic  biomass  as  feedstock  for  its  trans-
formation into bio-aviation fuel is one of the major topics of re-
cent research. Zhang et al. established a novel transformation of
renewable  lignocellulosic  biomass  into  bio-jet  and  bio-diesel  fu-
els though optimizing catalytic pyrolysis, aromatic alkylation and
production of C8-C15 cyclic alkanes [75] . Buijs et al. produced tri-
, penta- and heptadecane by Saccharomyces cerevisiae by deleting
the HFD1 gene together with the expression of an alkane biosyn-
thesis pathway [76] . Using the Gerbert reaction of cyclopentanol,
followed by the hydrodeoxygenation (HDO), Sheng et al. synthe-
sized high density aviation fuels at high overall yield (95.6%) [77] .
Using  the  same  HDO  pathway  through  the  Gerbert  synthesis  to
produce bio-aviation fuel, Gutiérrez-Antonio et al. [78] optimized

the  purification  stage  of  aviation  fuel  from  renewable  feedstock
through simulations, with emphasis on the use of thermally cou-
pled distillation and feed conditioning.

eff ratio and carbon number, respectively. The H/C

Compared with bio-aviation fuel from lipids, the carbohydrate-
based  bio-aviation  fuel  calls  for  a  deeper  change  of  phase  and
chemical  composition.  This  can  be  realized  through  the  conver-
sion  of  the  whole  biomass  stream,  or  the  conversion  of  sepa-
rated and selected biomass streams through biochemical conver-
sion, chemo-catalytic conversion or their integration. The biomass
conversion into bio-aviation fuel generally involves three steps in-
cluding  the  generation  of  an  intermediate  state,  the  adjustment
of  the  C –C  bond  to  produce  bio-aviation  fuel  precursors,  and  a
hydro-processing [41] . Fig. 4 summarizes the intermediate phases
in different conversion technologies, expressed in function of the
H/C
eff ratio rep-
resents the effective hydrogen-to-carbon ratio, as defined by the
molar  fractions  of  atomic  constituents  in  the  biomass  feedstock
5 OH) and for
[H/C
eff
methane (CH
eff values are 2.0 and 4.0 respectively. The
intermediates  can  be  generated  through  either  thermo-chemical
conversion  (pyrolysis,  aqueous  phase  reforming)  or  biochemical
conversion. The C –C bond adjusting step is very critical for bio-
aviation fuel production. The subsequent hydro-processing step is
inherently similar to that of both petroleum resources and lipids.
This  section  hence  focuses  on  the  bio-chemical  or  catalytic  C –C
bond adjustment, where the bio-refinery system can also play a
major role towards the bio-aviation fuel production.

= (H - 2O - 3N- 2S)/C]. For e.g. ethanol (C

4 ) the H/C

2 H

2.2.1. Production of bio-aviation fuel and oxygenate precursors from
carbohydrates by metabolic engineering

The production of bio-aviation fuel and its intermediates were
significantly developed in recent years through synthetic biology
and  metabolic  engineering  [79–83] .  For  a  more  effective  and
efficient  application  of  microorganisms  to  produce  bio-aviation
fuel  and  its  intermediates,  the  metabolic  performance  of  these
microorganisms  needs  to  be  modified  by  metabolic  engineering
methods  [83,84] .  In  these  metabolic  engineering  pathways,  the
most  commonly  used  biosynthetic  pathway  for  bio-aviation  fuel

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

37

Table 2
Research on producing bio-aviation fuel and oxygenate precursors from carbohydrates by metabolic engineering (2010–2018).

Pathway

Host/Raw materials

Products

Conversion/results

Production of bio-aviation
fuel by the fatty acid
biosynthetic pathway

Terpenes-based
bio-aviation fuel production

E. coli
E. coli
E. coli
E. coli
E. coli
S. cerevisiae
S. cerevisiae
S. cerevisiae
E. coli
E. coli
E. coli

S. cerevisiae
E. coli and S.
cerevisiae

C13 to C17 alkane/alkene mixtures
C13 to C17 alkane/alkene mixtures
C7 to C15 alkanes
C9 to C14 alkanes
C9 to C14 alkanes
C13 to C17 alkanes
C13 to C17 alkanes
C7 to C13 alkanes
α-farnesene
limonene
Monoterpenoids

pinene, limonene and cineole
Bisabolene

Alkane titers exceeded 300 mg/L
Alkane titers of 2 – 5 mg/L
Alkane titers ∼2 mg/L
Alkane titers ∼ 580.8 mg/L
Alkane titers of 0.2 - 0.3 mg/gDW
Alkane titers of 22.0 ± 1.4 mg/gDW
Alkane titers of 0.8 mg/L
Alkane titers ∼ 3 mg/L
α-farnesene titers of 380.0 mg/L
Limonene titers of 35.8 mg/L
Monoterpenoids 1,8-cineole and linalool titers of
653 mg/L and 505 mg/L, respectively
Terpene titers were ∼100 mg/g
Bisabolene titers in E. coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae
were both > 900 mg/L.

Refs

[87]
[88]
[89]
[83]
[80]
[90]
[91]
[82]
[81]
[92]
[93]

[94]
[95]

and oxygenate precursors are an improved fatty acid pathway, the
terpenes biosynthetic pathways and the alcohol synthetic pathway
[76,84–86] . Recent research results on producing bio-aviation fuel
and  oxygenate  precursors  by  metabolic  engineering  are  summa-
rized  in  Table  2 .  The  main  strategy  to  produce  bio-aviation  fuel
and  precursors  through  the  three  biosynthetic  pathways  were
examined and further discussed.

2.2.1.1. Production of bio-aviation fuel and precursors through an im-
proved fatty acid biosynthetic pathway.  Since fatty acids have the
most similar chemical structure with the linear alkane compounds
in  aviation  fuel,  a  vast  number  of  researchers  studied  this  im-
proved fatty acid biosynthetic pathway to produce bio-aviation fuel
and  its  precursors  [96] .  Both  the  production  of  bio-aviation  fuel
and of the precursor (free fatty acid or glyceryl ester) were based
on the fatty acid synthetic system [97] . The direct biosynthesis of
linear alkanes was thereafter achieved through the modification of
fatty acid synthetic metabolic pathways and a recombination of the
decarbonylation  pathway  in  one  microorganism  [83,87,88,98,99] .
The  most  important  part  was  to  improve  the  intracellular  fatty
acid concentration or the rate of fatty acid synthesis, whether in
the form of free, combined with CoA or acyl carrier protein style
[88,99,100] . To achieve this, one strategy was to increase the pre-
cursor supply, which is acetyl CoA or malonyl-CoA; the other strat-
egy improved the efficiency of the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway,
as demonstrated in previous studies [97,101,102] . Acetyl-CoA car-
boxylase (ACC) catalyzes the first committed step of the fatty acid
synthetic  pathway  [103]  and  increasing  the  activity  of  ACC  was
therefore a main method of increasing the precursor supply. Davis
et al. achieved a 6-fold increase in the rate of fatty acid synthe-
sis  under  the  condition  of  ACC  overproduction  [104] .  Choi  et  al.
introduced a S1157A mutation into ACC obtained a 9-fold higher
specific activity. When the mutated ACC was introduced into yeast,
the fatty acid levels increased by 3-fold [101] .

Except for increasing the precursor supply, improving the fatty
acid biosynthetic pathway by metabolic switch or other methods
was also an efficient strategy to increase the fatty acid concentra-
tion or the rate of fatty acid synthesis. Research of Xu et al. re-
ported a metabolic switch to dynamically regulate the fatty acids
(FA) biosynthesis system [105] . Using this metabolic switch, the FA
titer achieved a 2.1-fold improvement.

More than the production of the bio-aviation precursors i.e. free
fatty acids or glyceryl esters, an alkane synthesis pathway needed
to  be  combined  on  the  basis  of  a  higher  fatty  acid  intracellu-
lar fatty acid concentration to directly bio-synthesize linear alka-
nes. Usually, the alkane synthesis pathway was a combination of
acyl-acyl carrier protein reductase and an aldehyde decarbonylase
[83,87,99] . Schirmer et al. were the first to report an alkane syn-

thesis  pathway  by  combining  an  acyl-acyl  carrier  protein  reduc-
tase  and  an  aldehyde  decarbonylase  [87] .  This  combination  pro-
duces  alkanes  and  alkenes  from  intermediates  of  the  fatty  acid
metabolism. They successfully achieved alkanes of C13 - C17 by ex-
pressing this pathway in E. coli . However, the carbon number range
did not exactly fit bio aviation fuel’s targets.

To control the carbon number range, thioesterase, that can se-
lectively hydrolyze the acyl carrier protein conjunct fatty acid, be-
came the key point. As the aviation fuel needs a specific carbon
number range, thioesterase became promising for its control of the
fatty acids into this range from specific plants or microorganisms
such as Umbellularia californica and Cuphea lanceolate [29,106–108] .
Following this finding, Choi and Lee engineered the biosynthesis of
fatty acids and the degradation pathway in E. coli to obtain fatty
acids with carbon number between C10 - C14 using a thioesterase
from  Umbellularia  californica  [83] .  Subsequently,  the  alkane  pro-
duction by Clostridium acetobutylicum fatty acyl-CoA reductase and
Arabidopsis thaliana fatty aldehyde decarbonylase were introduced
to E. coli . Finally, the alkane production was up to 580.8 mg/L with
a carbon number of C9 – C14. Following Choi and Lee’s research,
Zhou  et  al.  successfully  achieved  a  straight  chain  hydrocarbons
production  in  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  yeast  by  engineering  the
fatty acid synthesis system (FASs) and introducing a heterologous
thioesterase  to  control  the  fatty  acids  chain  length  between  C8
– C14. The heterologous pathways for alkane or 1-alkene synthe-
sis were then introduced into Saccharomyces cerevisiae for straight
chain  hydrocarbons  (C7  – C13)  production  [82] .  Other  research
about the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway based bio-aviation fuel
production was shown in Table 2 .

2.2.1.2. Production of bio-aviation fuel and precursors through the al-
cohol biosynthetic pathway.  With the development of the ATJ tech-
nology  for  bio-aviation  fuel  production  [109] ,  the  alcohol  route,
such as butanol and other long-chain fatty alcohols used as pre-
cursor of bio-aviation, drew major research attention [110] , with a
focus on the biosynthesis of two important raw materials for ATJ
technology, i.e. n-butanol and isobutanol [111–113] . The n-butanol
and isobutanol biosynthetic pathways naturally exist in Clostridium
and  are  named  2-keto  acid  pathways  [114] .  The  precursor  of  n-
butanol and isobutanol was acyl CoA and pyruvate, respectively. As
Clostridium is required for the anaerobic culture and the products
are usually a mix, most research on this field aimed at achieving
and re-constructing this pathway into E. coli or Saccharomyces cere-
visiae [115–117] .

2.2.1.3. Production of bio-aviation fuel and precursors through a ter-
penes  biosynthetic  pathway.  Terpenes  are  a  class  of  isoprenoids
oligomer which contains several isoprene units [118] . As the carbon

38

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

numbers of monoterpene and sesquiterpenoids are in the range of
aviation  fuel,  monoterpene  and  sesquiterpenoids  can  be  used  as
the precursors of bio-aviation fuel [119] . At the same time, the spe-
cial carbon skeletons of monoterpene and sesquiterpenoids trans-
ferred improved properties to their corresponding alkanes, such as
lower freezing point than the linear alkanes obtained by the fatty
acid synthetic pathway [120–122] .

The intracellular synthesis of terpenes is mainly based on the
mevalonate  (MVA)  or  the  2-methylerythritol  4-phosphate  (MEP)
pathway, as their precursors isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethy-
lallyl  diphosphate  are  the  products  of  these  two  pathways  [84] .
Therefore,  the  strategy  to  improve  the  productivity  of  monoter-
pene and sesquiterpenoids involved increasing the precursor lev-
els of MVA pathway (acetyl-coA) and MEP pathway [81,123,124] . In
this field, Amyris succeeded in producing the sesquiterpene biofuel
farnesene which can be used as diesel and jet fuel after saturation
by  hydrogenation  [99] .  Another  sesquiterpene  product  is  bisabo-
lene and its hydrogenated bisabolane [94,95] .

2.2.2. Catalytic conversion of different bio-oxygenates into
bio-aviation fuel

The catalytic conversion of bio-oxygenates, obtained from dif-
ferent  processes,  into  bio-aviation  fuel  targets  two  important
aspects  being  an  appropriate  carbon  chain  length  and  hydro-
deoxygenation.

2.2.2.1. Catalytic conversion of thermo-chemically produced interme-
diates  into  bio-aviation  fuel.  Through  technologies  like  thermo-
chemical  or  hydro-thermal  conversions,  different  intermediate
phases  such  as  syngas,  pyrolysis  oil,  furanic  derivates  and  other
compounds can be produced. The conversion of these intermedi-
ates into jet fuel calls for different catalytic strategies.

Syngas from gasification can be converted into jet fuel through
the F-T synthesis and a subsequent hydro-cracking step. This is the
first approved bio-aviation fuel production. However, the main hin-
drance of this technology is the mismatch of the scales of biomass
gasification  and  F-T  synthesis:  whereas  gasification  is  applied  at
moderate scale (ton/h), F-T synthesis requires a high feed rate, not
yet reached by biomass gasification. Recent research activities in
this  area  include  both  the  application  of  the  micro-channel  re-
actor to reduce the minimum economically competitive scale re-
quirement  of  the  F-T  synthesis,  or  the  combined  single  step  F-T

synthesis and hydro-cracking. The Velocys Company developed a
state-of-art micro-channel technology for F-T synthesis, which can
decrease the point of economical viability by a factor of 20 [125] .
On the other hand, pioneer catalyst researchers such as Mawhood
et  al.  proposed  a  catalyst  concept  to  integrate  the  F-T  synthesis
and hydro-cracking by carefully designing a bi-functional catalyst
to  break  the  traditional  Anderson-Schulz-Flory  (ASF)  distribution
[126] . As an outstanding example in this area, Li et al. reported
that the types of liquid fuels in F-T synthesis can be readily tuned
by controlling the porosity and acid properties of the zeolites [127] .
A  jet  fuel  selectivity  of  up  to  72%  was  achieved  by  only  using
mesoporous Y-type zeolites in combination with cobalt nanopar-
ticles.

The fast pyrolysis and hydrotreatment are considered as simple,
cost-effective, and efficient technologies that can directly produce
liquid transportation fuels from lignocellulosic biomass. It attracted
special attention in recent decades [128] . Compared to other inter-
mediate phases with defined chemical structure, pyrolysis oil has
a  complicated  and  highly  oxygenated  chemical  composition.  The
design  of  C –C  bond  adjusting  reactions,  according  to  the  chem-
ical  composition,  is  hence  impossible  with  pyrolysis  oil.  The  ef-
fective  hydro-treatment  of  pyrolysis  bio-oil  moreover  presents  a
main challenge to the application of biomass conversion: the de-
velopment of active, selective and stable hydro-treating catalysts
is problematic due to the overall poor quality of current pyrolysis
bio-oil feedstock, reflected by its high oxygen content, high molec-
ular complexity, high coking propensity, and important corrosive-
ness  [129–131] .  Recently,  a  breakthrough  in  this  area  has  been
achieved by PNNL [132] : a 10 0 0 h stable operation of a pyrolysis
oil hydro-treatment was demonstrated through the integration of
pyrolysis oil cleaning and catalyst development. The hydrotreated
product, after distillation, can be used as aviation fuel blend. One
outstanding feature of such bio-aviation fuel is its high content in
aromatics and cycloalkanes.

Furanic derivates are typical intermediate streams from biomass
hydrolysis, aqueous phased reforming or hydrothermal carboniza-
tion [133] . Major developments to convert furanic compounds into
aviation  fuel  were  reported  by  the  Dumesic  and  Corma  group
[134,135] .

As reported in literature and summarized in Fig. 5 , the furanic
compounds  can  be  converted  into  bio-aviation  fuel  through  a

Fig. 5.  Different bio-aviation fuel precursors from furanic components.

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

39

Table 3
The composition and performance of reported high energy density biofuels from terpene.

Biofuels
β-pinene dimers
Camphene dimers
Sesquiterpene derived fuel
Blended Sesquiterpene-derived fuel and 5-methylundecane
Cedarwood oil derived fuel
a β, Density at 20 °C.
b
Tf, Freezing point.
c
Viscosity.
d
NHOC, Net heat of combustion.

β(20 °C)/(g/mL) a

Tf/ °C b

γ /cSt c

NHOC/(MJ/L) d

Ref.

0.938
0.941
0.88
0.85–0.90
0.923

−30
−54
–
–
–

–
34.96 (40 °C)
50.2 ( −20 °C)
8.3–14.0 ( −20 °C)
33 ( −20 °C)

39.5
39.6
37.7
37.07–39.30
39.47

[151]
[152]
[153]
[154]
[122]

series  of  C –C  condensation  reactions  and  a  final  hydro-
deoxygenation  reaction  [136] .  As  a  very  successful  example,
Corma et al. reported the hydro-alkyation mechanism for the con-
version  of  2-methylfuran  into  1,1-bisylvylbutane,  and  ultimately
obtaining a hydrocarbon stream with very suitable properties as
aviation fuel [137] . They further extended such C –C bond adjust-
ment method into other furanic derivates obtained from both C6
and C5 sugars. Dumesic et al. extensively studied the aviation fuel
range  precursor  production  through  adol-condensation  reaction
[138] . A range of suitable aviation and diesel products. In order to
hydro-deoxygenate the aviation fuel precursor, excellent catalysts
such  as  Pt/NbOPO
4  with  mild  acidity  and  mesoporous  structure
were designed for a long-term hydro-deoxygenation reaction [139] .
In  bio-oxygenate  hydro-deoxygenation,  the  catalyst  always  calls
for a very mild and suitable acidity, although different oxygenates
require a different matched acidity.

Levulinic  acid  is  another  easily  obtained  intermediate  from  a
cellulosic feedstock [140–142] . The angelica lactone dimer can be
produced at high yield by dehydration of biomass-based levulinic
acid using a solid acid catalyst and subsequent treatment of the
formed angelica lactone with catalytic K
3  [143] . The angelica
lactone dimer can serve as the feedstock in bio-gasoline production
through hydro-deoxygenation. By the reaction of angelica lactone
with furfuryl, the carbon chain length of the products was exactly
within the aviation fuel range [144] . The carbon yield of C10 oxy-
genates reached approximately 96% and was obtained by the aldol
condensation under mild conditions (353 K, 4 h) over Mn
3  cat-
2 catalyst used for hydrogenation
alyst. The Pd/C and Pd-FeOx/SiO
and  hydrodeoxygenation  of  the  aldol  condensation  product  pro-
vided a ∼96% yield of C9 and C10 alkanes.

2 CO

2 O

2.2.2.2. Catalytic  conversion  of  bio-chemically  derived  intermediates
into  bio-aviation  fuel.  A  variety  of  small  bio-oxygenates  can  be
produced in biochemical conversions through metabolic engineer-
ing  [145] .  After  integration  of  chemo-catalysis,  these  small  bio-
oxygenate can be converted into aviation fuel products. Anbarasan
et al. integrated fermentation and chemo-catalytic synthesis strate-
gies to efficiently convert acetone-n-butanol-ethanol (ABE) fermen-
tation products into ketones by a Pd-catalysed alkylation [146] . The
key  feature  of  such  a  process  is  acetone,  that  contains  a  nucle-
ophilic α-carbon, capable to form C –C bonds with the electrophilic
ABE-alcohols [147] . This facilitates the production of heavier hydro-
carbons (higher-molecular-mass) as required for common aviation
and diesel fuels [96] . By carefully tuning the reaction conditions,
different products such as aviation and diesel precursors could be
produced [96,146,148] .

With a similar chemical mechanism, Balakrishnan et al. selec-
tively  upgraded  biomass-based  alkyl  methyl  ketones  into  trimer
condensates with > 95% yields [149] . This trimer can subsequently
be hydro-deoxygenated into near-quantitative yields of cycloalkane
compounds [150] . Balakrishnan et al. present an example of a sug-
arcane biorefinery using synergies of various routes to produce a
mixture of lubricants and aviation fuels to achieve net life-cycle

GHG-savings  of  up  to  80%  [149] .  As  discussed  before,  monoter-
penes  (C10)  and  sesquiterpenes  (C15)  are  of  interest  as  jet  fuel
or  fuel  blend.  Farnesane,  through  catalytic  hydrogenation  of  far-
nesene,  has  already  been  approved  as  a  renewable  aviation  fuel
[122] . More hydrogenated cyclic terpenes derived from limonene,
pinenes,  sabinene  and  bisabolene  are  being  considered  as  com-
ponents  of  jet  fuel.  A  special  advantage  of  terpene-derived  avi-
ation  fuel  is  its  high  energy  density  that  can  exceed  the  value
for JP-10 in some cases, the most widely used high energy den-
sity fuel for military applications. Hence a clear research direction
in terpene-based aviation bio-fuel production is the production of
high-density biosynthetic fuels by the interaction of heterogeneous
catalysis and metabolic engineering. In such an approach, a hetero-
geneous catalyst is applied to engineer the structure of fermented
products. The US Navy research group around Harvey is very ac-
tive  group  in  this  area  [121,122] .  The  current  research  results  in
this area are summarized in Table 3 .

2.2.3. The bio-refinery concept to produce bio-aviation fuel

The above mentioned technologies can be developed within a
bio-refinery system for high efficient aviation fuel production after
integration of a pre-treatment and lignin processing [137,155] . The
pre-treatment of biomass is important towards the bio-fuel pro-
duction and extensively discussed elsewhere [75,134,156,157] . Here
we focus on the aviation fuel production from lignin and the in-
tegrated bio-refinery system [158] , with different processing path-
ways as illustrated in Fig. 6 .

Significant amounts of lignin are produced by the pulping in-
dustry  or  as  residual  products  of  fermentation  [145] .  The  lignin
amount is expected to increase with the further development of
bio-refineries [159,160] . Lignin is conceptually a very suitable re-
source  for  aromatic  and  cycloalkane  components  in  the  aviation
biofuel. Through direct depolymerization coupled with the alkyla-
tion of aromatics, desired C8–C15 aromatics and cycloalkane can
be produced at a reasonable yield. However, the examples of the
conversion of lignin into aviation fuel are still limited [75] .

Different  bio-refinery  systems  were  technically  and  economi-
cally  developed  based  on  a  set  of  unit  processes.  Recently,  Hu-
ber et al. presented experimental results and a techno-economic
assessment of the catalytic conversion with high carbon yields of
complete biomass into drop-in aviation fuels [134] , through com-
bining biomass pre-treatment, carbohydrate hydrolysis and dehy-
dration, and catalytic upgrading of platform chemicals. The path-
way includes producing firstly furfural and levulinic acid from five-
and  six-carbon  sugars  present  in  hardwoods,  and  subsequently
upgrading  these  intermediates  into  a  mixture  of  branched,  lin-
ear, and cyclic alkanes of molecular weights within the range of
common aviation fuels. Hemicellulose sugars can be incorporated
into bio-aviation fuels at roughly 80% carbon yield, while carbon
yields to bio-aviation fuels from cellulose-based sugars are of the
order  of  50%  only.  The  results  moreover  demonstrated  that  us-
ing lignocellulose-derived feedstock provides a better insight into
the  effects  of  impurity  carryover  than  when  using  commercially

40

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

Fig. 6.  Proposed jet fuel oriented lignocellulosic bio-refineries.

sourced  model  compounds.  Results  moreover  demonstrated  the
needs of stable catalytic materials for the aqueous phase process-
ing, the efficient inter-stage separations, and the intensified pro-
cessing strategies. The proposed technology could deliver aviation
fuel-range liquid hydrocarbons at about $1.25 per litre for a com-
mercial plant producing 143.84 million litres liquid fuels/year with
a net present value of the 20 year bio-refinery set to zero [134] .
A further improvement with e.g. replacing precious metal catalysts
by base metal catalysts and improving the recyclability of water
streams, can reduce this cost to $0.76 per litre [134] .

A  bio-refinery  should  target  the  highest  possible  yield  (both
mass  and  energy)  and  excellent  product  quality  through  the  ra-
tional integration of different unit operations. Two interesting di-
rections in bio-refineries should be mentioned here. The first one
is  the  IH 2  (integration  of  hydro-pyrolysis  and  hydro-conversion)
process  which  directly  produces  hydrocarbon  fuel  from  biomass
[156,157] .  Such  a  process  integrates  three  individual  processing
technologies  including hydro-pyrolysis,  hydro-conversion  and  hy-
drogen  production  through  steam  reforming  of  the  in-situ  pro-
duced light hydrocarbon. Different biomass feedstock such as wood
chip, straw and algae samples were tested on pilot scale with very
successful performance. A very low oxygen content was reported
for all biomass feedstock. An outstanding feature of such a process
is the optimized oxygen removal as H

2 O and CO

2 .

A  novel  concept  of  the  bio-refinery,  is  the  "lignin  first"  bio-
refinery.  As  mentioned  above,  the  processing  of  lignin  is  still  a
challenge,  part  of  which  is  attributed  to  the  structural  change
during biomass pre-treatments [161–166] . In some of those pre-
treatments  such  as  acid/base  hydrolysis,  the  decrease  in  ether
bonds  of  lignin  and  subsequent  formation  of  new  C –C  link-

ages  generally  takes  place,  which  results  in  difficulties  of  de-
polymerization and utilization of the resulting lignin. The concept
intends to process lignin in its most reactive and workable form. In
such a concept, lignin is successfully converted into low-molecular-
weight phenolic products in the so-called lignin-first biorefinery,
where  also  the  C9  basic  structure  of  the  original  lignin  struc-
ture is preserved, thus improving the carbon atomic efficiency as
potentially  producing  jet  fuel  that  generally  has  a  carbon  num-
ber between 9 and 15 [160] . Such a lignin-first bio-refinery con-
cept, when integrated with metabolic engineering, could be very
promising for aviation bio-fuel production.

2.3. Pilot and industrialization production of bio-aviation fuel

The  pilot  and  industrialization  effort s  are  closely  connected
with the ASTM activities since ASTM approval requires extensive
pilot-scale operation and the production of sufficient samples to
support the ASTM tests.

At present, there is no biomass-dedicated F-T plant in operation
and hence no SPK bio-jet is produced. There are however several
plans for such installations, mainly in the USA (Red Rock Biofuels,
50 million litre per year of which 40% bio-aviation fuel, Fulcrum
Sierra Biofuels, 40 million litre per year). In the EU, some projects
with NER 300 contracts were planned to produce F-T liquids. FT-
SPK/A relates to the use of the high temperature F-T process used
by Sasol [167] .

HEFA has been the predominant fuel for test flights and more
extended  tests.  Although  a  lot  of  vegetable  oil  hydrogenation
(HVO) plants are available (e.g. Neste), none of the HVO plants that

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

41

were in operation before 2016 produce a dedicated stream of bio-
aviation fuel, since they were mainly focusing on renewable diesel.
The 10 0,0 0 0 ton per year Altair plant in California (USA), which
came on stream in 2016, is the first plant that produces a com-
bination of a dedicated stream of HEFA bio-aviation fuel and HVO
bio-diesel [168] . This project utilizes the UOP Renewable Jet Fuel
Process to convert various feedstock like vegetable oils, animal fats
and greases to “drop in” hydrocarbon fuels via deoxygenation, iso-
merization, hydrocracking and product separation [169] .

With regard to SIP, a product developed by Amyris, a demon-
stration plant was built and operated in Brazil for the annual pro-
duction  of  50,0 0 0 L/year  [170,171] .  Farnesene  is  hydrogenated  to
farnesane and used as the bio-jet component. The Amyris indus-
trial  production  plant  in  Brotas,  Brazil  converts  sugarcane  syrup
into farnesene and other tailored molecules for a range of renew-
able products including a bio-component for the diesel and jet-fuel
(SIP). It was started-up in 2012 and had a productivity of about
40,0 0 0 L/day. Plant operations have been smooth without poten-
tial problems or technology barriers. The longest run has been 11
months related to the fermentation process into farnesene [172] .
Since farnesene is also used for lubricants, bio-polymers and resins,
the actual production of bio-jet is not specified [173] .

ATJ-SPK targets synthetic kerosene produced from C2-C5 alco-
hols. Currently the only qualified pathway starts with isobutanol,
a technology developed by Butamax and Gevo, where the initial
production  of  butanol  is  still  in  the  pilot/demonstration  phase
[126] . Since at present both SIP and ATJ-SPK are produced from
crop-based  sugars,  they  are  not  advanced  biofuels  according  to
the  SGAB  definitions.  However,  other  ATJ  technologies  exist  and
are currently under review by ASTM, including one developed by
LanzaTech to convert ethanol to SPK. LanzaTech’s technology can
use  ethanol  from  any  source,  including  cellulosic  and  industrial
waste feedstock, for the conversion to drop-in jet fuel blend stock
[174] .  The  Swedish  bio-fuels  pilot  plant  established  by  KTH  in
Sweden  is  also  demonstrating  the  Swedish  bio-fuel  production
method where alcohol feeds (C2-C5), obtained from biochemically
converted  wood  waste  or  agricultural  waste,  are  converted  into
hydrocarbons [175] . In the developed process, the alcohol mixture
is dehydrated into a mixture of the corresponding olefins. In the
second  stage,  olefins  are  synthesized  into  higher  alcohols,  with
carbon  monoxide  and  hydrogen  obtained  e.g.  by  gasification  or
dry  reforming  of  biogas  using  CO
2  from  alcohol  fermentation.
In  subsequent  stages,  the  higher  alcohols  are  again  dehydrated
to  olefins,  which  are  then  condensed  into  higher  unsaturated
compounds, including aromatics. In the final stage, the higher un-
saturated compounds are hydrogenated to yield the corresponding
paraffins.  The  mixed  hydrocarbon  product  stream  is  separated
into  gasoline,  kerosene  and  diesel  by  rectification.  The  plant
has  been  in  operation  since  2009.  The  plant  capacity  has  been
increased over the years from an initial 5 ton/year to the current
20 ton/year. The final products are fully synthetic motor fuels of
kerosene,  gasoline  and  diesel,  which  comply  with  the  standard
fossil  fuel  specifications  for  use  in  standard  engines.  Alcohols
in  the  range  C2  -  C5  have  been  used  as  feedstock  for  the  pilot
plant, either as a single alcohol or as a multi-component mixture,
confirming  the  flexibility  of  the  process.  There  are  no  expected
technology barriers, but low price of the fossil oil is an economic
barrier. The next step in the development of the technology is the
construction of a pre-commercial scale plant during the period of
2015–2019. The project was supported by a FP-7 grant from the
European Commission with the production of synthetic bio-fuels
for use in aviation as main objective [176,177] . The project will use
the Alcohol to Jet (ATJ) pathway, different from the technologies
available today, and aiming to produce drop-in aviation fuel. The
capacity of the plant will be 10,0 0 0 ton/year, of which half will be
bio-aviation fuel with the rest being ground transportation fuels.

There  are  also  technologies  in  various  stages  of  development
below the actual demonstration scale such as pyrolysis oil upgrad-
ing, sugar chemical conversion to hydrocarbons and conversion of
ethanol to hydrocarbons. Recently FP-7 presented a review of the
status  of ASTM  approvals and of the  synthesis pathways. It also
listed more than a dozen pipeline pathways to be assessed towards
qualification [176] .

The Virent plant built in the USA has piloted two different tech-
nologies that convert sugars to “direct replacement” hydrocarbons:
(1)  the  sugar  to  reformate  process  and  (2)  the  sugar  to  distil-
late process. Both processes utilize Virent aqueous phase reforming
(APR) technology to first stabilize and deoxygenate the sugar feed-
stock.  The  sugar  to  reformate  process  utilizes  a  second  catalytic
step that converts oxygenates derived from the APR technology to
a highly aromatic reformate that can be fractionated and blended
into the gasoline pool, the jet fuel pool, and the diesel fuel pool.
The sugar to distillate process utilizes a different second catalytic
step that converts the oxygenated products derived from the APR
into longer carbon chain paraffins and cyclic paraffins that are pri-
marily in the jet fuel and diesel fuel range. Both larger scale pilot
plants operated as designed and proved that the two technologies
could be upscaled utilizing bench and pilot plant data. The Eagle
plant of Virent had a feedstock capacity of 0.35 ton/day and con-
verted sugar to gasoline reformate while the Falcon plant produces
distillates instead. The former product was blended into either the
gasoline pool, into jet fuel, or into diesel fuel as well as used as
a feedstock to generate p-xylene while the latter was fractionated
and blended into either the gasoline pool, jet fuel pool or diesel
fuel.  The  Eagle  plant  of  Virent  had  a  feedstock  capacity  of  0.12
ton/day and had operated in seven different campaigns for a to-
tal of 6200 h where the longest lasted 3500 h while the Falcon
plant has operated one campaign of 1200 h [178] .

3. Combustion chemistry, properties and environmental
impacts of bio-aviation fuel

The  use  of  aviation  bio-fuel  has  been  demonstrated  in  test
flights  with  positive  results.  “Bio-fuel” is  a  chemically  very  het-
erogeneous  and  variable  term.  Bio-aviation  fuel  is  very  different
from  typical  bio-fuels  like  alcohols,  ethers,  esters,  and  some  ni-
trogenated  chemicals  since  it  is  completely  oxygen  free  [179] .  It
has been reported that typical bio-fuels can produce PAHs (poly-
cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) and soot, similar to conventional hy-
drocarbon  fuels.  At  a  similar  molecular  size,  the  emissions  may
be reduced with respect to pure hydrocarbon molecules with in-
creased formation of carbonyl compounds, including formaldehyde,
acetaldehyde, acetone, and higher aldehydes and ketones. Since the
bio-aviation  fuel  is  produced  from  deoxygenating  the  fuel  feed-
stock, the potential formation of hazardous combustion pollutants
of the traditional bio-fuel is however largely avoided.

As  recent  contribution,  the  chemical  origin  of  soots  seem  to
be connected with ring structures such as cyclopentadiene, having
a characteristic weak C –H bond: their cleavage produces radicals
with extended spans of π -electron conjugation [180] . Clusters thus
build up through successive coupling reactions that extend conju-
gation in stabilized radicals of increasingly larger size. Hence dur-
ing the development of bio-aviation fuel, the control of the aro-
matics percentage should be carefully considered. Indeed, the ex-
perience from petroleum derived jet fuel is still applicable to bio-
aviation fuel despite the difference in molecular classes. Properties
of alternative bio-aviation fuels were investigated, specifically to-
wards the influence of the chemical composition on auto-ignition,
and  including  the  influence  of  isoparaffinic,  cycloparaffinic,  and
aromatic structures [181] , while also comparing fuel reformation
using petroleum-based aviation jet fuel (JP-8) versus hydro-treated
renewable jet fuel (HRJ-S) in an oxidative steam reforming process

42

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

[182] . The conclusion is that the molecular groups should be care-
fully balanced to match the different properties necessary for avi-
ation fuel. Fortin et al. moreover measured the kinematic viscos-
ity of 9 aviation turbine fuel samples from petroleum fuels, syn-
thetic F-T fuels, and renewable fuels derived from biomass feed-
stock, with a significant difference observed among the measured
viscosities [183] .

Though  similar  in  hydrocarbon  composition,  bio-aviation  fuel
has  two  clear  advantages  being  its  feedstock  of  renewable  car-
bon and its sulphur-free nature, both leading to significant envi-
ronmental benefits. Current environmental studies were conducted
mostly towards measuring the impact of using bio-aviation fuels
in a mix with traditional aviation fuels. Hicks et al. compared bio-
derived aviation fuel with JP-8 towards emissions and combustion
performance in a flame tube facility. Both the bio-derived aviation
fuel and JP-8 show a similar OH image structure near the dome
exit, and no difference between bio-derived aviation fuel and JP-8
was discerned with respect of combustion efficiency or emissions
[184] .  A  different  result  emerged  from  the  research  of  Ali  et  al.
when fuelling a turbojet engine with Jet A-1 fuel or with blends of
up to 50% of biodiesel with Jet A-1. SO
2 emissions were reduced,
2 and NO x emissions exceeded the concentrations obtained
but CO
with regular Jet A-1 fuel [185] . Both results further prove the im-
portance of complete deoxygenation since one of the main differ-
ences between biodiesel and bio-aviation fuel is the presence of
oxygen in the bio-diesel, as clearly demonstrated by a recent NASA
test. Moore et al. [23] reported observations of sampling the engine
exhausts from a DC-8 aircraft when burning either Jet A fuel, or an
equal vol% mix of Jet A fuel and a biofuel obtained from Camelina
oil. The bio-fuel mix significantly reduced the particle number con-
centration and mass flow  by 50 to  70% immediately behind the
aircraft. Their results demonstrate that aerosol emissions are con-
siderably reduced when using a bio-fuel blend.

4. Life cycle assessment of both bio-aviation fuel production
and uses

As  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  the  application  of  bio-
2 reduction in the
aviation fuel is the only realistic solution for CO
aviation  sector.  The  CO
2  reduction  capacity  is  generally  demon-
strated by life-cycle assessment (LCA) studies. LCA is an increas-
ingly important tool to assess and enhance the progress for achiev-
ing the international aviation sector’s goal on reducing emissions
of greenhouse gas (GHG). It should be accompanied by additional
techno-economics analyses [18,186–188] . Complete LCA studies for
the production and use of bio-aviation fuel are still quite scarce,
but initial attempts show positive results. It was demonstrated that
almost all pathways result in lower GHG emissions than the con-
ventional aviation fuel, that produced between 88 and 106 g CO
2eq
/MJ [39] . De Jong et al. performed a LCA of GHG emissions from
bio-jet  fuel  production,  and  demonstrated  a  considerable  reduc-
tion of aviation-related GHG emissions when using bio-jet fuels.
They also demonstrated that the F-T pathway resulted in the high-
est GHG emission reduction in comparison with other production
pathways  [39] .  When  assessing  the  thermodynamic  influence  of
various bio-fuels on a gas turbine performance, and relating it to
the aircraft performance over a fixed trajectory with a given en-
gine/airframe  configuration,  Lokesh  et  al.  demonstrated  that  the
use of Bio-SPKs resulted in an average fuel economy of 2.4% rel-
ative to the Jet-kerosene burnt for the same mission [189] .

LCA  studies,  together  with  a  techno-economic  analysis  could
also be used to evaluate the bio-refinery concepts for bio-aviation
fuel  supply  chains.  In  Brazil,  the  co-production  of  bio-fuels  and
higher  value-added  products  was  examined  by  Alves  et  al.  and
proven to be economically feasible, while ethanol-to-jet and hydro-
processed  esters  and  fatty  acids  (HEFA)  were  the  most  attrac-

tive bio-jet fuel production routes [190] . Jagtap investigated algae-
derived hydro-processed renewab1e (HRJ) jet fuel to be used from
the year 2020: GHGs emission will reduce by 68.81% - 68.87% if
HR jet fuel from algae replaces petroleum- based jet fuel [191] . The
price of 100% HRJ jet fuel from algae in 2020 will likely be lower
than or similar to the petroleum-based jet fuel [191] . Experimental
studies and a techno-economic analysis of a catalytic process for
the conversion of whole biomass into drop-in aviation fuels with
maximal carbon yields were reported by Bond et al. demonstrating
that biomass pre-treatment, carbohydrate hydrolysis and dehydra-
tion, and catalytic upgrading to platform chemicals were key-issues
[134] . In trying to elucidate whether the production processes of
the bio-aviation fuel were important, Buffi et al. demonstrated that
hydro-treated renewable jet fuel (HRJ) from waste cooking oil and
its blends reduces emissions and both compacts and homogenizes
the  heat  release  zone  [192] .  The  energy  integration  of  a  hydro-
treatment process for sustainable bio-jet fuel production moreover
leads to a reduction of the environmental impact of the process
itself, with 86% reduction reported, thus also reducing the carbon
footprint and increasing the sustainability of bio-aviation fuel [78] .
Additional emission impact studies were presented by Winchester
et al. [193] and Wolters et al. [194] : both studies emphasise the
role of the implicit subsidy and the consideration of the carbon
dioxide equivalent abated by using bio-fuels, and of the strategy to
be implemented up to the year 2050. Only an increased production
and application of bio-aviation fuel will compensate for steady air
traffic growth, and will facilitate the achievement of both a car-
bon neutral growth from 2020 onwards, and enable a 50% CO
2eq
emission reduction by 2050 [194] . Likely scenarios were studied by
probabilistic analysis to substantiate and facilitate decision making
by aviation industry stakeholders [195] .

It should be noted that the development of bio-fuel is in line
with  the  long  debate  on  the  land  and  water  use.  For  example,
the environmental performance of vegetable oil HRJ is strongly de-
pending upon the agricultural conditions and location of the crops
cultivation.  Towards  land  and  water  use,  the  production  of  bio-
aviation fuel and traditional bio-fuel is similar.

5. Policy studies for bio-aviation fuel production

Up to 2050, worldwide aviation is expected to grow annually
by about 5% [196,197] . Europe is assuming a leading role in set-
ting targets and policy instruments concerning bio-fuels (including
bio-aviation fuels) and its 2020 Renewable Energy Directive (RED)
imposes a binding target of 20% gross energy consumption from
renewable sources (20% RES).

In the USA, the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM)
Subcommittee on Aviation Fuels is setting the targets as presented
in  its  standard  ASTM  D  1655,  and  currently  met  by  hydrocar-
bon  distillate  products  derived  from  a  limited  number  of  fossil
sources, i.e. from crude oil, natural gas liquid condensates, heavy
oil, shale oil, and oil sands. The ASTM recently published the ap-
proved  methods  for  the  production  of  alternative  jet  fuels,  in-
cluding the Fischer-Tropsch hydro-processed synthesized paraffinic
kerosene (FT-SPK) and the hydro-processed esters and fatty acids
(HEFA). The ASTM D7566 Standard defines specifications for Avia-
tion Turbine Fuel Containing Synthesized Hydrocarbons, to include
alternative fuels that can be used to blend semi-synthetic jet fuel
and meeting the ASTM D1655 requirements.

The  European  Joint  Inspection  Group  approved  FAME  as  an
Identified  Incidental  Material  in  jet  fuel  up  to  50 ppm  (2  May
2015), while up to 100 ppm incidental material of jet with FAME
is under discussion, and subject to approval by the turbine engine
manufacturers.

A  global  bio-aviation  fuel  trend  is  emerging  as  a  result  of
the enhanced authority approval, the issue of lower bio-aviation

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

43

fuel  emissions,  and  reduced  aircraft  engine  maintenance,  as
was  discussed  by  Noh  et  al.  [198] .  Blair-Smith  summarized  the
development tendency of aviation fuel in the current century, with
special emphasis on the use of bio fuels [199] , whereas Hari et al.
reviewed the opportunities and challenges in the development of
alternative fuels for aviation, towards the production process, feed-
stock used and the most promising global projects [200] . The po-
tential feedstock for renewable aviation fuel in Brazil was reviewed
by Cantarella et al. [201] .

In their analysis of the current commercial status and future de-
velopments of production pathways for renewable jet fuel, Maw-
hood et al. stated that the development of a supportive policy is
crucial to its future deployment [202] . Airlines moreover need to
adapt and adopt a smooth transition to alternative fuels.

To  reduce  the  risk  in  investment,  Bittner  et  al.  assessed  the
impact of two policies on the future of bio-aviation fuels, i.e. re-
verse auction and capital subsidy [203] . Appropriate public and tax
policies are necessary to stimulate and enhance the bio-aviation
fuel  industry.  With  European  Commission  supports,  Lufthansa
[204] tested the bio-jet fuel produced by Gevo in order to obtain
the necessary approval for the commercial use in aviation of its
alcohol-to-jet (ATJ) fuel.

6. ASTM activities in bio-aviation fuel certification

The  properties  and  conditions  for  aviation  bio-fuels  are  de-
fined  by  ASTM  standards.  Hence,  all  bio-aviation  bio-fuel  candi-
dates should pass ASTM tests and the ASTM activities are good in-
dicators to reflect the extent of the research activities. As shown
in Fig. 7 , research in this area lead to the development of various
ASTM activities.

Fischer-Tropsch Synthetic Paraffinic Kerosene (F-T SPK), Hydro-
processed Esters and Fatty Acids (HEFA), and direct fermentation
of  hydrocarbons  (DSHC)  are  the  first  three  task  forces  approved
by the ASTM committee [202] . In July 2016, the fourth technology,
named ATJ (alcohol-to-jet) as submitted by the Gevo company, got
successfully approved [205] . In such an ATJ technology, the avia-
tion fuel derived from isobutanol (itself derived from fermentation

of sugar) has been proven at a 50% blend ratio. It is the intention to
further expand the aviation fuel production from other bio-derived
alcohols such as ethanol, butanol and others. The fifth technology
that has been approved concerns the aromatic products from the
alkylation of a F-T stream (rich in olefins) and aromatics. This is
the first approved route to produce an aviation fuel range blend
with chemical composition different from isoparaffins.

Besides  the  approved  routes,  there  are  more  tasks  in  the
process.  For  example,  with  lipid  feedstock,  CH  (Catalytic  hydro-
thermolysis, proposed by ARA/Chevron) and Renewable Diesel (ini-
tiated by Boeing Company) are under consideration [202] . For car-
bohydrate  or  lignocellulosic  feedstock,  several  tasks  on  thermo-
chemical  conversions  are  now  under  consideration.  The  Virent
company proposed a technology based on aqueous phase reform-
ing for alternative aviation fuel production [206] . KIOR and other
partners focus on pyrolysis and hydro-upgrading for renewable avi-
ation fuel production [177] . The task force on co-processing of bio-
stream and fossil-based resources was also proposed.

In parallel, the HFP-HEFA annex would be a relaxation of the
already approved HEFA annex such that all the properties of the
jet fuel are met only after blending. This would mean that HVO
diesel could be used more or less as-is but in a more limited blend
ratio of the same order of magnitude as for SIP. If accepted, the
availability of bio-kerosene would improve significantly based on
already operating HVO plants. In the event of such an approval,
it is not unlikely that also other pathways will be examined e.g.
SPK + or ASJ + [207] . As far as their respective blend-walls are far
away e.g. 10% in a large quantity of biofuel used in a major air-
port,  this  could  increase  the  market  (Stockholm  Arlanda  Airport
consumes some 0.7 million m 3 per year, Schiphol around 4.4 mil-
lion m 3 ) [171] . FT-SPK/A, ATJ-SKA and HDO-SAK are of some ad-
ditional interest towards the fuel value, as these fuels are higher
in  aromatics  than  the  SPK,  SIP  and  SK  fuels,  and  could  hence
help to achieve the set specifications since after blending a min-
imum  requirement  for  8%  aromatics  must  be  retained.  Although
aromatics  also  increase  soot  emissions,  they  are  not  the  limit-
ing factor for blending since fossil jet fuel has a lower aromatics
content.

Fig. 7..  ASTM activities of bio-aviation fuel production.

44

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

In most of the ASTM annexes, there are blending limitations for
the aviation bio-fuel. However, in practice the actual tank blend
level will be lower than the cap in the ASTM specification, since an
operational aircraft normally has a significant part of the fuel left
in the tanks from the previous flight as a safety precaution when
refuelling.

7. Perspective: The evolution of costs and the required
atom-efficient production of bio-aviation fuel

Despite  the  numerous  studies,  the  commercial  application  of
bio-aviation fuel is largely hindered by an economic issue, espe-
cially with respect of the recently low crude oil prices [208] . This
economic issue, at least after consideration of carbon tax contribu-
tions, must therefore be overcome before bio-aviation fuel can be
accepted by the users’ common community.

The cost issue of renewable aviation fuel is a function of differ-
ent technology and feedstock aspects. The significant composition
difference  of  the  biomass-derived  feedstock  and  target  aviation
fuel is a serious drawback [209] through the oxygen-rich biopoly-
mer nature of biomass and its unsuitable monomer carbon chain
length. Such a difference calls for a deep change in both chemical
composition and phase during renewable aviation fuel production.
Since  the  carbon  numbers  in  raw  materials  for  bio-aviation  fuel
production do  not  exactly  fit  the  carbon  number range required
by  aviation  fuel,  there  is  a  carbon  atom  loss  in  the  bio-aviation
fuel  production  process  due  to  the  cracking  or  hydro-treatment
step. Therefore, an enhanced direction for atom-efficiency should
limit the carbon losses. The first two ASTM approved pathways are
technologies derived from fossil resource processing [210] . Gasifi-
cation followed by F-T synthesis is a technology from coal/natural
gas indirect liquefaction and the HEFA route is a bio-mimicking of
the hydro-processing technology in an oil refinery. These technolo-
gies, although having relatively low technical risks, also have a low
possibility to balance costs due to the difference of feedstock. The
feedstock difference in energy density, and oxygen content will re-
sult in a lower energy efficiency, overall fuel yield and higher hy-
drogen consumption, which can hamper the economic issues.

During  the  development  of  renewable  aviation  fuel,  task-
specified technologies should be designed and developed. The third
ASTM approved technology (DHSC, direct hydrocarbon production
by fermentation from sugar) partly proved the possibility of a task
specific development of biotechnology for aviation fuel production.
In this aspect, a molecular management concept, calling for putting
suitable  molecules  at  the  right  place  and  timing,  together  with
careful technology development, should be considered.

The  first  level  of  molecular  management  is  the  selection  of
the right feedstock and product. Among biomass feedstock, lipids
have the highest H/C
eff ratio, thus making them the most promis-
ing  feedstock  for  aviation  fuel  production.  Typical  lignocellulosic
eff ratio, indicating its
biomass, such as sugar, has a very low H/C
limited potential in chemical conversion. However, it could be a
promising feedstock for bio-chemical conversion through a design-
specific plant for bio-fuel production purpose. For example, Wilk-
erson  et  al.  engineered  poplar  to  produce  lignin  that  is  more
amenable to degradation [211] . The resulting poplar trees showed
no  difference  in  growth  habit  under  greenhouse  conditions,  but
their lignin showed improved digestibility. Towards product selec-
tion, it should be remembered that target aviation fuels are com-
plicated mixtures with different H/C
eff ratio, hence besides paraf-
eff ratios like
fin and isoparaffin, molecules with relatively low H/C
cycloalkanes and aromatics should also be considered as renew-
able aviation fuel. A long overlooked feedstock/product pair in bio-
aviation fuel production is lignin/aromatics due to the low H/C
eff
gap (0.6 vs 1.4), suitable carbon chain length of lignin (C9 of lignin
monomer)  and  the  necessity  of  aromatics  in  aviation  fuel.  By-

product selection is also very important for cost-effective aviation
fuel  production,  in  case  the  biomass  to  aviation  fuel  conversion
is not completed with 100% carbon selectivity. The simultaneous
production of aviation fuel and by-products with high added value
could contribute to reduce the overall production cost and improve
the economy of producing bio-aviation fuel.

The second level of molecular management is the development
of  a  correct  chemical/bio-chemical  conversion  strategy.  The  con-
version  of  oxygen-rich  bio-feedstock  is  a  relatively  new  topic  in
the catalytic scope after more than half a century of study on a
hydrocarbon  stream.  Hence  developing  a  suitable  catalytic  strat-
egy  based  on  mechanistic  understanding,  novel  catalytic  materi-
als design, and structure/performance relationship development is
necessary for bio-aviation fuel production. The precise control of
breaking  and  re-arranging  chemical  bond  (C –O  and  C –C)  during
biomass processing requires special attention.

An  additional  important  research  area  is  the  development  of
bio-technology. The potential of the biotechnology frontiers such
as synthetic biology and metabolic engineering cannot be under-
estimated  and  should  be  fully  released  in  future  renewable  avi-
ation  fuel  production.  The  atom-efficiency  is  considered  an  im-
portant issue. Since the carbon number in biomass does not ex-
actly fit the carbon number range required by the bio-aviation fuel,
cracking and hydro-treatment steps are required. These steps in-
herently  lead  to  a  carbon  loss.  The  atom-efficient  production  of
bio-aviation fuel should limit the carbon losses, hence retaining as
many biomass carbon atoms as possible in the bio-aviation prod-
uct. The third level of molecular management is the precise tim-
ing of selected feedstock and intermediate phase. During biomass
processing, different intermediates (shown in Fig. 7 ) are formed.
Hence the right integration of different reactions like deoxygena-
tion and carbon chain adjustment should be considered. An im-
portant example of processing timing is the de-oxygenation timing
of bio-oxygenate, in which the oxygen containing function group
can be used in designing a high selective C –C adjusting reaction.

8. Conclusions

Renewable  aviation  fuel  is  a  relatively  new  topic,  with  a  lot
of challenges remaining in all aspects of technology development,
2 can be a valu-
fuel approval and distribution. However, before CO
able  alternative  as  carbon  source  through  a  technology  break-
through,  biomass  is  the  only  realistic  and  worldwide  renewable
carbon source. To effectively im prove the biomass to aviation fuel
production technology several steps are required through the right
integration  of  biology,  chemical  engineering,  catalysts  as  well  as
energy  crops.  The  survey  listed  in  this  paper  clearly  proved  the
environmental  benefit  of  the  aviation  bio-fuel.  The  review  also
proved that the yield of target products and consequently cost is-
sues can be improved through the development of novel catalytic
strategies under a molecular management concept. The production
of biomass-based aviation fuel is possible at large scale through an
integrated research throughout the whole industrial chain from air
plane manufacturer, aviation fuel producer and provider, airlines,
and R&D facilities.

Several relevant findings summarize the present review.
∗ The  present  petroleum-source  of  jet  fuel  is  a  hydrocarbon
mixture of mostly paraffins, isoparaffins, cycloalkanes and aromat-
ics, with specific and desired carbon chain lengths and properties.
∗ A viable bio-based alternative to petroleum-based jet fuel is
recognized as needed if the aviation industry needs to meet its en-
vironmental targets.

∗ The significant composition difference of the biomass-derived
feedstock and target aviation fuel is a serious drawback through
the  oxygen-rich  biopolymer  nature  of  biomass  with  unsuitable
monomer carbon chain length.

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

45

∗ The production of aviation bio-fuel from biomass resources is
an integration of different technologies such as thermo-chemical
conversions, chemo-catalytic conversion, and bio-chemical conver-
sion.

∗ Although  lipids  are  a  recognised  feedstock  for  bio-aviation
fuel  production,  lipid  resources  with  carbon  chain  length  in  the
C10-C16 range are limited, thus necessitating a carbon chain length
control by selection or genetic modification of energy crops, or of
microbial and algae strains.

∗ The use of lignocellulosic biomass as feedstock for the trans-
formation into bio-aviation fuel is one of the major topics of re-
cent research, with special emphasis both through the production
of oxygenate precursors from carbohydrates by metabolic engineer-
ing, and through a precursor production by an improved fatty acid
biosynthetic  pathway.  Since  fatty  acids  have  the  most  appropri-
ate chemical structure in comparison with the linear alkane com-
pounds in aviation fuel, a vast number of researchers studied this
improved fatty acid biosynthetic pathway to produce bio-aviation
fuel  and  its  precursors.  The  yield  of  desired  products  remains
low.

∗ The catalytic conversion of bio-oxygenates obtained from dif-
ferent processes into bio-aviation fuel targets two important steps
for producing bio-aviation fuel production, being achieving an ap-
propriate carbon chain length and applying hydro-deoxygenation.
Both the catalytic conversion of chemical or of bio-chemical inter-
mediates into bio-aviation fuel are potentially interesting.

∗ Lignin is conceptually a very suitable resource for aromatic
and cycloalkane components. For bio-aviation fuel, a direct depoly-
merization coupled with the alkylation of aromatics can produce
the  desired  C8–C15  aromatics  and  cycloalkanes  at  a  reasonable
yield. Examples of the conversion of lignin into aviation fuel are
still  limited,  but  the  application  of  the  "lignin  first"  bio-refinery
could significantly enhance the lignin use and its conversion ef-
ficiency.

∗ The pilot and industrialization effort s are closely connected
with the ASTM activities, since ASTM approval requires extensive
pilot-scale operation to  produce sufficient samples in support  of
the ASTM tests. The properties and conditions for bio-aviation fu-
els are defined by ASTM standards. The ASTM activities are good
indicators to reflect the extent of the research activities. There are
blending limitations for the bio-aviation fuel in most of the ASTM
annexes,.

∗ Up to date, the use of aviation bio-fuel has been demonstrated

in test flights with positive results.

∗ Although it has been reported that typical bio-fuels such as
bio-ethanol and biodiesel can produce PAHs and soot, similar to
conventional hydrocarbon fuels, the oxygen – free aviation biofuel
has obvious environmental advantage than petroleum-derived jet
fuels.

∗ Worldwide  aviation  is  expected  to  grow  annually  by  about
5%  up  to  2050.  Europe  and  the  USA  are  assuming  a  leading
role in setting targets and policy instruments concerning bio-fuels
through  imposing  binding  targets  for  integrating  renewable  en-
ergy sources. The ASTM recently published the approved methods
for  the  production  of  alternative  jet  fuels,  including  the  Fischer-
Tropsch hydro-processed synthesized paraffinic kerosene (FT-SPK)
and the hydro-processed esters and fatty acids (HEFA).

∗ However, advanced drop-in biofuels have been slow to reach
commercial  maturity  due  to  significant  technological  challenges,
high capital costs, and the challenge of generally low oil prices. It
is likely that the co-processing of co-drop-in biofuels with conven-
tional petroleum refining could considerably reduce capital costs,
while  the  simultaneous  production  of  bio-aviation  fuel  and  by-
products  with  high  added  value  could  contribute  to  reduce  the
overall  production  cost  and  improve  the  economy  of  producing
bio-aviation fuel.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  acknowledge  funding  from  the  National  Natural
Science Foundation of China under grant 2170 600 6 and Beijing Ad-
vanced Innovation Centre for Soft Matter Science and Engineering.

References

[1] Ramanathan V , Carmichael G . Global and regional climate changes due to

black carbon. Nature Geosci 2008; 1 :221–7 .

[2] Agarwal AK . Biofuels (alcohols and biodiesel) applications as fuels for internal

combustion engines. Progress Energy Combust Sci 2007; 33 :233–71 .

[3] Fargione J , Hill J , Tilman D , Polasky S , Hawthorne P . Land clearing and the

biofuel carbon debt. Science 2008; 319 :1235–8 .

[4] Chu S , Cui Y , Liu N . The path towards sustainable energy. Nature Mater

2016; 16 :16 .

[5] Chu S , Majumdar A . Opportunities and challenges for a sustainable energy

future. Nature 2012; 488 :294–303 .

[6] Connolly D , Lund H , Mathiesen B . Smart Energy Europe: the technical and
economic impact of one potential 100% renewable energy scenario for the
European Union. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016; 60 :1634–53 .

[7] Huang Y , Surawski NC , Organ B , Zhou JL , Tang OHH , Chan EFC . Fuel consump-
tion and emissions performance under real driving: comparison between hy-
brid and conventional vehicles. Sci Total Environ 2019; 659 :275–82 .

[8] Resasco DE , Crossley S . Molecular engineering approach in the selection of

catalytic strategies for upgrading of biofuels. AIChE J 2009; 55 :1082–9 .

[9] Boot MD , Tian M , Hensen EJ , Sarathy SM . Impact of fuel molecular structure
on auto-ignition behavior–Design rules for future high performance gasolines.
Progress Energy Combust Sci 2017; 60 :1–25 .

[10] Chuck CJ , Donnelly J . The compatibility of potential bioderived fuels with Jet

A-1 aviation kerosene. Appl Energy 2014; 118 :83–91 .

[11] Haynes WM . CRC handbook of chemistry and physics . CRC press; 2014 .
[12] Speight JG . Handbook of petroleum product analysis . John Wiley & Sons; 2015 .
[13] Chiaramonti D . Sustainable aviation fuels: the challenge of decarbonization.

Energy Procedia 2019; 158 :1202–7 .

[14] IATA I . Sustainable aviation fuel roadmap . Montreal, Geneva: International Air

Transport Association; 2015 .

[15] Su Y , Zhang P , Su Y . An overview of biofuels policies and industrializa-
tion  in  the  major  biofuel  producing  countries.  Renew  Sustain  Energy  Rev
2015; 50 :991–1003 .

[16] Hao H , Geng Y , Sarkis J . Carbon footprint of global passenger cars: scenarios

through 2050. Energy 2016; 101 :121–31 .

[17] Chai J , Zhang Z-Y , Wang S-Y , Lai KK , Liu J . Aviation fuel demand development

in China. Energy Econ 2014; 46 :224–35 .

[18] Yilmaz  N ,  Atmanli  A .  Sustainable  alternative  fuels  in  aviation.  Energy

2017; 140 :1378–86 .

[19] Schäfer AW , Evans AD , Reynolds TG , Dray L . Costs of mitigating CO 2 emissions

from passenger aircraft. Nature Climate Change 2016; 6 :412–17 .

[20] Total  fuel  consumption  of  commercial  airlines  worldwide  between  2005
and  2018  (in  billion  gallons).  2018.  https://www.statista.com/statistics/
655057/fuel- consumption- of- airlines- worldwide ,  Accessed  on  25th  March,
2019.

[21] Michaelis L , Davidson O . GHG mitigation in the transport sector. Energy Policy

1996; 24 :969–84 .

[22] Hassan M , Pfaender H , Mavris D . Feasibility analysis of aviation CO 2 emission
goals under uncertainty. In: 17th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Op-
erations Conference ; 2017. p. 3267 .

[23] Moore RH , Thornhill KL , Weinzierl B , Sauer D , D’Ascoli E , Kim J , et al. Bio-
fuel blending reduces particle emissions from aircraft engines at cruise con-
ditions. Nature 2017; 543 :411–15 .

[24] Vennestrøm P , Osmundsen CM , Christensen C , Taarning E . Beyond petro-
chemicals: the renewable chemicals industry. Angewandte Chemie Interna-
tional Edition 2011; 50 :10502–9 .

[25] Wang T , Qiu S , Weng Y , Chen L , Liu Q , Long J , et al. Liquid fuel production by
aqueous phase catalytic transformation of biomass for aviation. Appl Energy
2015; 160 :329–35 .

[26] Li G , Li N , Wang X , Sheng X , Li S , Wang A , et al. Synthesis of diesel or jet fuel
range cycloalkanes with 2-methylfuran and cyclopentanone from lignocellu-
lose. Energy Fuels 2014; 28 :5112–18 .

[27] Hassan SS , Williams GA , Jaiswal AK . Moving towards the second generation of
lignocellulosic biorefineries in the EU: drivers, challenges, and opportunities.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019; 101 :590–9 .

[28] Gutiérrez-Antonio C , Gómez-Castro FI , de Lira-Flores JA , Hernández S . A re-
view on the production processes of renewable jet fuel. Renew Sustain Energy
Rev 2017; 79 :709–29 .

[29] Kallio  P ,  Pásztor  A ,  Akhtar  MK ,  Jones  PR .  Renewable  jet  fuel.  Curr  Opin

Biotechnol 2014; 26 :50–5 .

[30] Wang W-C , Tao L . Bio-jet fuel conversion technologies. Renew Sustain Energy

Rev 2016; 53 :801–22 .

[31] Richter S , Braun-Unkhoff M , Naumann C , Riedel U . Paths to alternative fuels

for aviation. CEAS Aeronaut J 2018; 9 :389–403 .

[32] Ramsum H , Gupta RB . Biofuels in air and ground transportation. In: Run-
chal  AK,  Gupta  AK,  Kushari  A,  De  A,  Aggarwal  SK,  editors.  Energy  for

46

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

Propulsion: a sustainable technologies approach . Singapore: Springer Singapore;
2018. p. 457–72 .

[33] Neuling U , Kaltschmitt M . Biokerosene from vegetable oils – technologies and
processes. Biokerosene: status and prospects . Kaltschmitt M, Neuling U, editors.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2018 .

[34] Yang J , Xin Z , He Q , Corscadden K , Niu H . An overview on performance char-

acteristics of bio-jet fuels. Fuel 2019; 237 :916–36 .

[35] Rubie J.S., Li Y.G., Jackson A.J.B. Performance simulation and analysis of a gas

turbine engine using drop-in bio-fuels. 2018:V003T06A5.

[36] van Dyk S., Su J., Mcmillan J.D., Saddler J. Potential synergies of drop-in bio-
fuel production with further co-processing at oil refineries. Biofuels, Bioprod-
ucts and Biorefining.0.

[37] O’Connell A , Kousoulidou M , Lonza L , Weindorf W . Considerations on GHG
emissions and energy balances of promising aviation biofuel pathways. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2019; 101 :504–15 .

[38] Staples  MD ,  Malina  R ,  Suresh  P ,  Hileman  JI ,  Barrett  SRH .  Aviation  CO 2
emissions  reductions  from  the  use  of  alternative  jet  fuels.  Energy  Policy
2018; 114 :342–54 .

[39] de Jong S , Antonissen K , Hoefnagels R , Lonza L , Wang M , Faaij A , et al. Life-cy-
cle analysis of greenhouse gas emissions from renewable jet fuel production.
Biotechnol Biofuels 2017; 10 :64 .

[40] Pereira LG , MacLean HL , Saville BA . Financial analyses of potential biojet fuel

production technologies. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining 2017; 11 :665–81 .

[41] Serrano-Ruiz  JC ,  Dumesic  JA .  Catalytic  routes  for  the  conversion  of
biomass into liquid hydrocarbon transportation fuels. Energy Environment Sci
2011; 4 :83–99 .

[42] Liu S , Zhu Q , Guan Q , He L , Li W . Bio-aviation fuel production from hydropro-
cessing castor oil promoted by the nickel-based bifunctional catalysts. Biore-
source Technol 2015; 183 :93–100 .

[43] Wang M , Chen M , Fang Y , Tan T . Highly efficient conversion of plant oil to
bio-aviation fuel and valuable chemicals by combination of enzymatic trans-
esterification, olefin cross-metathesis, and hydrotreating. Biotechnol Biofuels
2018; 11 :30 .

[44] Itthibenchapong V , Srifa A , Kaewmeesri R , Kidkhunthod P , Faungnawakij K .
Deoxygenation  of  palm  kernel  oil  to  jet  fuel-like  hydrocarbons  using
Ni-MoS 2 / γ -Al 2 O 3 catalysts. Energy Convers Manag 2017; 134 :188–96 .

[45] Choi I-H , Hwang K-R , Han J-S , Lee K-H , Yun JS , Lee J-S . The direct production
of jet-fuel from non-edible oil in a single-step process. Fuel 2015; 158 :98–104 .
[46] Kandel K , Anderegg JW , Nelson NC , Chaudhary U , Slowing II . Supported iron
nanoparticles for the hydrodeoxygenation of microalgal oil to green diesel. J
Catalysis 2014; 314 :142–8 .

[47] Ju C , Zhou Y , He M , Wu Q , Fang Y . Improvement of selectivity from lipid to
jet fuel by rational integration of feedstock properties and catalytic strategy.
Renew Energy 2016; 97 :1–7 .

[48] Pfister KF , Baader S , Baader M , Berndt S , Goossen LJ . Biofuel by isomerizing
metathesis of rapeseed oil esters with (bio) ethylene for use in contemporary
diesel engines. Sci Adv 2017; 3 :e1602624 .

[49] Zhou Y , Huang Y , Fang Y , Tan T . Selective conversion of castor oil derived

ricinoleic acid methyl ester into jet fuel. Green Chem 2016; 18 :5180–9 .

[50] Silva LN , Fortes IC , de Sousa FP , Pasa VM . Biokerosene and green diesel from

macauba oils via catalytic deoxygenation over Pd/C. Fuel 2016; 164 :329–38 .

[51] Zhao X , Wei L , Julson J , Qiao Q , Dubey A , Anderson G . Catalytic cracking
of non-edible sunflower oil over ZSM-5 for hydrocarbon bio-jet fuel. New
Biotechnol 2015; 32 :300–12 .

[52] Li L , Coppola E , Rine J , Miller JL , Walker D . Catalytic hydrothermal conversion

of triglycerides to non-ester biofuels. Energy Fuels 2010; 24 :1305–15 .

[53] Verma D , Rana BS , Kumar R , Sibi M , Sinha AK . Diesel and aviation kerosene
with desired aromatics from hydroprocessing of jatropha oil over hydrogena-
tion catalysts supported on hierarchical mesoporous SAPO-11. Appl Catal A
Gen 2015; 490 :108–16 .

[54] Verma D , Kumar R , Rana BS , Sinha AK . Aviation fuel production from lipids
by a single-step route using hierarchical mesoporous zeolites. Energy Environ-
ment Sci 2011; 4 :1667–71 .

[55] Kumar R , Rana BS , Tiwari R , Verma D , Kumar R , Joshi RK , et al. Hydroprocess-
ing of jatropha oil and its mixtures with gas oil. Green Chem 2010; 12 :2232–9 .
[56] Sinha A , Sibi M , Naidu N , Farooqui S , Anand M , Kumar R . Process intensifi-
cation for hydroprocessing of vegetable oils: experimental study. Indust Eng
Chem Res 2014; 53 :19062–70 .

[57] Robota HJ , Alger JC , Shafer L . Converting algal triglycerides to diesel and HEFA

jet fuel fractions. Energy Fuels 2013; 27 :985–96 .

[58] Zhou L , Lawal A . Hydrodeoxygenation of microalgae oil to green diesel over
Pt, Rh and presulfided NiMo catalysts. Catal Sci Technol 2016; 6 :1442–54 .
[59] Yang C , Nie R , Fu J , Hou Z , Lu X . Production of aviation fuel via catalytic hy-
drothermal decarboxylation of fatty acids in microalgae oil. Bioresource Tech-
nol 2013; 146 :569–73 .

[60] Rabaev M , Landau MV , Vidruk-Nehemya R , Koukouliev V , Zarchin R , Her-
skowitz M . Conversion of vegetable oils on Pt/Al 2 O 3 /SAPO-11 to diesel and
jet fuels containing aromatics. Fuel 2015; 161 :287–94 .

[61] Bezergianni  S ,  Kalogianni  A ,  Vasalos  IA .  Hydrocracking  of  vacuum  gas
oil-vegetable  oil  mixtures  for  biofuels  production.  Bioresource  Technol
20 09; 10 0 :3036–42 .

[62] Wang M , He M , Fang Y , Baeyens J , Tan T . The Ni-Mo/ γ -Al 2 O 3 catalyzed hy-
drodeoxygenation of FAME to aviation fuel. Catal Commun 2017; 100 :237–41 .
[63] Li T , Cheng J , Huang R , Zhou J , Cen K . Conversion of waste cooking oil to jet
biofuel with nickel-based mesoporous zeolite Y catalyst. Bioresource Technol
2015; 197 :289–94 .

[64] Bala DD , Chidambaram D . Production of renewable aviation fuel range alka-

nes from algae oil. RSC Adv 2016; 6 :14626–34 .

[65] Murata K , Liu Y , Watanabe MM , Inaba M , Takahara I . Hydrocracking of algae
oil into aviation fuel-range hydrocarbons using a Pt–Re catalyst. Energy Fuels
2014; 28 :6999–7006 .

[66] Kim MY , Kim J-K , Lee M-E , Lee S , Choi M . Maximizing biojet fuel produc-
tion from triglyceride: importance of the hydrocracking catalyst and separate
deoxygenation/hydrocracking steps. ACS Catal 2017; 7 :6256–67 .

[67] Lee SK , Chou H , Ham TS , Lee TS , Keasling JD . Metabolic engineering of mi-
croorganisms for biofuels production: from bugs to synthetic biology to fuels.
Curr Opin Biotechnol 2008; 19 :556–63 .

[68] Xu P , Gu Q , Wang W , Wong L , Bower AG , Collins CH , et al. Modular opti-
mization of multi-gene pathways for fatty acids production in E. coli . Nature
Commun 2013; 4 :1409 .

[69] Beller HR , Lee TS , Katz L . Natural products as biofuels and bio-based chemi-

cals: fatty acids and isoprenoids. Natural Prod Rep 2015; 32 :1508–26 .

[70] Xing S , Lv P , Wang J , Fu J , Fan P , Yang L , et al. One-step hydroprocessing of
fatty acids into renewable aromatic hydrocarbons over Ni/HZSM-5: insights
into the major reaction pathways. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2017; 19 :2961–73 .
[71] Mohammad M , Hari TK , Yaakob Z , Sharma YC , Sopian K . Overview on the
production of paraffin based-biofuels via catalytic hydrodeoxygenation. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2013; 22 :121–32 .

[72] Herskowitz M., Landau M., Reizner I., Kaliya M. Production of diesel fuel from

vegetable and animal oils. 2006.

[73] Acosta-Solórzano AD , Guerrero-Farfán O , Ramírez-Márquez C , Gómez-Cas-
tro FI , Segovia-Hernández JG , Hernández S , et al. Controllability analysis of
distillation sequences for the separation of bio-jet fuel and green diesel frac-
tions. Chem Eng Technol 2016; 39 :2273–83 .

[74] Anand M , Farooqui SA , Kumar R , Joshi R , Kumar R , Sibi MG , et al. Optimizing
renewable oil hydrocracking conditions for aviation bio-kerosene production.
Fuel Process Technol 2016; 151 :50–8 .

[75] Zhang  Y ,  Bi  P ,  Wang  J ,  Jiang  P ,  Wu  X ,  Xue  H ,  et  al.  Production  of  jet
and  diesel  biofuels  from  renewable  lignocellulosic  biomass.  Appl  Energy
2015; 150 :128–37 .

[76] Buijs NA , Siewers V , Nielsen J . Advanced biofuel production by the yeast Sac-

charomyces cerevisiae. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2013; 17 :480–8 .

[77] Sheng X , Li N , Li G , Wang W , Yang J , Cong Y , et al. Synthesis of high den-
sity aviation fuel with cyclopentanol derived from lignocellulose. Sci Rep
2015; 5 :9565 .

[78] Gutiérrez-Antonio C , Romero-Izquierdo AG , Israel Gómez-Castro F , Hernán-
dez S . Energy integration of a hydrotreatment process for sustainable biojet
fuel production. Indust Eng Chem Res 2016; 55 :8165–75 .

[79] Smolke CD , Silver PA . Informing biological design by integration of systems

and synthetic biology. Cell 2011; 144 :855–9 .

[80] Wang M , Nie K , Cao H , Xu H , Fang Y , Tan T , et al. Biosynthesis of medium
chain length alkanes for bio-aviation fuel by metabolic engineered E. coli .
Bioresource Technol 2017; 239 :542–5 .

[81] Wang C , Yoon S-H , Jang H-J , Chung Y-R , Kim J-Y , Choi E-S , et al. Metabolic en-
gineering of E. coli for α-farnesene production. Metabol Eng 2011; 13 :648–55 .
[82] Zhu Z , Zhou YJ , Kang M-K , Krivoruchko A , Buijs NA , Nielsen J . Enabling
the synthesis of medium chain alkanes and 1-alkenes in yeast. Metabol Eng
2017; 44 :81–8 .

[83] Choi  YJ ,  Lee  SY .  Microbial  production  of  short-chain  alkanes.  Nature

2013; 502 :571 .

[84] Lee SY , Kim HM , Cheon S . Metabolic engineering for the production of hydro-

carbon fuels. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2015; 33 :15–22 .

[85] Nielsen J , Larsson C , van Maris A , Pronk J . Metabolic engineering of yeast for
production of fuels and chemicals. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2013; 24 :398–404 .
[86] Rude MA , Schirmer A . New microbial fuels: a biotech perspective. Curr Opin

Microbiol 2009; 12 :274–81 .

[87] Schirmer A , Rude MA , Li X , Popova E , del Cardayre SB . Microbial biosynthesis

of alkanes. Science 2010; 329 :559–62 .

[88] Howard  TP ,  Middelhaufe  S ,  Moore  K ,  Edner  C ,  Kolak  DM ,  Taylor  GN ,
et al. Synthesis of customized petroleum-replica fuel molecules by targeted
modification of free fatty acid pools in Escherichia coli. Proceed Nat Acad Sci
2013; 110 :7636–41 .

[89] Akhtar MK , Turner NJ , Jones PR . Carboxylic acid reductase is a versatile en-
zyme for the conversion of fatty acids into fuels and chemical commodities.
Proceed Nat Acad Sci 2013; 110 :87–92 .

[90] Buijs NA , Zhou YJ , Siewers V , Nielsen J . Long-chain alkane production by the

yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol Bioeng 2015; 112 :1275–9 .

[91] Zhou YJ , Buijs NA , Zhu Z , Qin J , Siewers V , Nielsen J . Production of fatty
acid-derived oleochemicals and biofuels by synthetic yeast cell factories. Na-
ture Commun 2016:7 .

[92] Du F-L , Yu H-L , Xu J-H , Li C-X . Enhanced limonene production by optimizing
the expression of limonene biosynthesis and MEP pathway genes in E. coli ..
Bioresources Bioprocess 2014; 1 :10 .

[93] Mendez-Perez D , Alonso-Gutierrez J , Hu Q , Molinas M , Baidoo EE , Wang G ,
et al. Production of jet fuel precursor monoterpenoids from engineered E. coli .
Biotechnol Bioeng 2017 .

[94] Ignea C , Cvetkovic I , Loupassaki S , Kefalas P , Johnson CB , Kampranis SC ,
et al. Improving yeast strains using recyclable integration cassettes, for the
production of plant terpenoids. Microb Cell Factor 2011; 10 :4 .

[95] Peralta-Yahya PP , Ouellet M , Chan R , Mukhopadhyay A , Keasling JD , Lee TS .
Identification and microbial production of a terpene-based advanced biofuel.
Nature Commun 2011; 2 :483 .

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

47

[96] Deneyer A , Renders T , Van Aelst J , Van den Bosch S , Gabriels D , Sels BF .
Alkane production from biomass: chemo-, bio-and integrated catalytic ap-
proaches. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2015; 29 :40–8 .

[97] Bressler R , Wakil SJ . Studies on the mechanism of fatty acid synthesis. J Biol

Chem 1961; 236 :1643–51 .

[98] Haushalter RW , Phelan RM , Hoh KM , Su C , Wang G , Baidoo EEK , et al. Pro-
duction of odd-carbon dicarboxylic acids in E. coli using an engineered biot-
in-fatty acid biosynthetic pathway. J Am Chem Soc 2017; 139 :4615–18 .

[99] Peralta-Yahya PP , Zhang F , del Cardayre SB , Keasling JD . Microbial engineering

for the production of advanced biofuels. Nature 2012; 488 :320–8 .

[100] Harger M , Zheng L , Moon A , Ager C , An JH , Choe C , et al. Expanding the
product profile of a microbial alkane biosynthetic pathway. ACS Synth Biol
2013; 2 :59–62 .

[101] Choi JW , Da Silva NA . Improving polyketide and fatty acid synthesis by engi-
neering of the yeast acetyl-CoA carboxylase. J Biotechnol 2014; 187 :56–9 .
[102] Steen EJ , Kang Y , Bokinsky G , Hu Z , Schirmer A , McClure A , et al. Microbial
production of fatty-acid-derived fuels and chemicals from plant biomass. Na-
ture 2010; 463 :559 .

[103] Schujman GE , de Mendoza D . Regulation of type II fatty acid synthase in

Gram-positive bacteria. Curr Opin Microbiol 2008; 11 :148–52 .

[104] Davis MS , Solbiati J , Cronan J . Overproduction of acetyl-CoA carboxylase ac-
tivity increases the rate of fatty acid biosynthesis in E. coli . J Biol Chem 20 0 0 .
[105] Xu P , Li L , Zhang F , Stephanopoulos G , Koffas M . Improving fatty acids pro-
duction by engineering dynamic pathway regulation and metabolic control.
Proceed Nat Acad Sci 2014; 111 :11299–304 .

[106] Liu X , Sheng J , Curtiss R III . Fatty acid production in genetically modified

cyanobacteria. Proceed Nat Acad Sci 2011 .

[107] Lu X . A perspective: photosynthetic production of fatty acid-based biofuels in

genetically engineered cyanobacteria. Biotechnol Adv 2010; 28 :742–6 .

[108] Lennen RM , Braden DJ , West RM , Dumesic JA , Pfleger BF . A process for micro-
bial hydrocarbon synthesis: overproduction of fatty acids in Escherichia coli
and catalytic conversion to alkanes. Biotechnol Bioeng 2010; 106 :193–202 .
[109] Luning Prak DJ , Jones MH , Trulove P , McDaniel AM , Dickerson T , Cowart JS .
Physical and chemical analysis of Alcohol-to-Jet (ATJ) fuel and development
of surrogate fuel mixtures. Energy Fuels 2015; 29 :3760–9 .

[110] Zhang F , Rodriguez S , Keasling JD . Metabolic engineering of microbial path-
ways for advanced biofuels production. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2011; 22 :775–83 .
[111] Tao L , Tan EC , McCormick R , Zhang M , Aden A , He X , et al. Techno-eco-
nomic analysis and life-cycle assessment of cellulosic isobutanol and com-
parison with cellulosic ethanol and n-butanol. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining
2014; 8 :30–48 .

[112] de Jong E , Higson A , Walsh P , Wellisch M . Bio-based chemicals value added

products from biorefineries. IEA Bioenergy Task42 Biorefinery 2012 .

[113] Breitkreuz  K ,  Menne  A ,  Kraft  A .  New  process  for  sustainable  fuels  and
chemicals from bio-based alcohols and acetone. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining
2014; 8 :504–15 .

[114] Atsumi  S ,  Hanai  T ,  Liao  JC .  Non-fermentative  pathways  for  synthesis  of

branched-chain higher alcohols as biofuels. Nature. 2008; 451 :86 .

[115] Hanai T , Atsumi S , Liao J . Engineered synthetic pathway for isopropanol pro-

duction in Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007; 73 :7814–18 .

[116] Shen  CR ,  Liao  JC .  Metabolic  engineering  of  Escherichia  coli  for  1-bu-
tanol and 1-propanol production via the keto-acid pathways. Metabol Eng
2008; 10 :312–20 .

[117] Inui M , Suda M , Kimura S , Yasuda K , Suzuki H , Toda H , et al. Expression of
Clostridium acetobutylicum butanol synthetic genes in E. coli . Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 2008; 77 :1305–16 .

[118] Dickschat JS . Isoprenoids in three-dimensional space: the stereochemistry of

terpene biosynthesis. Natur Prod Rep 2011; 28 :1917–36 .

[119] Leavell MD , McPhee DJ , Paddon CJ . Developing fermentative terpenoid pro-

duction for commercial usage. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2016; 37 :114–19 .

[120] Yang X , Uddin MH , Zhou X , Neupane B , Miller GC , Coronella CJ , et al. Produc-
tion of high-density renewable aviation fuel from arid land crop. ACS Sustain
Chem Eng 2018; 6 :10108–19 .

[121] Zhang X , Pan L , Wang L , Zou J-J . Review on synthesis and properties of high-
-energy-density liquid fuels: hydrocarbons, nanofluids and energetic ionic liq-
uids. Chem Eng Sci 2018; 180 :95–125 .

[122] Harrison KW , Harvey BG . Renewable high density fuels containing tricyclic

sesquiterpanes and alkyl diamondoids. Sustain Energy Fuels 2017; 1 :467–73 .

[123] Das A , Yoon S-H , Lee S-H , Kim J-Y , Oh D-K , Kim S-W . An update on microbial
carotenoid production: application of recent metabolic engineering tools. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 2007; 77 :505 .

[124] Klein-Marcuschamer D , Ajikumar PK , Stephanopoulos G . Engineering micro-
bial cell factories for biosynthesis of isoprenoid molecules: beyond lycopene.
Trends Biotechnol 2007; 25 :417–24 .

[125] LeViness  S ,  Deshmukh  SR ,  Richard  LA ,  Robota  HJ .  Velocys  Fischer–Trop-
sch  synthesis  technology—new  advances  on  state-of-the-art.  Topics  Catal
2014; 57 :518–25 .

[126] Mawhood R., Gazis E., Hoefnagels R., De Jong S., Slade R. Technological and
commercial maturity of aviation biofuels: eEmerging options to produce jet
from lignocellulosic biomass. 2015.

[127] Li J , He Y , Tan L , Zhang P , Peng X , Oruganti A , et al. Integrated tuneable syn-
thesis of liquid fuels via Fischer–Tropsch technology. Nature Catal 2018; 1 :787 .
[128] Huber GW , Iborra S , Corma A . Synthesis of transportation fuels from biomass:

chemistry, catalysts, and engineering. Chem Rev 2006; 106 :4044–98 .

[129] Wang H , Male J , Wang Y . Recent advances in hydrotreating of pyrolysis bio-oil
and its oxygen-containing model compounds. ACS Catal 2013; 3 :1047–70 .
[130] Elliott  DC ,  Wang  H ,  Rover  M ,  Whitmer  L ,  Smith  R ,  Brown  R .  Hydrocar-
bon liquid production via catalytic hydroprocessing of phenolic oils fraction-
ated from fast pyrolysis of red oak and corn stover. ACS Sustain Chem Eng
2015; 3 :892–902 .

[131] Bi Y , Wang G , Shi Q , Xu C , Gao J . Compositional changes during hydrodeoxy-

genation of biomass pyrolysis oil. Energy Fuels 2014; 28 :2571–80 .

[132] Elliott DC . Biofuel from fast pyrolysis and catalytic hydrodeoxygenation. Curr

Opin Chem Eng 2015; 9 :59–65 .

[133] Zhou  C-H ,  Xia  X ,  Lin  C-X ,  Tong  D-S ,  Beltramini  J .  Catalytic  conversion
of  lignocellulosic  biomass  to  fine  chemicals  and  fuels.  Chem  Soc  Rev
2011; 40 :5588–617 .

[134] Bond JQ , Upadhye AA , Olcay H , Tompsett GA , Jae J , Xing R , et al. Production of
renewable jet fuel range alkanes and commodity chemicals from integrated
catalytic processing of biomass. Energy Environ Sci 2014; 7 :1500–23 .

[135] Climent MJ , Corma A , Iborra S . Conversion of biomass platform molecules
into fuel additives and liquid hydrocarbon fuels. Green Chem 2014; 16 :516–47 .
[136] Serrano-Ruiz  JC ,  Luque  R ,  Sepulveda-Escribano  A .  Transformations  of
biomass-derived platform molecules: from high added-value chemicals to fu-
els via aqueous-phase processing. Chem Soc Rev 2011; 40 :5266–81 .

[137] Arias KS , Climent MJ , Corma A , Iborra S . Synthesis of high quality alkyl naph-
thenic kerosene by reacting an oil refinery with a biomass refinery stream.
Energy Environ Sci 2015; 8 :317–31 .

[138] Alonso DM , Bond JQ , Dumesic JA . Catalytic conversion of biomass to biofuels.

Green Chem 2010; 12 :1493 .

[139] Xu  W ,  Xia  Q ,  Zhang  Y ,  Guo  Y ,  Wang  Y ,  Lu  G .  Effective  production
of  octane  from  biomass  derivatives  under  mild  conditions.  ChemSusChem
2011; 4 :1758–61 .

[140] Luterbacher JS , Rand JM , Alonso DM , Han J , Youngquist JT , Maravelias CT ,
et al. Nonenzymatic sugar production from biomass using biomass-derived
γ -valerolactone. Science 2014; 343 :277–80 .

[141] Rackemann DW , Doherty WO . The conversion of lignocellulosics to levulinic

acid. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining 2011; 5 :198–214 .

[142] Alonso  DM ,  Wettstein  SG ,  Dumesic  JA .  Gamma-valerolactone,  a  sustain-
able platform molecule derived from lignocellulosic biomass. Green Chem
2013; 15 :584–95 .

[143] Shen F , Smith Jr RL , Li L , Yan L , Qi X . Eco-friendly method for efficient con-
version of cellulose into levulinic acid in pure water with cellulase-mimetic
solid acid catalyst. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2017; 5 :2421–7 .

[144] Xu J , Li N , Yang X , Li G , Wang A , Cong Y , et al. Synthesis of diesel and jet fuel

range alkanes with furfural and angelica lactone. ACS Catal 2017; 7 :5880–6 .

[145] Baeyens J , Kang Q , Appels L , Dewil R , Lv Y , Tan T . Challenges and opportu-
nities in improving the production of bio-ethanol. Prog Energy Combust Sci
2015; 47 :60–88 .

[146] Anbarasan P , Baer ZC , Sreekumar S , Gross E , Binder JB , Blanch HW , et al. In-
tegration of chemical catalysis with extractive fermentation to produce fuels.
Nature 2012; 491 :235–9 .

[147] Gutierrez N , Maddox I , Schuster K , Swoboda H , Gapes J . Strain comparison
and medium preparation for the acetone-butanol-ethanol (ABE) fermentation
process using a substrate of potato. Bioresource Technol 1998; 66 :263–5 .
[148] Wright ME , Harvey BG , Quintana RL . Highly efficient zirconium-catalyzed
batch  conversion  of  1-butene:  a  new  route  to  jet  fuels.  Energy  Fuels
2008; 22 :3299–302 .

[149] Balakrishnan M , Sacia ER , Sreekumar S , Gunbas G , Gokhale AA , Scown CD ,
et al. Novel pathways for fuels and lubricants from biomass optimized using
life-cycle greenhouse gas assessment. Proceed Nat Acad Sci 2015; 112 :7645–9 .
[150] Sacia ER , Balakrishnan M , Deaner MH , Goulas KA , Toste FD , Bell AT . Highly
selective condensation of biomass-derived methyl ketones as a source of avi-
ation fuel. ChemSusChem 2015; 8 :1726–36 .

[151] Harvey BG , Wright ME , Quintana RL . High-density renewable fuels based on

the selective dimerization of pinenes. Energy Fuels 2009; 24 :267–73 .

[152] Meylemans HA , Quintana RL , Harvey BG . Efficient conversion of pure and

mixed terpene feedstocks to high density fuels. Fuel 2012; 97 :560–8 .

[153] Harvey BG , Meylemans HA , Gough RV , Quintana RL , Garrison MD , Bruno TJ .
High-density biosynthetic fuels: the intersection of heterogeneous catalysis
and metabolic engineering. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2014; 16 :9448–57 .

[154] Harvey BG , Merriman WW , Koontz TA . High-density renewable diesel and jet
fuels prepared from multicyclic sesquiterpanes and a 1-hexene-derived syn-
thetic paraffinic kerosene. Energy Fuels 2015; 29 :2431–6 .

[155] Clark JH , Luque R , Matharu AS . Green chemistry, biofuels, and biorefinery.

Annual Rev Chem Biomol Eng 2012; 3 :183–207 .

[156] Marker TL , Felix LG , Linck MB , Roberts MJ . Integrated hydropyrolysis and hy-
droconversion (IH2) for the direct production of gasoline and diesel fuels or
blending components from biomass, Part 1: proof of principle testing. Environ
Progress Sustain Energy 2012; 31 :191–9 .

[157] Marker TL , Felix LG , Linck MB , Roberts MJ , Ortiz-Toral P , Wangerow J . Inte-
grated hydropyrolysis and hydroconversion (IH2 ®) for the direct production
of gasoline and diesel fuels or blending components from biomass, Part 2:
continuous testing. Environ Progress Sustain Energy 2014; 33 :762–8 .

[158] Ragauskas AJ , Williams CK , Davison BH , Britovsek G , Cairney J , Eckert CA ,
et al. The path forward for biofuels and biomaterials. Science 2006; 311 :484–9 .
[159] Van den Bosch S , Schutyser W , Vanholme R , Driessen T , Koelewijn S-F , Ren-
ders T , et al. Reductive lignocellulose fractionation into soluble lignin-derived

48

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

phenolic monomers and dimers and processable carbohydrate pulps. Energy
Environ Sci 2015; 8 :1748–63 .

[160] Huang Y , Duan Y , Qiu S , Wang M , Ju C , Cao H , et al. Lignin-first biorefinery: a
reusable catalyst for lignin depolymerization and application of lignin oil to
jet fuel aromatics and polyurethane feedstock. Sustain Energy Fuels 2017 .
[161] Rahimi A , Ulbrich A , Coon JJ , Stahl SS . Formic-acid-induced depolymerization

of oxidized lignin to aromatics. Nature 2014; 515 :249 .

[162] Yan W , Acharjee TC , Coronella CJ , Vasquez VR . Thermal pretreatment of lig-
nocellulosic biomass. Environ Progress Sustain Energy Offic Pub Am Inst Chem
Eng 2009; 28 :435–40 .

[163] Dias MO , da Cunha MP , Maciel Filho R , Bonomi A , Jesus CD , Rossell CE . Sim-
ulation of integrated first and second generation bioethanol production from
sugarcane: comparison between different biomass pretreatment methods. J
Indust Microbiol Biotechnol 2011; 38 :955–66 .

[164] Banerjee G , Car S , Scott-Craig JS , Hodge DB , Walton JD . Alkaline peroxide
pretreatment of corn stover: effects of biomass, peroxide, and enzyme load-
ing  and  composition  on  yields  of  glucose  and  xylose.  Biotechnol  Biofuels
2011; 4 :16 .

[165] Bussemaker MJ , Zhang D . Effect of ultrasound on lignocellulosic biomass as
a pretreatment for biorefinery and biofuel applications. Indust Eng Chem Res
2013; 52 :3563–80 .

[166] Ma  H ,  Liu  W-W ,  Chen  X ,  Wu  Y-J ,  Yu  Z-L .  Enhanced  enzymatic  saccha-
rification  of  rice  straw  by  microwave  pretreatment.  Bioresource  Technol
20 09; 10 0 :1279–84 .

[167] Janssen R , Turhollow AF , Rutz D , Mergner R . Production facilities for second–
generation biofuels in the USA and the EU–current status and future perspec-
tives. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining 2013; 7 :647–65 .

[168] van Dyk S., Saddler J., McMillan J. Commercializing conventional and ad-
vanced liquid biofuels from biomass. International Conference on Lignocel-
lulosic Ethanol (6ICLE) held in Brussels. p. 28.

[169] AltAir  fuels  biofuel  production  facility  -  driving  to  cleaner  transporta-
tion.  2016.  https://www.energy.ca.gov/transportation/tour _ additional/altair/
index.html , Accessed on 25th September , 2018.

[170] Cortez  LA , Nigro FE , Nogueira LA , Nassar AM , Cantarella  H , Moraes MA ,
et al. Perspectives for sustainable aviation biofuels in Brazil. Int J Aerospace
Eng 2015; 2015 .

[171] Airlines  fly  the  skies  on  a  sugar  high  -  The  New  York  Times.  2014.

https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/08/business/energy-environment/
airlines- fly- the- skies- on- a- sugar- high.html ,  Accessed  on  25th  September,
2018.

[172] Klein-Marcuschamer D , Blanch HW . Survival of the fittest: an economic per-
spective on the production of novel biofuels. AIChE J 2013; 59 :4454–60 .
[173] Zargar A , Bailey CB , Haushalter RW , Eiben CB , Katz L , Keasling JD . Leveraging
microbial biosynthetic pathways for the generation of ‘drop-in’biofuels. Curr
Opin Biotechnol 2017; 45 :156–63 .

[174] Low Carbon fuel project achieves breakthrough. 2017. http://www.lanzatech.
com/low- carbon- fuel- project- achieves- breakthrough- lanzatech- produces- jet-
fuel- waste- gases- virgin- atlantic , Accessed on 5th November, 2018.

[175] Johnson FX , Silveira S . Pioneer countries in the transition to alternative trans-
port fuels: comparison of ethanol programmes and policies in Brazil, Malawi
and Sweden. Environ Innovat Soc Trans 2014; 11 :1–24 .

[176] Research  and  innovation  funding  2014-2020.  2016.  https://ec.europa.eu/

research/fp7/index _ en.cfm , Accessed on 25th September, 2018

[177] IRENA Biofuels for aviation: technology brief. Abu Dhabi: Int Renew Energy

Agency 2017 .

[178] Virent  delivers  plant-based  jet  fuel  to  U.S.  Air  Force  Re-
search  Laboratory  for  testing.  2013.  https://www.virent.com/news/
virent-delivers-plant-based-jet-fuel-to-u-s-air-force-research-laboratory-
for-testing , Accessed on 6th July, 2018.

[179] Kohse-Höinghaus K , Oßwald P , Cool TA , Kasper T , Hansen N , Qi F , et al. Bio-
fuel combustion chemistry: from ethanol to biodiesel. Angewandte Chemie Int
Ed 2010; 49 :3572–97 .

[180] Johansson K , Head-Gordon M , Schrader P , Wilson K , Michelsen H . Reso-
nance-stabilized hydrocarbon-radical chain reactions may explain soot incep-
tion and growth. Science 2018; 361 :997–10 0 0 .

[181] Valco D , Gentz G , Allen C , Colket M , Edwards T , Gowdagiri S , et al. Autoigni-
tion behavior of synthetic alternative jet fuels: an examination of chemical
composition effects on ignition delays at low to intermediate temperatures.
Proceed Combust Inst 2015; 35 :2983–91 .

[182] Walluk MR , Bradley MA , Trabold TA , Smith DF , Junaedi C , Roychoudhury S .
Comparison of reforming performance of JP-8 and HRJ-5 for fuel cell applica-
tions. Fuel 2015; 139 :35–9 .

[183] Fortin TJ , Laesecke A . Viscosity measurements of aviation turbine fuels. En-

ergy Fuels 2015; 29 :5495–506 .

[184] Hicks YR , Tedder SA , Anderson RC . Alternative bio-derived JP-8 class fuel and
JP-8 fuel: flame tube combustor test results compared using a GE TAPS in-
jector configuration. In: 52nd AIAA/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference ; 2016.
p. 4890 .

[185] Ali A , Ibrahim M . Performance and environmental impact of a turbojet engine
fueled by blends of biodiesels. Int J Environ Sci Technol 2017; 14 :1253–66 .
[186] Bicer Y , Dincer I . Life cycle evaluation of hydrogen and other potential fuels

for aircrafts. Int J Hydro Energy 2017; 42 :10722–38 .

[187] Fortier M-OP , Roberts GW , Stagg-Williams SM , Sturm BS . Life cycle assess-
ment of bio-jet fuel from hydrothermal liquefaction of microalgae. Appl En-
ergy 2014; 122 :73–82 .

[188] Connelly EB , Colosi LM , Clarens AF , Lambert JH . Life cycle assessment of bio-
fuels from algae hydrothermal liquefaction: the upstream and downstream
factors affecting regulatory compliance. Energy Fuels 2015; 29 :1653–61 .
[189] Lokesh K , Sethi V , Nikolaidis T , Karumbaiah D . System level performance
and  emissions  evaluation  of  renewable  fuels  for  jet  engines.  ASME  2014
Gas Turbine India Conference: American Society of Mechanical Engineers ; 2014.
V001T03A-VT03A .

[190] Alves CM , Valk M , de Jong S , Bonomi A , van der Wielen LA , Mussatto SI .
Techno-economic assessment of biorefinery technologies for aviation biofu-
els supply chains in Brazil. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining 2017; 11 :67–91 .
[191] Jagtap SS . Sustainability assessment of hydro-processed renewable jet fuel
from algae from market-entry year 2020: use in passenger aircrafts. 16th AIAA
Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference: American Institute
of Aeronautics and Astronautics ; 2016 .

[192] Buffi M , Valera-Medina A , Marsh R , Pugh D , Giles A , Runyon J , et al. Emissions
characterization tests for hydrotreated renewable jet fuel from used cooking
oil and its blends. Appl Energy 2017; 201 :84–93 .

[193] Winchester N , Malina R , Staples MD , Barrett SR . The impact of advanced
biofuels  on  aviation  emissions  and  operations  in  the  US.  Energy  Econ
2015; 4 9 :4 82–91 .

[194] Wolters F , Schaefer M , von der Bank R . Potential impact of renewable fu-
els and technological innovations on global air traffic emissions development
by 2050. ASME Turbo Expo 2014: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition:
American Society of Mechanical Engineers ; 2014. V01ATA005-V01AT01A .
[195] Payan AP , Kirby M , Justin CY , Mavris DN . Meeting emissions reduction tar-
gets: a probabilistic lifecycle assessment of the production of alternative jet
fuels. In: AIAA/3AF aircraft noise and emissions reduction symposium ; 2014.
p. 1–17 .

[196] Nygren E , Aleklett K , Höök M . Aviation fuel and future oil production scenar-

ios. Energy Policy 20 09; 37 :40 03–10 .

[197] Lee DS , Fahey DW , Forster PM , Newton PJ , Wit RCN , Lim LL , et al. Avi-
ation  and  global  climate  change  in  the  21st  century.  Atmospher  Environ
2009; 43 :3520–37 .

[198] Noh HM , Rodrigo G , Rahman NA . The adaptation of sustainable biojet fuels
and its effect on aircraft engine maintenance. IOP Conference Series: Materials
Science and Engineering . IOP Publishing; 2016 .

[199] Blair-Smith H . Aviation mandates in an automated fossil-free century. Dig-
ital  Avionics  Systems  Conference  (DASC),  2015  IEEE/AIAA  34th .  IEEE;  2015.
9A3-1-9A3-9 .

[200] Hari  TK ,  Yaakob  Z ,  Binitha  NN .  Aviation  biofuel  from  renewable  re-
sources:  routes,  opportunities  and  challenges.  Renew  Sustain  Energy  Rev
2015; 42 :1234–44 .

[201] Cantarella H , Nassar AM , Cortez LAB , Baldassin R . Potential feedstock for re-

newable aviation fuel in Brazil. Environ Develop 2015; 15 :52–63 .

[202] Mawhood R , Gazis E , de Jong S , Hoefnagels R , Slade R . Production path-
ways for renewable jet fuel: a review of commercialization status and future
prospects. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining 2016; 10 :462–84 .

[203] Bittner A , Tyner WE , Zhao X . Field to flight: a techno-economic analysis of
the corn stover to aviation biofuels supply chain. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining
2015; 9 :201–10 .

[204]  Business highlights. Biofuels Bioprod Biorefining 2014; 8 :611–13 .
[205] Brooks K , Snowden-Swan L , Jones S , Butcher M , Lee G-S , Anderson D , et al. .
Low-Carbon aviation fuel through the alcohol to jet pathway. Biofuels for Avi-
ation: Elsevier; 2016. p. 109–50 .

[206] Maity SK . Opportunities, recent trends and challenges of integrated biorefin-

ery: part I. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015; 43 :1427–45 .

[207] Radich T. The flight paths for biojet fuel. Washington, DC. 2015;20585.
[208] Rye L , Blakey S , Wilson CW . Sustainability of supply or the planet: a review of
potential drop-in alternative aviation fuels. Energy Environ Sci 2010; 3 :17–27 .
[209] Melero JA , Iglesias J , Garcia A . Biomass as renewable feedstock in standard
refinery units. Feasibility, opportunities and challenges. Energy Environ Sci
2012; 5 :7393–420 .

[210] Luque  R ,  Herrero-Davila  L ,  Campelo  JM ,  Clark  JH ,  Hidalgo  JM ,  Luna  D ,
et al. Biofuels: a technological perspective. Energy Environ Sci 2008; 1 :542–64 .
[211] Wilkerson C , Mansfield S , Lu F , Withers S , Park J-Y , Karlen S , et al. Monolig-
nol ferulate transferase introduces chemically labile linkages into the lignin
backbone. Science 2014; 344 :90–3 .

Meng Wang completed his chemical engineering bache-
lor and masters study at the Beijing University of Chemi-
cal Technology in China. In 2012, he joined the research
team of Prof. Tan at the Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, where he obtained his PhD in 2016. He is cur-
rently postdoc research fellow, with main research fields
in liquid bio-energy resources and related bio/chemo -
catalytic processes. A special focus is on biodiesel and
bio-aviation fuel production processes. He has published
more than 7 papers since 2012. He has participated in
different international conf erences (China, South Korea,
Sweden...).

M. Wang, Raf. Dewil and K. Maniatis et al. / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 74 (2019) 31–49

49

Raf Dewil holds a MEng in Chemical Engineering (Uni-
versity Leuven) and a PhD in Biochemical Engineering
(University Antwerp). Currently, he is professor with the
Chemical Engineering Department of the KU Leuven. His
specific research topics involve biochemical and advanced
wastewater treatment and biomass to bio-energy and bio-
chemicals’ processes. He has (co-)authored 105 publica-
tions in peer-reviewed international journals (with over
3900 citations). His h-factor 26. He made nearly 100 pre-
sentations at international conferences. He is a member
of the European Federation of Chemical Engineers’ Work-
ing Party on Education (EFCE-WPE) and co-chairman of
different European conferences.

Kyriakos Maniatis is Principal Administrator in the Di-
rectorate General for Energy, European Commission. He
is responsible for technical issues related to biofuels and
bioenergy and manages the DG ENER demonstration com-
ponent on advanced biofuels in the Commission’s the 7th
Framework Programme. He contributes accordingly to the
legislative actions of the EC and to the European Indus-
trial Bioenergy Initiative of the SET Plan and he is in-
volved in the CEN standardisation work on liquid and
gaseous biofuels. In June 2011 he initiated the Biofuels
FlightPath for Aviation in close coordination with the avi-
ation and biofuels sectors. Currently he chairs the Sub
Group on Advanced Biofuels of the Sustainable Transport
Forum. Kyriakos also represents the European Commission in the Executive Com-
mittee of IEA Bioenergy Implementing Agreement and served as the ExCo Chairman
in 20 02, 20 05–20 07. He regularly organizes workshops and conferences on these
subjects. Kyriakos holds a PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University
Aston in Birmingham.

John Wheeldon graduated in chemical engineering from
the University of Bradford (U.K). While employed by the
National Coal Board and the International Energy Agency
in the UK, and the Electric Power Research Institute in the
USA, he worked on several coal-based pilot and demon-
stration projects for fluidised-bed combustion and gasifi-
cation at both atmospheric and elevated pressure. Incor-
porated with some of these projects was the co-feeding
of biomass and the clean-up and processing of fuel gas
for the production of aviation fuel and chemicals. He has
written or contributed to over 200 publications and re-
ports and to seven books, and has an h-factor of 14.

Tianwei Tan performed chemical engineering bachelor,
masters and PhD at Tsinghua University in China (1981–
1992),  while  also  being  a  selected  exchange  students
in the Biotechnology Research Institute of Germany, and
Lund University, Sweden. He successively was postdoc, as-
sociate professor and professor in College of Life Science
and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technol-
ogy. He spent one year in Uppsala University, Sweden as
visiting scholar. He is Fellow of the Chinese Academy of
Engineering and currently engaged in bio-energy and bio-
refinery related research, especially for industrial biotech-
nology and bio-energy such as biodiesel, bio-aviation fuel
and biogas. He participated in more than 20 Chinese gov-
ernment funded projects. Has twice won the national technical invention award. He
has a very extensive collaboration network with Chinese and international univer-
sities and companies. He has published more than 500 papers up to now, with an
h-factor of 45.

Jan Baeyens studied Nuclear Engineering (Brussels) and
Chemical Engineering (Leuven). He obtained his Ph.D. at
the University of Bradford-U.K. After 13 years of employ-
ment in engineering divisions of various Belgian compa-
nies, he became a part-time professor at the University of
Leuven (B) and worked as a process and project consul-
tant in Europe and overseas. In 2005, he moved to the
University of Birmingham (U.K.) and University of War-
wick (U.K.), where he lectures on process design, sus-
tainable development and renewable energy. He more-
over co-ordinates research in the above fields. He has
contributed to over 200 publications in international jour-
nals, is author/editor of 12 books and is a regular speaker
at international congresses. His h-factor is 45, and citations exceed 10 0 0 0. Since
2010, he is Visiting Professor at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology,
within the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engi-
neering.

Yunming Fang graduated as PhD at the Department of
Chemical Engineering of Dalian University of Technology
(2008). He was appointed Assistant/Associate Professor
at Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Tech-
nology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He joined the De-
partment of Chemical Engineering of Beijing University
of Chemical Technology as full Professor since 2013. His
main research area is Bioenergy and related catalytic en-
gineering. He has published 38 papers, with an h-factor
of 12.
