Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Critical review on the synthesis, characterization, and application of highly
efficient metal chalcogenide catalysts for fuel cells

Tasnim Eisa a,b, Mohammad Ali Abdelkareem c,d, e, *, Dipak A. Jadhav a, Hend Omar Mohamed f,
Enas Taha Sayed d,e, Abdul Ghani Olabi c,g, Pedro Casta ̃no f, Kyu-Jung Chae a,b,*
a Department of Environmental Engineering, College of Ocean Science and Engineering, Korea Maritime and Ocean University, 727 Taejong-ro, Yeongdo-gu, Busan
49112, Republic of Korea
b Interdisciplinary Major of Ocean Renewable Energy Engineering, Korea Maritime and Ocean University, 727 Taejong-ro, Yeongdo-gu, Busan 49112, Republic of Korea
c Department of Sustainable and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of Sharjah, PO Box 27272 Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
d Center of Advanced Materials Research, Research Institute of Science and Engineering, University of Sharjah, P.O. Box 27272 Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
e Chemical Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Minia University, Minia, Egypt
f Multiscale Reaction Engineering, KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
g Mechanical Engineering and Design, Aston University, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Metal chalcogenide
Synthesis techniques
Characterization techniques
Oxygen reduction reaction
Selective catalysis
Anode poisoning
Fuel cells

The shift in the energy sector toward green resources makes fuel cells increasingly relevant as a supplier of green
and  sustainable  energy.  However,  factors  such  as  expensive  catalysts,  anodic  poisoning,  and  fuel  crossover
reduce the lifetime and performance of the fuel cells, necessitating catalysis improvement. This review article
presents the unique capabilities of metal chalcogenides (MC) as tailored catalysts, elucidating their synthesis,
testing techniques, and performance evaluations. MC catalysts are matured via various physical and chemical
methods to control their morphology, quantity, dimension, and size. Upon synthesis, the catalyst performance is
quantified using three-electrode cells, followed by tests in fuel-cell prototypes. As anodic catalysts, MCs oxidize
various fuels such as methanol, ethanol, urea, and impure H2 at high current densities and low onset potentials,
while hindering the poisoning species. As cathodic catalysts, MCs exhibit current values similar to that exhibited
by their noble metal counterparts while reducing oxygen selectively in the vicinity of the fuels via four electron
transfers at a wide range of potentials.

1. Introduction

Industrialization  revolutionized  human  society’s  social  and  eco-
nomic aspects, creating opportunities for individuals to enhance their
livelihood  and  lifestyle.  However,  such  prosperity  of  humankind  was
built upon industries and energy consumption that polluted the envi-
ronment [1]. As a result, climate change today is no longer a debate but
a  reality  visible  through  the  collapsing  agricultural  projects  owing  to
water scarcity and regression of fertile land, leading humankind toward

drought,  starvation,  and  displacement  [2].  Consequently,  sustainable
green energy conversion devices became crucial to replace conventional
methods while maintaining livelihood and lifestyle. However, sustain-
able  green  energy  is  cultivated  from  variable  resources  such  as  solar
radiation, wind, and tides. Thus, storage mechanisms have been devised
to store the energy from the green sources and release it on demand to
counter the unpredictability and variability of the green resources [3].
Among such storage units, fuel cells, which combine the single galvanic
function of primary battery cells and the long lifetime of secondary cells,

Abbreviations:  AEMFC,  anion  exchange  membrane  fuel  cell;  CNT,  carbon  nanotubes;  CV,  cyclic  voltammetry;  CVD,  chemical  vapor  deposition;  DETA,  dieth-
ylenetriamine; DFT, density functional theory; EtOH, ethanol; FCNS@NF, trimetallic FeCoNi disulfide nanosheets on Ni foam; FOR, fuel oxidation reaction; HPO,
hydrogen peroxide oxidation; iORR, oxygen reduction reaction current; K-L, Koutecky–Levich; LSV, linear sweep voltammetry; MCD, maximum current density; MPD,
maximum power density; MeOH, methanol; MOR, methanol oxidation rection; MC, metal chalcogenide; MNT, mesoporous nanotubes; NP, nanoparticles; NPS G,
nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur doped porous graphene; OCV, open-circuit voltage; ORR, oxygen reduction reaction; PEMFC, proton exchange membrane fuel cell;
QH, quinhydrone; RDE, rotating disk electrode; RE, reference electrode; rGO, reduced graphene oxide; RRDE, rotating ring disk electrode; SeNCM, N-doped porous
carbon membrane containing semimtallic Se; SOFC, solid oxide fuel cell; UOR, urea oxidation reaction; VB and VIB, group five and six in the periodic table.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: mabdulkareem@sharjah.ac.ae (M.A. Abdelkareem), ckjdream@kmou.ac.kr (K.-J. Chae).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101044
Received 26 April 2022; Received in revised form 5 October 2022; Accepted 9 October 2022

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)101044Availableonline26October20220360-1285/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

T. Eisa et al.

have emerged as promising candidates for sustainable energy storage,
apart from the regenerative fuel cells. Moreover, fuel cells can also be
used  as  primary  energy  sources  when  waste  is  used  asinput.  Conse-
quently, fuel cells can be employed as optimized primary energy sour-
ces,  exhibiting  less  harmful  emissions  compared  to  conventional
sources, and higher controllability than green-energy sources [4,5].

Fuel  cells  transform  the  energy  stored  in  chemical  bonds  to  elec-
tricity in separated redox reactions on catalysts dispersed on bulk carbon
or modified with metals, a combination of metals, or a combination of
metals  with  other  elements.  Often,  these  metals  are  costly  platinum
group  metals  that  show  excellent  electrocatalytic  activity.  Fuel  is
oxidized at an anodic electrode, and oxidant is reduced at a cathodic
electrode while a membrane separates them into two chambers. Theo-
retically, the membrane prohibits the exchange of fuels, oxidants, and
electrons between the two chambers while allowing the passage of ions
[6,7]. However,  during the actual operation, the fuel  might cross the
membrane too, thereby depleting the fuel concentration at the anode
and creating mixed potentials at the cathode. This ultimately introduces
unnecessary losses and significantly degrades the cell performance [8,
9].

Various researchers limited the membrane permeability and altered
the cell design to minimize the fuel crossover losses and enhance the cell
performance  [10,11].  Another  approach was  to  enhance the  catalytic
activity at the anode and cathode. At the anode, the catalytic activity can
be  enhanced  by  utilizing  poisoning-resistant  catalysts  with  faster  ki-
netics and larger surface areas, which in turn would promote the fuel
consumption at a higher rate and reduce crossover. On the other hand,
the mixed potentials at the cathode can be reduced by using selective
catalysts, which only facilitate the reduction of oxidants while ignoring
any existing fuel. Combining conventional metals with chalcogens can
produce metal chalcogenide (MC) catalysts capable of achieving both
objectives at the anode and cathode [12,13].

As the name indicates, metal chalcogenides are built from at least
one  metal  and  one  chalcogen  using  various  fabrication  techniques.

Chalcogens are group 16 elements: oxygen (O), sulfur (S), selenide (Se),
tellurium (Te), and polonium (Po). Chalcogens exhibit different metallic
properties. Going down the periodic table, the atomic number increases
and thus the elements change from nonmetals (O) to metalloids (Se) and
finally  metals  (Po).  Therefore,  chalcogens  can  be  used  to  tune  the
electronic levels of metal catalysts, producing metal chalcogenides with
different  properties  according  to  the  elements  involved  in  the  com-
pound, compound phase, and fabrication method [13–19]. Evidently, as
an anodic catalyst, metal chalcogenides can oxidize fuel with superior
kinetics [14,15]. Meanwhile, as a cathodic catalyst, MC can ignore fuel
particles’ existence, and selectively reduce oxygen. In particular, using
transition  metals  significantly  improves  oxygen  reduction  reaction
(ORR)  catalytic  activity,  owing  to  the  synergistic  effects  between  the
different  active  species  compared  to  bare  transition  metal  catalysts
[16–19].  However,  conventionally,  metal  oxides  are  not  included  as
MCs.

This  review  article  introduces  the  MCs  as  attractive  catalysts  that
simplify  the  complexity  of  fuel  cells  by  limiting  the  function  of  elec-
trodes to necessary reactions only. First, the MC synthesis methods are
extensively presented and discussed. Next, the electrochemical evalua-
tion techniques used for the evaluation of these catalysts are summa-
rized using three-electrode systems (ex-situ systems) and two-electrode
cell structures (in-situ systems). Finally, the article focuses the light on
MCs potential as catalysts in fuel cells as an anode and cathode.

2. Synthesis of metal chalcogenides

Metal chalcogenides can be prepared using different methods such as
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) [17–20], template-directed [21,22],
self-assembly [23,24], sono-chemical [25,26], ball milling [27–29], and
solvothermal/hydrothermal  methods  [30].  Fig.  1  summarizes  the
commonly utilized methods for MC synthesis. As shown in Figs. 1 and 2,
each method affects the properties of the produced catalyst differently.
Moreover, post-synthesis treatments are also essential to control the

Fig. 1. Frequently used methods to prepare MCs.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010442

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 2. Scanning electron microscopy images of the MCs prepared by the enlisted routes. Reprinted from [28,32,72,81,110] with permissions from Springer Nature
(2017), Elsevier B.V. (2006 and 2021), The Royal Society of Chemistry (2019), and American Chemical Society (2021), respectively.

content  and  morphology  of  the  catalysts.  For  instance,  thermal  post-
treatment enhances the crystallinity and increases the  particle size  of
the prepared catalysts. It also modified morphology upon rapid evapo-
ration  of  organic  materials,  inducing  porosity  or  creating  surface
nanowires [31–35]. Further, electrochemical, heat, acidic, and alkaline
etching  have  been  used  to  remove  oxides  or  excess  chalcogenide  by
striping the oxide layers [36–38]. Nonetheless, the post-treatment con-
ditions must be controlled and optimized to avoid total stripping of the
chalcogens. For example, in the case of heat treatment, the temperature
and time should be optimized to avoid erasing the chalcogen from the
catalyst; for instance, sulfur was completely removed at 600

C [39].

◦

On  the  other  hand,  using  catalyst  supports  and  doping  are  highly
desirable strategies to harvest more active sites [25], owing to the dif-
ferences  in  electronegativity  and  the  electron  spin  density  between
carbon and heteroatoms such as N, P, or cyanate (CN) [14,40–45]. In
general,  carbon  supports  include  activated  carbon,  carbon  nanotubes
(CNT),  multiwalled  carbon  nanotubes,  graphene,  reduced  graphene
oxide  (rGO),  and  graphene  foams  [31,39,46–50].  However,  carbon
anchored  catalysts  are  mostly  nanoparticles.  Despite  their  simple
shapes, the good dispersion of these catalysts enlarges accessible surface
area and simultaneously allows the catalyst to be supported on a highly
conductive substrate [15,51-53]. Moreover, carbon could create active
sites  when  doped  with  chalcogenides  [54].  Reportedly,  the  catalyst
performance could be optimized on graphene supports at 1:1 catalyst to
graphene ratios, repetitively [39,55]. Other supports could be used, such
as diethylenetriamine (DETA) nanobelts, which exhibit higher current
than some carbon supported catalysts [56].

2.1. Physical methods

Metal chalcogenides can be prepared by physical mixing in the solid

state  via  ball  milling,  which  is  a  simple  and  cost  effective  mechano-
chemical method successfully used for preparing MCs such as sulfides
[28,57–59] and selenides [27,60–63]. Ball milling involves mixing the
metal or metal precursor with the chalcogen or its precursor using a ball
mill. Under the high-energy collisions in the ball mill, an alloy is formed
between the metal and the chalcogen. However, it is difficult to control
the formed phase of the alloy [64]. Moreover, as the collision time in-
creases, the product becomes contaminated by metallic balls and con-
tainers [64,65]. Often, ball milling is followed by annealing to improve
the crystallinity and reduce the contamination and phases of the product
[29,64].

2.2. Chemical methods

2.2.1. Co-precipitation

Co-precipitation is one of the simplest methods used for preparing
metal sulfides. This method requires a solvent that can dissolve metal
salt and sulfide precursors. The morphology and size of the metal sulfide
particles prepared by this method are controlled using different addi-
tives such as ligands, surfactants, chelating agents, and scaffolds. The
pH, solution mixing, and reaction temperature play important roles in
controlling the reaction yield. However, the difficulty in removing such
additives is one of the main disadvantages of this method. Nonetheless,
it  can  produce  small-sized  (nanometers  scale)  catalysts  (zero-dimen-
sional particles) [66,67]. For instance, PtxSy/C prepared via the chem-
ical reduction in a previous study had a particle size of 1.95 nm [32].

2.2.2. Chemical vapor deposition

Compared to the basal plane, the catalyst edges can possess a large
number  of  active  sites;  therefore,  other  techniques  such  as  electro-
chemical and atomic layer deposition are used to prepare a thinner layer

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010443

T. Eisa et al.

of  catalysts  with  a  higher  number  of  edges  [68–71].  The  preparation
methods  have  been  further  tuned  to  control  the  distribution  of  the
catalyst on the support material up to the atomic scale. Such single-atom
active sites are prepared via precursor- and conditions-controlled CVD
[72].  In  CVD,  an  element  is  deposited  on  a  heated  substrate,  from  a
chemical reaction in the vapor phase. CVD has several advantages such
as covering surfaces with complex shapes and irregular morphologies, a
high deposition rate, and no high vacuum requirement. Interesting ferns
like hierarchical structures have also been created on Ag foils via CVD
[73]. Several studies on the preparation of selenides and sulfides using
CVD have been reported to date; for instance, Boscher et al. and Khan
et al. [74,75] used diethyl selenide as a source of Se, whereas Assili et al.
[76] used triphenylphosphine sulfide (Ph3PS) as a sulfur source in CVD
to prepare SnS at 250

C.

◦

2.2.3. Solvothermal/hydrothermal method

Despite  CVD  sophisticated  control  over  the  synthesis  process,  the
method  involves  the  usage  of  toxic  and  corrosive  chemical  vapors  at
elevated  temperatures.  A  solvothermal  autoclave  is  usually  used  to
avoid the high temperature and high interfacial energy difference be-
tween  the  substrate  and  the  particles  [77].  Hydrothermal  method  in-
volves the usage of solvent (solvothermal) in a pressurized Teflon bottle
by  a  stainless-steel  pressure  reactor  (autoclaves).  Then,  the  autoclave
system is heated to a temperature higher than the saturation tempera-
ture  of  the  solvents  which,  in  turn,  increases  the  pressure  inside  the
reactor. Under prolonged high-temperature and pressure conditions, the
catalyst is synthesized. The pressure inside the reactor depends on the
type and volume of the liquid used in the Teflon bottles as well as on the
operating temperature.

In an uncontrolled environment, a crystal starts as a seed, which then
aggregates  while  maximizing  stability  and  minimizing  surface  area;
which  mainly  results  in  spherical  shapes  following  Ostwald  ripening
[78].  Modification  is  possible  by  altering  the  nuclei  components  and
imposing  growth-direction  control  via  additives.  Furthermore,  the  in-
ternal layers of an established form might migrate onto its surface and
recrystallize,  creating  a  porous  structure  [79,80].  For  instance,  Pt|Te
was engineered through the solvothermal treatment to form sieved and
mesoporous nanowires (MNTs) [81].

Through the solvothermal treatment, it is possible to achieve com-
plex  morphologies  such  as  nanoparticles  [82],  microspheres  [83],
nanotubes  [84–86],  nanoflowers  [87,88],  nanowires  [89],  nanorods
[90,91],  urchin-like  particle  shapes  [92],  nanostars,  nanoflakes
(nano-sheets)  [93],  and  octahedral  particles  [93].  The  resultant
morphology depends on the operational conditions and on the chemical
identity  of  the  reactants,  solvents,  and  surfactants  [94–96].  Thio-
acetamide  [97–99]  and  thiourea  [100–102]  are  the  commonly  used
sulfur sources for sulfides, while selenium chloride (SeCl4) [103–106],
selenium powder [107,108], and sodium hydrogen selenide (NaHSe) are
usually used to prepare selenides [109].

2.2.4. Template-directed synthesis

Template-directed synthesis is based on the use of a template that
shapes  the  final  structure  of  the  MCs  [110–112].  Using  nanoporous
aluminum oxide (AAO) template is one of the most promising strategies
for  preparing  different  dimensional  anodic  nanostructures  (i.e.,  one-,
two- and three-dimensional nanostructures) [113]. NiS2 nanotubes were
successfully prepared using the AAO template [114]. Through a com-
bination of sacrificial templating and the hydrothermal method, NiSe2
was  successfully  prepared,  where  the  Se  nanorods  acted  as  the  sacri-
ficing template that was removed by evaporation [115]. Furthermore,
nitrogen containing carbon nanowires encapsulated CoTe was created
from a Te wire precursor after growing a zeolitic imidazolate framework
(ZIF) on the wire, followed by calcinating it at a high temperature [116].

3. Catalytic performance evaluation

This  section  summarizes  the  various  characterization  techniques

used for the evaluation of anodic and cathodic active catalysts.

3.1. Anodic fuel oxidation

Prior to usage in fuel cells, synthesized catalysts are characterized in
controlled conditions using potentiostats or galvanostats to understand
the  electrochemical  nature  of  the  materials  and  ensure  their  compe-
tency. To test the performance of the catalyst, the workstation is con-
nected to a three-electrode system (Fig. 3), which includes a reference
electrode,  counter  electrode,  and  working  electrode.  The  catalyst  is
mounted  to  the  system  either  directly  as  the  working  electrode  or
indirectly using conductive substrates using binders (such as Nafion®).
Then, the three-electrode system is immersed in a solution of the elec-
trolyte and fuel, and electrochemical techniques are applied by polar-
izing  the  working  electrode  away  from  its  equilibrium  state.  These
electrochemical  methods  are  applied  to  test  the  performance  of  the
catalyst in terms of current density, onset potential, peak potential, and
poisoning resistance.

3.1.1. Current density

As the reaction proceeds on the surface of a catalyst, electrons flow
into the catalyst, generating an electrical current. The electron flow per
second, or current, is a direct assessment of the reaction quantity on the
catalyst per unit of area or weight, including the activity of the catalyst
and the amount of available active surface area. Usually, the current is
measured  and  compared  using  different  potentiodynamic  techniques
such as cyclic voltammetry (CV), linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), and
chronoamperometry [117,118]. The measured current includes both the
faradic and non-faradic responses. To obtain a better understanding of
the  catalyst  performance,  the  measurements  should  be  conducted  at
different electrolyte and fuel concentrations [119,120].

3.1.2. Onset and peak potentials

The  faradic  current  (current  due  to  chemical  reaction)  starts
increasing after the Gibbs free energy exceeds the activation energy of
the reaction. In other terms, after polarization potential exceeds ther-
modynamic onset potential. Practically, the Gibbs free energy should be
higher than the activation energy for the reaction to occur, and thus, the
measured onset potential differs from the thermodynamic onset poten-
tial, creating overpotential [121]. The measured onset potential differs
with each catalyst and media, and could be obtained using a potentio-
dynamic technique such as CV or LSV [122]. Further potential polari-
zation beyond the onset potential induces higher current; this current
increases until it reaches a peak and then decreases with the potential
(Fig. 4). At the peak, the favorable reaction conditions are opposed by
the mass transfer limitations, causing the current to decrease [123]. This
peak  is  a  characterizing  aspect  of  the  catalyst  performance,  and  is
described  by  the  coinciding  potential,  current,  and  experimental
conditions.

3.1.3. Poisoning

Catalysts  in  fuel  cells  are  used  to  adsorb  reactants  on  their  active
sites, facilitate the reaction, then release the products, while maintain-
ing  their  own  chemical  stability.  In  fuel  cells,  on  the  anodic  side,
complicated molecules with bonds varying in strength could be used as
fuels, such as formic acid in direct formic acid fuel cells or hydrogen
sulfide in solid oxide fuel cells. In addition, impurities often infiltrate the
cell  as  part  of  the  incoming  fuel.  In  these  cases,  the  reaction  in-
termediates or fuel impurities could be harder to desorb. This shuts the
respective active site temporarily or permanently, in the phenomenon
known as “poisoning”  in fuel cells, thereby deteriorating the fuel cell
performance  during  the  operation  [124,125].  Thus,  a  catalyst  must
exhibit  a  high  performance  as  well  as  resist  poisoning.  To  measure

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010444

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 3. Three-electrode system used to test the redox activities of catalysts with electrochemical workstations.

Fig. 4. The measured onset and peak potentials indicated on CV generated voltammogram.

catalyst’s  aptitude  to  avoid  or  remove  poisoning,  researchers  use  the
following electrochemical and material characterizations:

• Accelerated  stability  tests  or  accelerated  durability  tests:  The
catalyst  is  repeatedly  tested  in  the  fuel  via  potentiodynamic  tech-
niques, for instance, for 1000 cycles of CV (Fig. 5(a)), while moni-
toring  the  generated  current  [124,126].  Catalyst  degradation
appears as a deficiency in the current as the cycles proceed. How-
ever, such a degradation could be due to physical or chemical factors;
thus, these tests do not provide concrete evidence about poisoning;
instead, they provide information about the general stability of the
catalyst.

• In-situ  electrochemical  attenuated  total  reflection  infrared
spectroscopy (EC-ATR-IR spectroscopy): In-situ IR provides insights
into the bonding on the catalyst surface and identity of the reaction
intermediates,  thus  providing  a  direct  evidence  of  poisoning  at  a
specific potential. The IR spectrum is recorded at a predetermined

potential  for  a  prolonged  time  as  the  reaction  proceeds  and  in-
termediates form. The ATR mode is preferred among the IR modes
with in-situ electrochemical applications. Similarly, X-ray absorption
spectroscopy also monitors poisoning based on the elements present
on the catalyst surface [124,127].

• Electrochemical stripping voltammetry (Fig. 5(b)): Another direct
evidence of poisoning could be obtained from stripping voltamme-
try,  where  the  catalyst  is  tested  for  adsorption  and  oxidization  of
poison molecules. First, a voltammogram is run on a clean catalyst
surface  emersed  in  an  electrolyte  full  of  inert  gas.  Then,  the
poisoning substance is loaded onto the catalyst surface, followed by a
voltammogram  run  in  a  poison  free  environment  to  oxidize  and
remove  the  loaded  poison.  The difference  between  the  voltammo-
grams shows the resistivity of the catalyst to poisoning and its ability
to regenerate its active site [124,128].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010445

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 5. Performance degradation observed in (a) accelerated stability test and (b) CO stripping.

3.2. Cathodic oxygen reduction

ORR  represents  the  other  half of  the  performance  in conventional
fuel cells. Therefore, its evaluation contributes to the fundamental un-
derstanding of the performance of fuel cells. Various techniques are used
to  evaluate  the  ORR  activity  on  different  materials,  with  the  help  of
three-electrode  systems  and  electrochemical  stations,  like  the  anodic
fuel oxidation tests (Section 3.1), except for using a rotating disk elec-
trode  (RDE)  as  the  working  electrode  (Fig.  6).  The  ORR  activity  is
investigated by analyzing the produced current density, onset potential,
half-wave potential, electron transfer steps, and ORR selectivity [129].

3.2.1. Current response

The oxygen reduction reaction current (iORR) is the basic indicator
used  for  the  evaluation  of  the  ORR  activity  of  different  catalysts.
Potentiodynamic techniques such as CV and LSV are frequently used to
measure the iORR  from the ORR facilitated by a catalyst, and then, the
obtained current is normalized by the catalyst surface area or mass.

To conduct these tests, the catalyst is immersed in an acidic (0.5 M
H2SO4) or a basic solution (1 M KOH), followed by removing the dis-
solved oxygen from the solution by purging an inert gas (N2 gas) for at
(cid:0) 1) is carried out while maintaining
least 20 min. Then, slow CV (5 mV s
the N2 flow rate. The current recorded during this process (iN2) is related
to the capacitive behavior of the catalyst. At the end of this stage, N2
flow is stopped and inflow of O2 is started and proceeded for at least 20
(cid:0) 1) again while main-
min before measuring the slow CV (c.a. 5 mV s
taining the O2 flow rate [130]. The current recorded during the reverse

scan (iO2) is related to both the capacitance and ORR of the catalyst. The
difference between iO2 and iN2 in the reverse scan describes the catalyst
ORR activity (iORR) [131].

3.2.2. ORR onset potential and half-wave potential

The thermodynamic onset potential of ORR is 1.23 V vs SHE in acidic

media according to the following Eq. (1) [132]:

4H+ + 4e(cid:0) + O2 → 2H2O Eo = 1.23 V vs. SHE

(1)

However due to the overpotentials, the reaction needs a higher po-
larization  to  start  ORR.  Therefore,  the  actual  onset  potential  is  more
negative than this (1.23 V) value; and this negative potential varies from
one catalyst to another. The measured onset potential is recorded after
iORR  value  becomes  lower  than  zero  current  (negative  because  of  the
reduction process). Some researchers tried to quantify this point using a
(cid:0) 2  as the indicator [129,133]. The
current value such as (cid:0) 100 μA cm
half-wave  potential  measurement  was  devised  to  compare  the
precious-metal-free catalysts with those containing precious metals. In
this case, the potential and current are evaluated at the half ORR wave in
CV or LSV. This half wave potential validates the competition between
the  precious  and  non-precious  catalysts,  because  it  could  signify  a
reduced overpotential [134,135]. However, the half-wave potential is
dependent on the catalyst loading; thus, it should be used with caution
in comparisons [134].

Fig. 6. Onset potential, half-wave potential, and limiting current represented on a LSV curve.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010446

T. Eisa et al.

3.2.3. Number of electrons transferred and H2O2  production

To have reliable measurements of n and H2O2%, few points must be

3.2.3.1. Rotating ring disk electrode. Although the complete reduction of
oxygen into water in a four-electron path is the desired cathodic reac-
tion, H2O2 might be generated and released to the electrolyte during the
indirect ORR as an intermediate or the final product following Eq. (2)
[136]:

2H+ + 2e(cid:0) + O2 → H2O2 E∘ = 0.68 vs. SHE

(2)

Such  a  reaction  (Eq.  (2))  is  considered  a  valid  method  for  H2O2
production via electrochemical cells, but an inadequate incomplete path
for  ORR  [137].  Moreover,  in  fuel  cells,  the  oxidative  nature  of  H2O2
reduces the cell potential and damages the ionic conductivity and me-
chanical stability of membrane [138–141]. Therefore, cathodic catalyst
is expected to enable more four-electron reactions (Eq. (1)).

H2O2 production can be quantified on a rotating ring disk electrode
(RRDE) (Fig. 7), where the oxygen is reduced at the catalyst surface on
the disk of the RRDE. Then, the escaped H2O2 is oxidized at the surface
of the Au ring (alkaline electrolyte) surrounding the catalyst disk [142,
143]. As a result, we can determine the percentage of the produced H2O2
on the surface of the catalyst during the ORR, using Eq. (3), and sub-
sequently, the number of electrons involved in the reaction using Eq. (4):

H2O2(%) = 100% ×

2Ir/N
Id + Ir/N

n = 4

Id
Id + Ir/N

taken into consideration:

• Deposited  catalyst  thickness:  During  the  ORR,  the  released  H2O2
might be consumed inside the thick layers of the catalyst, instead of
reaching the ring. Consequently, thin layers of the catalyst should be
deposited on the electrode disk [134].

• Mass transfer limitation: The ring should achieve the mass transfer
limited current during the measurements, at potentials below that of
the  oxygen  evolution.  To  achieve  this  criterion,  there  are  two
important factors, the material and potential of the ring [142].
• N  variability:  Theoretically,  the  electrode  collection  efficiency  de-
pends only on the geometrical configuration of the RRDE, resulting
in a fixed value provided by the manufacturers. However, in practice,
the  shape  of  the  electrode  changes  with  its  age,  loaded  catalyst
amount, and topography, which in turn alter the efficiency and (at a
sufficient roughness) induce turbulence [142].

3.2.3.2. Koutecky–Levich analysis. The Koutecky-Levich (K-L) equations
are  used  to  find  the  number  of  transferred  electrons  by  relating  the
measured  current  limitation  to  a  combination  of  kinetics  and  mass
transfer effects when using an RDE, as formulated in Eqs. (5) and (6)
[144].

(3)

(4)

1
J

=

1
Jd

+

1
Jk

=

1
Bω1/2

+

1
Jk

B = 0.2 n F C0D2/3μ(cid:0) 1/6

(5)

(6)

where  Ir  and  Id  are  the  ring  and  desk  currents,  respectively,  N  is  the
electrode  collection  efficiency,  and  n  is  the  number  of  electrons
transferred.

where J is the current density, Jd  and Jk  are the mass transfer and ki-
netics limited current densities, respectively, ω is the angular velocity of
the rotating disk, B is the proportionality coefficient, F is the Faraday

Fig. 7. (a) RRDE working mechanism to measure H2O2 production and (b) corresponding measurement results (ORR is oxygen reduction reaction, HPO is hydrogen
peroxide oxidation).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010447

T. Eisa et al.

(cid:0) 1), C0  is the saturation concentration of O2  in
constant (96,485 C mol
the solution, D is the diffusion coefficient of O2 in the solution, and μ is
the kinematic viscosity of the solution. In Eq. (6), the value, 0.2, is used
to convert ω to revolutions per min (rpm).

K-L analysis starts with obtaining the reciprocal of the limiting cur-
rent density as a function of the reciprocal of the rotational speed at a
fixed  potential.  In  the  resulting  plot,  the  kinetics  limitations  are  pre-
sented by the y-intercept, while the mass transfer limitations are present
by the slope of the linear graph. The slope is the reciprocal of B, which
yields the number of electrons transferred (Eq. (6), Fig. 8).

The use of the K-L analysis in the determination of the number of
electrons transferred during the ORR has been controversial. In the re-
ported  literature,  the  controversy  varies  among  using,  modifying,  or
criticizing K-L analysis [142,145–150]. The reason behind the contro-
versy lies in the assumptions made in the equations; that is, in the K-L
equations, a one-step, first-order, and one-way process is assumed, in
which  a  linear  relationship  exists  between  the  reciprocal  of  the  mass
transfer current and that of the angular velocity square root. However,
the ORR does not necessarily fall into these assumptions. Therefore, the
use of K-L analysis in ORR electron transfer assessment has been criti-
cized, leading to number of modified mathematical models to suit the
ORR nature of the rotating electrodes [142,147].

3.2.4. Selectivity

In fuel cells, fuel crossover causes mixed potential when the cathodic
catalyst can perform both the fuel oxidation and oxygen reduction, such
as on Pt catalysts. The non-selective behavior of the catalysts causes fuel
and performance losses in the long run. Therefore, tests of catalyst ORR
performance under the presence of fuels are carried out as the selectivity
indicator of the catalyst. Typically, CV is conducted with a catalyst as the
working electrode in an aerated solution; thereafter, the fuel is intro-
duced  at  different  concentrations,  and  the  potential  and  current  are
monitored [151,152].

Fig. 8. K-L measurement procedure starts by (a) mapping the voltammogram
response as the rotational speed increases, then (b) graphing the reciprocal of
the current as a function of  the reciprocal of the rotational speed at a singu-
lar potential.

3.2.5. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy

Electrochemical

impedance  spectroscopy  (EIS)  quantifies  the
impedance  of  the  system  as  a  function  of  a  superimposed  wave  fre-
quency. An infinitesimal AC sinusoidal wave is applied around a fixed
DC potential or current; then the counterpart (current or potential) is
measured, followed by impedance calculation using a relation similar to
the  Ohm’s  law  (Fig.  9(a))  [125,153,154].  The  resulting  spectrum  is
usually  represented  using  Nyquist  or  Bode  diagrams;  the  former
(Nyquist,  Fig.  9(b))  shows  the  real  vs  imaginary  impedances  with
impeded  frequency  information,  whereas  the  later  (Bode,  Fig.  9(c))
shows  the  total  impedance  phase  and  magnitude  with  changing  fre-
quency. Various limitations prevail as the frequency changes, starting
with  physical  impedance  at  a  high  frequency,  followed  by  reaction
impedance  in  the  mid-to-low  frequency  region,  and  finally,  mass
transfer limitation at a low frequency.

In the case of ORR using a three-electrode system, at potentials lower
than  onset  potential  or  in  a  saturated  inert  condition  (Fig.  11),  the
current is limited by the kinetics, and oxygen reduction is not observed.
As a result, the EIS often displays physical and double layer capacitance
impedances [155].

As the potential proceeds beyond the onset potential, the limitation
mechanism  changes  from  pure  kinetics  into  mixed  kinetics  and  mass
transfer  limitation.  This  mixed  limitation  becomes  apparent  in  the
spectrum. The kinetics limitation is profound in the mid-frequency re-
gion, evident from the ideal semicircles with a single time constant (R/C
component) or irregular arcs with more than one time constants. Under
a relatively high potential, the charge transfer often occurs through the
transfer of four electrons (Eq. (1)), which is represented by arcs with one
or two time constants (Fig. 10). In the case of two time constants, the
first time constant is attributed to the reduction reaction, whereas the
second time constant arises from the hydroxide removal at lower fre-
quencies (Fig. 10) [156]. At more negative potentials, it is still possible
to observe one time constant. However, oxygen reduction is more likely
to proceed by a two-electron transfer pathway (Eq. (2)), resulting in two
time constants, one for each step [156,157]. Another scenario for oxy-
gen  reduction is  mixed four- and  two-electron transfer,  and two  time
constants have been reported for this case [158,159]. Moreover, the low
frequency  region  shows  mass  transfer  limitation  as  an  arc  or  a  line,
modelled by the R/C sub-circuit or Warburg elements [157].

Thereafter,  the  potential  reaches  the  mass  transfer  limited  region.
The limitation becomes apparent as a separate arc in the Nyquist plot or
superimposed  on  the  charge  transfer  arc,  depending  on  the  relative
value of the time constants between the two processes [157,160].

For  electrodes  with  complex  topographies,  semicircles  and  arcs  in
the high-to-mid frequency region could be caused by either faradic or
physical  effects.  To  clear  the  confusion,  various  conditions  can  be
applied to force variations in the faradic response, such as temperature,
potential, and reactive species concentration. Accordingly, if the semi-
circle varies with these factors, then the response is deemed a result of
the faradic interaction, otherwise it is due to physical effects [161]. Such
physical response in high frequency region can be used as indicator for
physical stability. For example, obtaining a consistent high frequency
response throughout the aging process indicates a high physical stability
of the catalyst [160].

3.3. Real-time evaluation

After  characterizing  each  electrode  separately,  the  performance  is
examined in situ (in a fuel cell) to assess the ability of the fuel cell to
provide a high power and current density continuously.

3.3.1. Quantification of the maximum output

The maximum output is measured in terms of the open-circuit cell
voltage (OCV), maximum current density (MCD), and maximum power
density  (MPD).  The  OCV  is  easily  quantified  using  a  multimeter  or
potentiostat  at  rest.  To  obtain  the  MCD,  external  loads  are  applied

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010448

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 9. (a) EIS input signal to a three-electrode system; (b) the calculated impedance represented in a Nyquist diagram; and (c) Bode diagram representation.

Fig. 10. Nyquist plot for ORR impedance at various potentials. Reprinted from [156] with permissions from Elsevier B.V. (2015).

through a resistor box, or the cell voltage is controlled in a linear po-
tential sweep using a potentiostat. Both methods start at the OCV (high
external resistance) and end at a low voltage (low external resistance),
resulting in a characteristic I–V polarization curve. The lowest voltage is

obtained near short-circuit current, which is also the maximum current.
The power density is calculated using Eq. (7) then converted into a P–V
curve; and the MPD can be deduced from it as:

P = I × V

(7)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)1010449

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 11. Potential sweep showing the change in the governing limitation as a function of the potential.

where  P  is  the  power  density;  I  is  the  current  density;  and  V  is  the
voltage.

At open circuit, the irreversibility inside the cell is at minimum; and
thus, the cell voltage is at its highest. As loads are introduced, the current
increases  whereas  the  irreversibility  introduces  voltage  losses.  Many
scholars classify these losses into categories according to the sources of
the  irreversibility  mainly  into  mixed  potentials  and  fuel  crossover,
activation  polarization,  ohmic  polarization,  and  concentration  polari-
zation [6,162].

3.3.2. Stability

Stability  signifies  the  ability  of  the  cell  to  maintain  an  output  of
certain current density or voltage for a prolonged time, and this reflects
the physical and chemical stability of the individual cell components. To
evaluate the stability, a potentiostatic or galvanostatic measurement is
performed at a certain discharge value for 9–168 h.

4. fuel-cell applications

Compared to metal oxides, metal non-oxides (with less electroneg-
ativity  compared  to  that  of  oxygen)  have  superior  physicochemical
properties, owing to the electron-rich bonds in their outer-layer struc-
ture and the tunable interaction between the non-oxygen element and
the metal [163–166]. Reportedly, the activity of Co-S/G (optimized at
1:1 ratio of Co-S to G) exceeded that of CoO, demonstrating the catalytic
superiority of MCs over metal oxides [39]. Notably, modifying metals
with  chalcogenides  prevents  the  oxidation  of  the  coupled  metal,
although in some cases, oxide formation has been observed mostly on
the first monolayer of catalyst [37]. In the following sections, the anodic
and cathodic performance evaluation of MCs using three-electrode cells
(ex-situ) or fuel cells (in-situ) is discussed.

4.1. Ex-situ evaluation

The ability of the MCs to oxidize different fuels (such as methanol
(MeOH), ethanol (EtOH), hydrazine, and ammonia–borane) or reduce
oxygen  is  investigated  using  three-electrode  systems,  through  various
tests described in Section 3. Fig. 12 compares the performance of various
MC catalysts. The current density of various catalysts was divided by the
maximum tabulated value to obtain a normalized dataset. The normal-
ized current density, shown in Fig. 12(a), obtained from fuel oxidation
reaction  (FOR)  shows  a  wider  range  compared  to  that  shown  by  the
ORR, with the highest values corresponding to Ni–Se and Fe(FC)–N/S–C
for FOR and ORR, respectively [13–15,31,33,34,39,41,42,45–47,49,51,
54,55,81,72,66,67,73,116,167–182].  Moreover,  the  optimum  onset
potentials (Fig. 12(b)) for FOR and ORR are obtained from Ni1(cid:0) xCuxSe2
and CoTe/C. Nonetheless, the FOR performance varies with the utilized
fuel; hence, further details on the testing conditions are enlisted in the
supplementary materials.

4.1.1. Fuel oxidation

The widely conceived selective nature of the MCs toward ORR makes
them more suitable as cathodic catalysts. As a result, it is less common
for  MCs  to  be  evaluated  for  anodic  activity.  However,  according  to
previous  reports,  MCs  can  successfully  oxidize  different  fuels  such  as
hydrogen, hydrazine, urea, MeOH, and EtOH. Furthermore, MC based
catalysts improved the performance of the high temperature fuel cells
such as solid-oxide fuel cells. Notably, MCs have attracted significant
attention as anodic catalysts because of their antipoisoning character-
istics;  chalcogens  facilitate  the  oxidation  of  poisoning  species  for  the
accompanying catalyst or weaken their adsorption on the catalyst sur-
face [169,172].

The  MeOH  tolerance  of  nitrogen-,  phosphorus-,  and  sulfur-doped
porous graphene (NPS G) catalyst is terminated upon the introduction
of Pt [45]. Thereafter, the catalyst oxidizes MeOH at a significant cur-
(cid:0) 1. Another MC catalyst, MoSe2, reportedly exhibited
rent of 47.5 mA cm
half the current density of Pt-MoSe2 [183]. NiSe [184] revealed a high
methanol-oxidation  activity,  which  was  higher  than  that  of  NiO  and
even that of Ni3S2. This high methanol-oxidation activity was attributed
to the faster electron transfer in NiSe [185] than those in NiO and Ni3S2.
Furthermore,  the  trimetal  catalyst,  NiFeCo  disulfide  on  nickel  foam
(cid:0) 2
(FCNS@NF)  could  achieve  a  high  current  density  of  265  mA  cm
during  MeOH  oxidation  [170]. Moreover,  formate  was  produced  at  a
(cid:0) 1 owing to the incomplete oxidation of MeOH.
rate of 0.66 mmol cm
Consequently,  CO2  production  was  minimized  at  the  expense  of  the
overall efficiency of the oxidation process.

(cid:0) 2 h

Using MCs in urea oxidation reaction leads to a higher current pro-
duction compared to MeOH. Urea can be oxidized on different catalysts,
with Ni being an established catalyst according to the reported studies
[186]. In case of the MCs, often, the reducing tendency toward urea does
not change upon the introduction of chalcogens into the catalyst matrix
(fuel  intolerant).  For  example,  Ni–Co–Se/CNT  shows  a  high  current
(cid:0) 2 with a low onset potential of 340 mV. The high
density of 240 mA cm
current results from the improved conductivity of CNT and the enhanced
adsorption/desorption  via  Se  assistance  (Fig.  14(c)).  Moreover,  a  low
onset potential has been accomplished using Co species [175] (reduced
by ~0.2 V vs Hg/HgO) [48]. A higher current density has been reported
in the case of urea oxidation on Ni–Se catalysts [13].

The  activity  of  the  MC  can  be  further  enhanced  by  using  support
materials  (Fig.  13).  For  CoS2/MoS2/rGO,  utilizing  rGO  as  a  support
result in a catalyst with abundant active catalyst edges, synergistic ef-
fects between the two transition metals, and promoted conductivity via
rGO. Similar benefits are obtained  from rGO in ReS2/rGO,  where the
separated  nature  of  the  catalyst  layers  increase  the  number  of  active
edges, and hence, the activity while rGO increases the conductivity of
the  catalyst  [49].  Another  carbon  support,  CNT,  doubles  the  urea
oxidation  reactivity  (UOR)  of  Ni–Co–Se  while  reducing  the  catalyst
resistance  without  affecting  its  stability.  The  stability  was  evident  as
both  the  CNT  support  and  bare  catalyst  showed  a  nearly  constant
response  during  test  performed  for  7000  s  (Fig.  14(c))  [48].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104410

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 12. (a) Normalized current density and (b) onset potential of MCs in three-electrode systems, for FOR and ORR.

Nevertheless, the support material improves the conductivity [174] as
well as influences the catalyst performance; for example, ZnTe could not
oxidize EtOH without quinhydrone (QH) as a support (Fig. 14(b)) [168].
On the other hand, MC itself can also be used as a support material

for  the  catalyst  to  induce  CO  removal  from  the  catalyst  surface.
Reportedly, SnS2 exhibits such an activity while supporting Cu- and Co-
based  catalysts  [172].  Furthermore,  SnS2  possess  a  graphene  like  2D
nanosheet  structure,  yet,  it  possesses  lower  inertness,  which  provides

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104411

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 13. Enhancing oxidation outputs by utilizing chalcogen as catalyst anchor or in MC which can be further adjusted.

(cid:0) 1, reprinted
Fig. 14. (a) CV curves for GC (red line), bare Pt (blue line), and TeNT/PtNP/GC (green line) electrodes, in a phosphate buffer and 1 M MeOH at 50 mV s
from [167] by MDPI is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution; (b) CV curves of bare and ZnTe/QH modified glassy carbon electrodes in 1 M KOH and 1 M
EtOH, reprinted from [168] with permission from Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC and Elsevier Ltd. (2019); (c) CV curves of Ni–Co–Se and Ni–Co–Se/CNT at 10
(cid:0) 1  in 1 M KOH with 0.5 M urea, reprinted from [48] with permission from John Wiley and Sons (2019); and (d) CV curves of Ni1(cid:0) xMxSe2/carbon fiber paper
mVs
anodes recorded in 0.01 M AB solution, reprinted from [176] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2019).

higher  possibilities  of  doping  when  it  is  used  as  support  [172].  Such
activity  also  allows  chalcogens  to  act  as  anchors  for  the  catalysts  on
carbon  supports  such  as  rGO.  Upon  doping  the  carbon  support  with
chalcogens, the catalyst attaches with the support, and this attachment
is  stronger  than  that  on  bare  carbon-based  supports.  Furthermore,  a
higher stability than that of N anchors is also observed [45,169]. Chal-
cogens as supports or anchors still display their constructive synergistic
effects on the catalyst performance.

nanowires for ammonia–borane oxidation (Fig. 14(d)) [176]. Further-
more,  dual  metal  MCs  can  be  organized  to  form  molecular  organic
frameworks (MOFs) with high porosities and stability. In such a case, it
is  suspected  that  the  oxidation  reaction  occurs  on  the  high-valence
metal.  Combining  MOFs  with  MCs  leads  to  a  catalyst  with  a  good
mass transfer and mass activity characteristic along with minimum CO
poisoning, because chalcogenides help in oxidizing CO and subsequently
removing it from the catalyst surface [172].

Further  catalysis  tuning  is  accomplished  by  using  two  transition
metals;  in  other  words,  a  tertiary  element  is  introduced  into  the  MC
matrix. Among Fe, Co, and Cu, Cu is the most effective in Ni1-xCuxSe2

Despite the various modifications, Pt/C and Pt catalysts show higher
current densities than do most MC-based catalysts. Nonetheless, in some
cases,  the  activity  of  the  MCs  exceeds  that  of  the  precious-metal

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104412

T. Eisa et al.

catalysts; for instance, decorating Te nanotubes with Pt nanoparticles
shows an increase in the MeOH oxidation activity beyond that in bare Pt
(Fig. 14(a)) [167]. Likewise, with PtTeCo/C, the achieved current den-
sity is 8.1 folds that of Pt/C, owing to the etching and electronic mod-
ifications of Pt by Co and Te. The etching induces defects and dissolves
Te, thereby optimizing the Te content and the coordination number of Pt
[171].

4.1.2. Oxygen reduction

4.1.2.3. Mechanism. The  chalcogenide-assisted  catalysts  have  been
frequently tested for ORR. In general, ORR starts as O2 chemisorbs at the
top  atom  on  the  catalyst.  The  O2  adsorption  varies  on  the  MCs;  for
example, FeS2 and CuFeS2 show oxygen chemisorption capabilities like
Pt. The bonding strength is attributed to the cationic D-band center of the
material being closer to the Fermi level, unlike in ZnS and PbS, in which
Fermi  level  is  closer  to  the  anionic  S  3p  [116,187–189].  Thereafter,
protonation  of  the  adsorbed  oxygen  molecule  occurs,  while  receiving

Fig. 15. (a) ORR general pathways in acidic media (‘b’ is for bulk, and ‘s’ indicates adsorbed, reprinted from [190] with permission from Elsevier Ltd and (b) in alkali
media, adapted from [190,191] with permission from Elsevier Ltd, modified using information from [14]. (c) Summary of the ORR paths (dissociative and asso-
ciative) in acidic and alkaline media.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104413

T. Eisa et al.

either  two  electrons  producing  H2O2  at  0.7  V,  or  four  electrons  pro-
ducing water at 1.23 V, in acidic media. In alkaline, water is needed to
initiate the oxygen reduction (Fig. 15) [190].

The four-electron  transfer mechanism follows  associative or  disso-
ciative  sub-steps.  Associative  mechanism  starts  with  OOH*  formation
from the adsorbed oxygen molecules. Conversely, dissociative mecha-
nism begins by splitting the adsorbed oxygen molecule, then proceeds
through multiple protonation steps. Consequently, OOH* is not an in-
termediate  product  in  the  dissociative  pathway  [187,192–194].
Computational  analysis  using  density  functional  theory  (DFT)  proved
that ORR proceeds via the associative four-electron transfer mechanism
on  group  VB  and  VIB  metal  dichalcogenides  [195].  Nevertheless,  the
dissociative mechanism is anticipated on some transition metals like Ni
or Cu [196]. Further, the rate determining step on MCs varies. The rate
determining step for TaS2, TaSe2, NbS2, and NdSe2 catalysts was *OOH
adsorption, while it was *OH protonation for NbTe2 and TaTe2 [195].
Associative mechanism in acidic (Eq. (7)) and alkali media (Eq. (8))

[191,192]:

O2 + (H+ + e(cid:0) )→OOH∗ + (H+ + e(cid:0) )→O∗ + (H+ + e(cid:0) )→OH∗

+ (H+ + e(cid:0) )→H2O

(7)

O2 + (H2O + e(cid:0) )→OOH∗∗ + (OH(cid:0) + e(cid:0) )→O∗ + OH(cid:0) + (H2O + e(cid:0) )→OH∗

+ (OH(cid:0) + e(cid:0) )→OH(cid:0)

(8)

Dissociative  mechanism  in  acidic  (Eq.  (9))  and  alkali  media  (Eq.

(10)) [192]:
O2 + (H+ + e(cid:0) )→O∗ + 2(H+ + e(cid:0) )→OH ∗ +(H+ + e(cid:0) )→H2O

O2→O∗ + (H2O + e(cid:0) )→OH∗ + (OH(cid:0) + e(cid:0) )→OH(cid:0)

(9)

(10)

During  the  associative  oxygen  complete  reduction,  two  reactions
compete after the OOH* formation,water production (or OH
) and H2O2
production.  For  water  production  to  occur,  oxygen  in  OOH*  has  to
dissociate before any further steps. Although the O–O bond scission in
OOH* is easier than in O2, higher activation energy and oxygen binding

(cid:0)

are still required [192,196].

The bond between the metal and the chalcogen depends on the in-
teractions between the  D-band and s-band of the metal and p-band or
hybridized  sp-band  of  the  chalcogen,  which  results  in  a  stable  rhom-
bohedral, hexagonal, or tetragonal (3R, 2H, 1T) polymorphs (Fig. 16),
and causes the MC to behave like a semiconductor [197,198]. The ORR
occurs through the interaction of the d-orbital of the metal with O2 [187,
199]. Then, the catalyst increases the number of electrons in the O=O
bonds. As a result, the antibonding of O=O is filled and the bond breaks.
In  other  words,  the  bonding  between  the  oxygen  molecule  and  the
catalyst  results  in  an  antibonding  inside  the  oxygen  molecule  itself
during the dissociative four-electron ORR. The observed high activity of
CoS2 toward ORR is related to the small energy gap between the oxygen
2p orbital and the highest occupied d-orbital of cobalt sulfide [200]. It is
also theorized that associative four-electron transfer ORR starts by O2
adsorption to chalcogen through p-orbital in chalcogen and p-orbital in
O2. The adsorption forms σ and π bonding and antibonding between pz
and px/py, respectively [195].

In theory, chalcogenides show the potential to facilitate four-electron
transfer  reactions.  Technically,  such  an  activity  is  approximated  in  a
defined  range  of  potential,  and  the  upper  limit  of  this  window  is
restricted  by  the  catalyst  stripping  and  oxygen  reduction  kinetics.
Generally, the limit varies with the catalyst type. Se shows a higher limit
compared to S. Among Se species, Ru/Se stripping occurs after 0.85 V vs
RHE compared to 0.75 V for Ru/S, and Rh species exceeds both at 0.9 V
[201].  In  another  study  on  Ru1.92Mo0.08SeO4,  both  Se  and  Mo  were
dissolved at a potential of 0.85 V, implying the possibility of extending
the upper limit for Ru/Se-based catalysts [202]. The lower end of the
potential window is restricted by the competitive water and hydrogen
adsorption [202]. In IrxSy/C catalyst, competitive adsorption decreases
with  the  increasing  S  content  [66].  In  Ru/Se  and  Ru/S  catalysts,  Se
shows further decrease in the competitive adsorption compared to that
in S [201].

4.1.2.4. Activity. A previous study demonstrated that the activity of late
transition MCs is in the order of S > Se > Te for the chalcogenide, and Co

Fig. 16. Top view of common MC,adapted from [197] with permission from Springer International Publishing Switzerland.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104414

T. Eisa et al.

> Ni > Fe for the metal [190]. S coupled with RuMo/C is superior to Se
in S/RuMo/C catalysts, evident by a greater electron transfer number
[203]. However, otherwhere, Se coupled Ru in Ru/Se and RuxSey shows
a better ORR activity than does the S coupled Ru, with an onset potential
difference at ~100 mV (Fig. 17(a)). Under MeOH presence, the perfor-
mance of RuxSey also exceeds that of Pt (Fig. 17(b)) [201,204]. Further,
Se  also  increases  the  valence  and  conductive  band  edges  in  Co  and
minimizes the distance between them and the water reactions, which
helps in better charge transfer [71]. S and Se prevent Ru oxidation hence
improve its molecular oxygen adsorption and electron transfer perfor-
mance (Fig. 17(c)).

Minimum DFT calculated overpotential was 0.4 V at 50% optimum
Ru, Rh, Pd, Ir, Co and W selenide or sulfide content [205]. Fig. 18 shows
the overpotential of different chalcogenide catalysts, represented by the
distance on the volcano from ideal horizontal dashed line, a manifes-
tation of Sabatier principle; with Pt showing the highest activity owing
to  a  moderate  intermediate  binding  energy  [193,205].  The  over-
potential on various catalysts can be repressed via mechanical strain.
Mechanical strain affected ORR performance by mobilizing the p orbit
center  to  the  Fermi  level  and  hence  improving  the  intermediated
adsorption  under  a  tensile  strain,  whereas  the  compressive  strain  re-
duces  the  ORR  performance  [195].  The  Ru/C  overpotential  is  under-
mined  by  the  outer  sphere  electron  transfer  mechanism  via  adsorbed
hydroxyl in alkali. This phenomenon is improved in chalcogenide/Ru/C
where  peroxide  is  reduced  at  the  more  abundant  oxide-free  Ru  sites
[203]. Computational analysis shows an improved overpotential for the
chalcogenides coupled with Nb and Ta compared to those with W and
Mo in metal dichalcogenides. Computational analysis results also favors
Te  as  the  chalcogen  in  general,  with  NbTa2  and  NbS2  as  the  best

performers [195].

In general, binary MC improves overall excess positive charge hence
activity. For example, NiCo2S4/AC outperformed both NiS/AC and CoS/
AC [47]. Metal wise, Iron in Co0.7Fe0.3Se2 reported better ORR activity
compared  to  nickel  due  to  Fe  lower  d-orbitals  hence  superior  bond
ability [181].

4.1.2.5. MC activity  compared to  that of  precious catalysts. Reportedly,
MCs  show  inferior  activity  compared  to  Pt/C,  even  on  larger  surface
areas. For instance, the onset potential of Co7Se8 was lower than that of
Pt/GC  by  0.12  V,  in  spite  of  3.7  times  larger  electrochemical  active
surface area [71]. Pt-based sulfide catalysts such as PtxSy/C have been
developed, which show similar kinetics to Pt/C kinetics, with an added
advantage of methanol tolerance [32]. The activity of the novel catalyst,
PtxSy/C, was optimized using thermal and electrochemical treatment by
removing  the  oxide  and  controlling  PtxSy  content,  and  the  treated
catalyst  approximated  the  Pt/C  activity  [152].  Other  precious-metal
catalysts showed lower onset potentials compared to Pt/C, but similar
limiting  currents  in  addition  to  methanol  tolerance.  Ma  et  al.  [38]
attempted  to  optimize  the  Pt/C  performance  by  inducing  methanol
tolerance  while  maintaining  the  high  ORR  activity.  After  selenizing
Pt/C, Se was electrochemically stripped from the catalyst surface at an
optimized period of Tstrip= 0.07 mcat + 18.87 [38]. Pt was deposited on a
CoSe2/DETA nanobelt to form Pt/CoSe2 nanobelts, whose onset poten-
tial matched that of Pt/C, whereas the half-wave potential and limiting
current  differed.  The  lower  performance  was  exchanged  for  a  higher
tolerance  [56].  On  the  other  hand,  the  Ir  catalyst,  Ir–Se  showed  a
limiting current same as that of Pt/C, while taking a late ORR start [67].

(cid:0) 1 and 1600 rpm [201] © The
Fig. 17. LSV for ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M H2SO4 with and without MeOH, for (a) Ru, Ru/S, and Ru/Se, (b) Pt electrodes at 20 mV s
Electrochemical Society, reprinted by permission of IOP publishing Ltd; and (c) the relationship between the number of CV scans and the atomic fraction of oxygen on
Ru, Ru/Se, and Ru/S after correcting for OH(cid:0) adsorption, reprinted from [204] with permission from Elsevier Ltd.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104415

T. Eisa et al.

Fig. 18. Various catalysts ORR activity as function of OH adsorption energy. Reprinted from Tritsaris et al. [205], with permission from Elsevier Ltd.

Cobalt as metal catalyst is relatively tolerant to MeOH where metal
catalyst  here  refers  to  the  catalyst  constructed  from  metal  particles
whether in bulk structures or dispersed on a support material such as
carbon. Generally, cobalt sulfide catalysts are noticeably inferior to Pt/
C, although two catalysts show exceptional activity. The onset potential
of  CoS2@NC  is  lower  than  that  of  Pt/C  by  25  mV  only  [41].  The
Co3S4-S/G-800 catalysts were synthesized by treating an encapsulated
◦
Co3S4 by porous S/G at 800
C. Its ORR activity almost replicated that of
Pt/C,  showing  similar  kinetics  at  a  higher  methanol  tolerance.  More-
over, the current remained constant even after 15000s (Fig. 19) [53].
Notably,  the  oxygen  reduction  activity  of  Pt|Te  MNT,  RuxSey/C,  and
PdS/rGO  exceeded  that  of  Pt/C  [81,206,207].  Computationally,
Ni2SbTe2  has  a  higher  ORR  potential  than  Pt(III)  (by  20  mV)  [70].

Occasionally,  MCs  outperform
in
oxygen-saturated and fuel-free solutions; for instance, IrxSy/C shows a
better ORR performance than Ir/C. At x = 0.3 and y = 0.7, the catalyst
exhibits an onset potential of 0.973 V vs RHE compared to 0.863 V of
Ir/C [66].

counterparts

their  pure

4.1.2.6. Fuel  tolerance. Nonetheless,  the  difference  between  the  per-
formance of the MCs and their pure counterparts can be accounted for in
fuel  tolerance.  The  predominant  ORR  selectivity  is  a  result  of  ORR
favorable  activation energy on  the MCs.  In other words, on most  MC
surfaces, fuel molecule dehydrogenation requires higher activation en-
ergy than that required by ORR [205]. In Fig. 20, the gray zone contains
a  catalyst  with  selective  ORR  ability  in  MeOH  presence  [205].  The

Fig. 19. (a) Stability analysis of the Co3S4-S/G-800 nanocatalyst modified electrode in N2  or O2  saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, and (b) RRDE voltammograms.
Reprinted from Gu et al. [53] by The Royal Society of Chemistry licensed under CC BY 3.0.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104416

T. Eisa et al.

anodic fuels and membrane less fuel cells. In particular, CoSe2/NCNH
demonstrates a pronounced ORR selectivity under a large MeOH con-
centration of 20 M [110].

4.1.2.7. Fuel intolerance. Metal chalcogenides crossing the inclined line
shown  in  Fig.  20  obtain  anodic  tendencies  toward  MeOH  oxidation
[205].  Catalysts  like  TeNTs/PtNPs/GC  show  both  ORR  and  MeOH
oxidation  capabilities  in  neutral  pH  [58].  The  material  becomes  an
excellent anode material at a low fuel-oxidation activation energy. In
general,  these  MCs  have  not  been  thoroughly  studied,  and  further
exploration is needed. For example, ReS2/rGO unveiled an MPD of 38.6
(cid:0) 2 as a direct methanol fuel-cell anode [64]. Surprisingly, ReS2
mW cm
also  reported  MeOH  tolerance  experimentally  and  computationally
elsewhere [8]. Moreover, nickel selenide doped with transitional metals
has  been  used  to  oxidize  urea  and  ammonia–borane  [60,61],  which
contradicts with studies reporting Ni catalyst tolerance towards MeOH
in Co0.7Ni0.3Se2  [181]. For ZnTe/QH, QH is the crucial for its activity
toward EtOH. Compared to Pd/C, ZnTe/QH exhibited 10 times higher
forward  to  backward  current  peak  ratios  [168].  Another  peculiar
behavior was reported by Zhang et al. [208] on (Co, Ni)9S8(cid:0) MoS2-YSZ in
a high-temperature solid-oxide fuel cell, where sulfide prevented sulfur
poisoning by forming a layer of SH. Such behavior requires further in-
vestigations in the future.

Fig.  20. MeOH  activation  vs  ORR  activation  for  various  catalysts.  ORR  is
favorable at UMO>UORR. Reprinted from Tritsaris et al. [205], with permis-
sion from Elsevier Ltd.

4.2. In-situ evaluation

experimental results showed a heightened MeOH tolerance on Pt cata-
lyst, upon selenide introduction as PtxSey/C [25]. The MeOH tolerance
on Se species is also associated with the large molecular size of MeOH or
(cid:0)
Se n
electrostatic repulsion [25]. The ORR selective behavior promotes
the applications of MCs under poisonous environments in concentrated

Metal chalcogenides have been used in fuel cells to examine their
actual capabilities as catalysts, in different cell configurations and using
different fuels. Fig. 21 presents the maximum power density recorded
from fuel cells utilizing MCs as anodic or cathodic catalysts [13–15,34,
39,42,47,49,54,55,72,116,182,207,208]. The highest value is obtained
from Pt–RuS2 used as an anodic catalyst, despite the popular use of MCs

Fig. 21. Power densities reported from various fuel cells employing chalcogenides as anodes or cathodes.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104417

T. Eisa et al.

for ORR. Further details are provided in the supplementary materials.

4.2.1. As anode

The CO removal efficiency increases when using MC in fuel cells as
the anodic catalyst layer, causing MC catalytic performance to exceed
that of Pt/C. RuS2/C was modified using Pt, with a content of ~22% of
the commercial 40 wt% of Pt/C. Despite the lower content of Pt, the
catalyst  showed  similar performance  in polymer  exchange membrane
fuel cells (PEMFCs) and better CO removal [207]. The PEMFC exhibited
(cid:0) 2. The syn-
a notable MCD of 2000 mA cm
ergistic  effects  of  rGO  were  also  observed.  rGO  worked  as  highly
conductive support with a large number of active edges for ReS2/GO and
CoS2/MoS/rGO in DMFC [15,49]. Furthermore, the pH is an important
factor that influences the catalytic performance; ReS2/rGO performance
in  alkaline  media  was  more  than  double  the  current  in  acidic  media
[49].

(cid:0) 2 and MPD of 800 mW cm

In solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC), H2S gas impurities poisons the cata-
lysts; however, metal sulfide showed tolerance to S when exposed to a
mixture  of  H2–H2S  gasses.  In  fact,  (Co,Ni)9S8(cid:0) MoS2-YSZ  activity
doubled under the mixed gas flow. Moreover, the catalyst exhibited a
(cid:0) 2  for 110 min [208]. A semimetallic
constant potential at 50 mA cm
chalcogenide was also utilized, wherein Se was fixed on a porous carbon
membrane,  forming  N–doped  porous  carbon  membrane  containing
semimtallic Se (SeNCM). The catalyst, SeNCM, was heat treated at an
optimized  temperature  of  1000
C.  The  MPD  exhibited  by  the  semi-
metallic catalyst exceeded that of 20 wt% Pt/C in hydrazine fuel cells.
The  catalyst  stability  was  tested  via  chronopotentiometry,  and  it  was
found that the catalyst could approximately withhold a constant voltage
of 0.7 V at 100 mA cm

(cid:0) 2 [54].

◦

4.2.2. As cathode

The tolerance of the MCs toward organic molecules enables them to
exhibit a superior ORR performance in actual in-situ settings. Utilizing

(cid:0) 2, MCD of
rGO-PdPS as a cathode leads to a high MPD of 341 mW cm
(cid:0) 2, and OCV of 950 mV in a hydrogen-fed anion exchange
1000 mA cm
membrane  fuel  cell  (AEMFC),  while  maintaining  the  ORR  selective
catalysis.  The  outstanding  kinetics  on  the  catalyst  was  attributed  the
synergistic  effects  between  the  additives  and  the  support.  S  and  P
enhanced  the  O2  adsorption  on  rGO  and  weakened  the  O=O  bond,
whereas the rGO π orbital hybridized the Pd d-band [14]. At a similar
(cid:0) 2
selectivity, a higher maximum density was achieved at 1700 mA cm
from RuTe2/C, owing to the small particle size and abundancy of the
dual catalyst, Ru and RuTe2, at an optimized Te content [34].

Furthermore, MC managed to surpass Pt catalytic activity. The MPD
exhibited by nano-Z67/NwTe-750 exceeded that of Pt/C by 26%, owing
to the unique structure of the metal-free catalyst, CoTe, inside the C-N
nanowires. The pyridinic and graphitic N was used to create the CoNx
catalyst, which enhanced the onset potential and current density while
(cid:0)
limiting  the  HO2
production.  The  N  species  also  promoted  the  O2
adsorption on C [116]. Likewise, the activity of Fe(Fc)-N/S-C exceeded
that of Pt/C, and N doping played an important role in tuning the charge
distribution on a single-atom (Fe) catalyst, where the negative charges
were coordinated toward Fe. Further tuning was achieved using S, in
addition to defect introduction due to the size of S [72].

Reportedly, MCs exhibit better performances than do the Pt/C cat-
alysts in micro-fuel cells, since the micro-fuel cells highlight the toler-
ance  of  chalcogenides  toward  fuels.  For  example,  the  Pt/C  catalyst
outperformed the cobalt selenide catalyst (CoSe/CN) in H2–O2  AEMFC
(Fig. 22(a)) [42]. However, the performance was reversed when the fuel
cell type was changed to micro fuel cells. Namely, in AEM-μDMFC, a
similar cobalt selenide catalyst (CoSe2/C) produced more than double
the  MPD  compared  to  that  produced  by  20  wt%  Pt/C  (Fig.  22(c)).
CoSe2/C’s superior performance occurred owing to the fuel tolerance of
cobalt selenide under the high fuel crossover conditions in micro fuel
cells. Evidently, such superiority did not prevail in ex-situ tests, as the
results favored Pt/C (Fig. 22(b)) [151]. Likewise, Ru selenides showed a

◦
Fig. 22. (a) Polarization curves of CoSe/CN compared to Pt/C as cathodes in H2–O2 AEMFCs, 50
C, reprinted from [42] with permission from the Royal Society of
(cid:0) 1, reprinted from [151] with
Chemistry; (b) LSV of 20 wt% CoSe2/C and 20 wt% Pt/C for ORR in 0.1 M MeOH and 0.1 M KOH saturated with O2, 900 rpm, 5 mV s
permission from Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC, published by Elsevier Ltd.; (c) polarization curves in AEM-μDMFC from Pt/C and CoSe2/C cathodes with 7 M
MeOH in 1 M KOH reprinted from [151] with permission from Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC, published by Elsevier Ltd.; and (d) iR corrected polarization curves
◦
of 40% Pt/C and 30% RuSeMo/C catalysts in SAFC under H2, Air, and ambient pressure at 250
C, reprinted with permission from [209], copyright (2017) American
Chemical Society.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104418

T. Eisa et al.

higher  performance than did the Pt/C catalysts in micro-fuel cells. In
SAFC, 30% RuSeMo/C reached only ~60% of the MPD exhibited by 40%
Pt/C (Fig. 22(d)) [209], whereas the performance of 20 wt% RuxSey/C
exceeded that of the 30 wt% Pt/C with the increasing formic acid con-
centration, despite the catalyst lower ex-situ ORR activity (Fig. 23 (a, b
and  c)) [206].  An interesting  comparison  between Pt/C and  PtxSey/C
was conducted in laminar and mixed-air breathing MeOH μ-fluidic fuel
cells  (Fig.  23  (d  and  e)).  The  laminar  flow  conditions  favored  Pt/C,
whereas  the  mixed  conditions  favored  the  selenide-modified  catalyst
because of its selective activity toward ORR in the presence of the fuel
[210].  Pt  modified  with  S  showed  higher  performance  in  mixed  flow
micro-fuel  cells  than did Pt  and  CoSe2, whereas  Pt  exhibited  a better
performance in the laminar flow cell. However, CoSe2  showed a con-
stant  performance  irrespective  of  the  flow  regime,  indicating  a  high
tolerance  [12].  On  a  different  note,  both  the  fuel  tolerance  and  ORR
activity of Te surpassed those of Se again in the CoTe/C catalyst [182].

5. Challenges and future prospects

Despite the advantages introduced by the chalcogenides, there are

some areas in need of improvement:

• Chalcogen stripping at high potentials: Chalcogens are oxidized and
removed from the catalyst. The stripping potential is dependent on
the chalcogen and modified metal. In general, S strips at lower po-
tentials than Se.

• Optimization for each catalyst: Excess chalcogen causes agglomera-
tion,  covering  the  active  sites  and  reducing  the  conductivity,  and
thus affects the catalyst performance. It also increases the negative
charge and attracts inhibitors.

• PEMFC cathode catalyst stripping: The catalyst dissolves and crosses
to the anodic side through the membrane, over extended usage.
• ORR  selectivity:  The  mechanism  and  physical  meaning  of  such

phenomena are not agreed upon yet.

6. Conclusions

A  chalcogen is used to modify the electronic structure of material
through physical or chemical means. Solvothermal synthesis achieves
high controllability of the resulting morphologies, despite the relatively

(cid:0) 1 and (b) for 30 wt% Pt/CE-TEK, reprinted from
Fig. 23. (a) Polarization curves for 20 wt% RuxSey/C in μFAFC operating with 0.1, 0.5, 1 and 5 M, at 1.2 mL min
(cid:0) 1, 1600 rpm, reprinted
[206] with permission from Elsevier B.V.; (c) LSV curves for RuxSey/C and 20 wt% Pt/C E-TEK in O2-purged MeOH and 0.5 M H2SO4, 5 mV s
from [206] with permission from Elsevier B.V.; (d) Polarization curves obtained in the air-breathing methanol LFFC and MRFC systems with Pt/C, reprinted from
[210] with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies and (e) PtxSey/C cathode catalysts, reprinted from [210] with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104419

T. Eisa et al.

mild  preparation  conditions,  whereas  CVD  allows  the  preparation  of
atomically dispersed catalysts. The produced MCs are inherently more
active than their oxide counterparts, owing to the tuneable interaction
between  the  metal  and  the  chalcogen.  Chalcogenides  reduce  the
bonding strength and prevent metal oxidation, thereby improving the
performance  by  enhancing  the  adsorption/desorption  rate  of  the  spe-
cies. Furthermore, Se reportedly decreases the increases the valence and
conductive bands edges in Co, thereby enhancing the charge transfer.

A second metal can be added to form a binary metal catalyst. It adds
an overall excess positive charge, which improves the synergetic inter-
action between the catalyst and the chalcogen, and as a result improves
the catalytic activity. Furthermore, non-metal doping has been used as
well  to  increase  the  activity,  such  as  doping  with  nitrogen  and  phos-
phorus.  Utilizing  carbon  support  enhances  the  performance  by
increasing the conductivity and accessible surface area. It can also create
active  sites  when  doped  with  chalcogenides.  Other  support  materials
such as DETA show high activities. The chalcogens themselves can be
used  as  support  materials  or  as  anchors  for  the  active  sites  on  inert
supports.

As anode catalysts, MCs reduce the effects of poisoning by easing the
CO  adsorption  or  accelerating  its  removal, thereby  enhancing  the  ac-
tivity  of  the  base  catalyst,  leading  to  high  in-situ  performance.  As
cathode  catalysts,  theoretically,  the  MCs  are  capable  of  one-step  four
electron transfers for ORR via an associative mechanism. However, in
practice, numbers close to four have been achieved for high potential.
Moreover, MCs are tolerant toward fuels as cathodic catalysts, such as
methanol and ethylene glycol. This feature mitigates the problem of fuel
crossover  in  fuel  cells  and  reduces  the  damage  caused  by  poisoning
species such as sulfates.

Interestingly, some chalcogenide catalysts such as, ReS2  have been
used as both anodic and cathodic catalysts for fuel cells. It appears that
support  materials  and  preparation  methods  can  affect  the  catalyst
selectivity.  For  instance,  ZnTe/QH  has  also  been  used  in  SOFC  as  an
anode. However, in the absence of QH, the catalyst remained inactive
toward  fuel  oxidation.  Such  a  dual  nature  of  the  chalcogenides  is
attributed to the different activation energy for each catalyst, i.e., some
catalysts have lower activation energy for fuel oxidation than for ORR.
Nevertheless,  this  phenomenon  should  be  further  investigated  in  the
future.

Statements and declarations

The authors have no competing interests in relevance to this article.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

Acknowledgements

Brain

This project was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea  (NRF)  grant  from  the  Korean  Government  (MSIT)  (No.
2019R1A2C1006356),
grant
(2021H1D3A2A02044903),  the  "Cooperative  Research  Program  for
Agriculture  Science  and  Technology  Development  (Project  No.
PJ0162592021)",  Rural  Development  Administration,  Republic  of
Korea, and Project No.19020406129 funded by the University of Shar-
jah, UAE. Furthermore, the resources and facilities provided by the King
Abdullah  University  of  Science  and  Technology  (KAUST)  are  greatly

fellowship

Pool

appreciated (BAS-1403).

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2022.101044.

References

[1] Gozgor G, Lau CKM, Lu Z. Energy consumption and economic growth: new

evidence from the OECD countries. Energy 2010:27–34.

[2] Arora NK. Impact of climate change on agriculture production and its sustainable

solutions. Environ Sustain 2019;2:95–6.

[3] Olabi AG. Renewable energy and energy storage systems. Energy 2017:1–6.
[4] Obata O, Salar-Garcia MJ, Greenman J, Kurt H, Chandran K, Ieropoulos I.

Development of efficient electroactive biofilm in urine-fed microbial fuel cell
cascades for bioelectricity generation. J Environ Manage 2020:109992.

[5] Abdelkareem MA, Elsaid K, Wilberforce T, Kamil M, Sayed ET, Olabi AG.

Environmental aspects of fuel cells: a review. Sci Total Environ 2021:141803.

[6] Zhao TS, Xu C, Chen R, Yang WW. Mass transport phenomena in direct methanol

fuel cells. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2009;35:275–92.

[7] Abdelkareem MA, Sayed ET, HO Mohamed, Obaid M, Rezk H, Chae KJ.
Nonprecious anodic catalysts for low-molecular-hydrocarbon fuel cells:
theoretical consideration and current progress. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;
77:100805.

[8] Azam AMIN, Lee SH, Masdar MS, Zainoodin AM, Kamarudin SK. Parametric

study on direct ethanol fuel cell (DEFC) performance and fuel crossover. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2019;16:8566–74.

[9] Alias MS, Kamarudin SK, Zainoodin AM, Masdar MS. Structural mechanism

investigation on methanol crossover of a passive direct methanol fuel cell
performance via modified micro-porous layer. Int Energy Res 2021;45:12928–43.
[10] Felice C, Ye S, Qu D. Nafion(cid:0) montmorillonite nanocomposite membrane for the
effective reduction of fuel crossover. Ind Eng Chem Res 2010;4:1514–9.
[11] Colpan CO, Ouellette D, Glüsen A, Müller M, Stolten D. Reduction of methanol
crossover in a flowing electrolyte-direct methanol fuel cell. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2017;33:21530–45.

[12] Gago AS, Gochi-Ponce Y, Feng YJ, Esquivel JP, Sabat ́e N, Santander J, Alonso-
Vante N. Tolerant chalcogenide cathodes of membraneless micro fuel cells.
ChemSusChem 2012;8:1488–94.

[13] Sayed ET, Abdelkareem MA, Bahaa A, Eisa T, Alawadhi H, Al-Asheh S, Chae KJ,
Olabi AG. Synthesis and performance evaluation of various metal chalcogenides
as active anodes for direct urea fuel cells. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021:
111470.

[14] Sarkar S, Patel S, Sampath S. Efficient oxygen reduction activity on layered

palladium phosphosulphide and its application in alkaline fuel cells. J Power
Sources 2020:227280.

[15] Askari MB, Salarizadeh P, Seifi M, Rozati SM. Electrocatalytic properties of CoS2/
MoS2/rGO as a non-noble dual metal electrocatalyst: the investigation of
hydrogen evolution and methanol oxidation. J Phys Chem Solid 2019;135:
109103.

[16] Moore D, Wang ZL. Growth of anisotropic one-dimensional ZnS nanostructures.

J Mater Chem 2006;40:3898–905.

[17] Jiang Y, Zhang WJ, Jie JS, Meng XM, Zapien JA, Lee ST. Homoepitaxial growth
and lasing properties of ZnS nanowire and nanoribbon arrays. Adv Mater 2006;
12:1527–32.

[18] Radovanovic PV, Barrelet CJ, Gradecak S, Qian F, Lieber CM. General synthesis of
manganese-doped II(cid:0) VI and III(cid:0) V semiconductor nanowires. Nano Lett 2005;7:
1407–11.

[19] Ye C, Wang MQ, Chen G, Deng YH, Li LJ, Luo HQ, Li NB. One-step CVD synthesis

of carbon framework wrapped Co 2 P as a flexible electrocatalyst for efficient
hydrogen evolution. J Mater Chem A 2017;17:7791–5.

[20] Zhao Z, Schipper DE, Leitner AP, Thirumalai H, Chen JH, Xie L, Qin F, Alam MK,
Grabow LC, Chen S, Wang D, Ren Z, Wang Z, Whitmire KH, Bao J. Bifunctional
metal phosphide FeMnP films from single source metal organic chemical vapor
deposition for efficient overall water splitting. Nano Energy 2017:444–53.
[21] Gao F, Lu Q, Zhao D. Synthesis of crystalline mesoporous CdS semiconductor

nanoarrays through a mesoporous SBA-15 silica template technique. Adv Mater
2003;9:739–42.

[22] Xu XJ, Fei GT, Yu WH, Wang XW, Chen L, Zhang LD. Preparation and formation
mechanism of ZnS semiconductor nanowires made by the electrochemical
deposition method. Nanotechnology 2006;17:426.

[23] Tang Z, Kotov NA, Giersig M. Spontaneous organization of single CdTe
nanoparticles into luminescent nanowires. Science 2002;5579:237–40.

[24] Tang Z, Zhang Z, Wang Y, Glotzer SC, Kotov NA. Self-assembly of CdTe
nanocrystals into free-floating sheets. Science 2006;5797:274–8.

[25] Zhu JJ, Xu S, Wang H, Zhu JM, Chen HY. Sonochemical synthesis of CdSe hollow
spherical assemblies via an in-situ template route. Adv Mater 2003;2:156–9.
[26] Murcia MJ, Shaw DL, Woodruff H, Naumann CA, Young BA, Long EC. Facile

sonochemical synthesis of highly luminescent ZnS(cid:0)
Chem Mater 2006;9:2219–25.

shelled CdSe quantum dots.

[27] Zhang Z, Zhao X, Li J. SnSe/carbon nanocomposite synthesized by high energy
ball milling as an anode material for sodium-ion and lithium-ion batteries.
Electrochim Acta 2015:1296–301.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104420

T. Eisa et al.

[28] Setoudeh N, Welham NJ. Metallothermic reduction of zinc sulfide induced by ball

milling. J Mater Sci 2017;11:6388–400.

[29] Song J, Teymur B, Zhou Y, Ngaboyamahina E, DB Mitzi. Porous Cu2BaSn(S,Se)4
film as a photocathode using non-toxic solvent and a ball-milling approach. ACS
Appl Energy Mater 2021;1:81–7.

[30] Liu J, Xue D. Rapid and scalable route to CuS biosensors: a microwave-assisted
Cu-complex transformation into CuS nanotubes for ultrasensitive nonenzymatic
glucose sensor. J Mater Chem 2011;1:223–8.

[31] Wang H, Liang Y, Li Y, Dai H. Co1(cid:0) xS–graphene hybrid: a high-performance
metal chalcogenide electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction. Angew Chem Int Ed
2011;46:10969–72.

[32] Gochi-Ponce Y, Alonso-Nu ̃nez G, Alonso-Vante N. Synthesis and electrochemical
characterization of a novel platinum chalcogenide electrocatalyst with an
enhanced tolerance to methanol in the oxygen reduction reaction. Electrochem
Commun 2006;9:1487–91.

[55] Arunchander A, Peera SG, Sahu AK. Synthesis of flower-like molybdenum sulfide/
graphene hybrid as an efficient oxygen reduction electrocatalyst for anion
exchange membrane fuel cells. J Power Sources 2017:104–14.

[56] Gao MR, Gao Q, Jiang J, Cui CH, Yao WT, Yu SH. A methanol-tolerant Pt/CoSe2

nanobelt cathode catalyst for direct methanol fuel cells. Angew Chem Int Ed
2011;21:4905–8.

[57] Mukherjee N, Chatterjee T, Ranu BC. Transition metal-and solvent-free synthesis
of unsymmetrical diaryl sulfides and selenides under ball-milling. ARKIVOC
2015;2:53–61.

[58] Tang C, Zhang H, Xu K, Hu Q, Li F, He C, Zhang Q, Liu J, Fan L. Scalable synthesis
of heterostructure molybdenum and nickel sulfides nanosheets for efficient
hydrogen generation in alkaline electrolyte. Catal Today 2018:171–6.

[59] Bal ́aˇz M, Zorkovsk ́a A, Urakaev F, Bal ́aˇz P, Brianˇcin J, Bujˇn ́akov ́a Z,

Achimoviˇcov ́a M, Gock E. Ultrafast mechanochemical synthesis of copper
sulfides. RSC Adv 2016;91:87836–42.

[33] Jinyu Z, Liping S, Fanhao K, Lihua H, Hui Z. Architecture of porous CoS1.097-C

composite nanowire for efficient oxygen reduction reaction. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2019;7:3681–9.

[60] Kristl M, Gyergyek S, Srt N, Ban I. Mechanochemical route for the preparation of
nanosized aluminum and gallium sulfide and selenide. Mater Manuf Process
2016;12:1608–12.

[34] Gong Q, Zheng J, Wang Y, Gong S, Yang W, Cheng X, Li H. Highly stable and

[61] Yao M, Liu W, Chen X, Ren Z, Wilson S, Ren Z, Opeil C. Low temperature

methanol tolerant RuTe2/C electrocatalysts for fuel cell applications.
J Electrochem Soc 2018;10:F876–82.

thermoelectric properties of p-type copper selenide with Ni, Te and Zn dopants.
J Alloy Compd 2017:718–21.

[35] Wang X, Xiang Q, Liu B, Wang L, Luo T, Chen D, Shen G. TiO2  modified FeS

[62] Oh SM, Lee E, Adpakpang K, Patil SB, Park MJ, Lim YS, Lee KH, Kim JY,

nanostructures with enhanced electrochemical performance for lithium-ion
batteries. Sci Rep 2013;1:2007.

[36] Ziegelbauer JM, Gatewood D, Gulla AF, Guinel MJF, Ernst F, Ramaker DE,

Mukerjee S. Fundamental investigation of oxygen reduction reaction on rhodium
sulfide-based chalcogenides. J Phys Chem C 2009;17:6955–68.

[37] Solorza-Feria O, Ellmer K, Giersig M, Alonso-Vante N. Novel low-temperature
synthesis of semiconducting transition metal chalcogenide electrocatalyst for
multielectron charge transfer: molecular oxygen reduction. Electrochim Acta
1994;11:1647–53.

[38] Ma J, Gago AS, Vogel W, Alonso-Vante N. Tailoring and tuning the tolerance of a
Pt chalcogenide cathode electrocatalyst to methanol. ChemCatChem 2013;3:
701–5.

[39] Arunchander A, Peera SG, Giridhar VV, Sahu AK. Synthesis of cobalt sulfide-
graphene as an efficient oxygen reduction catalyst in alkaline medium and its
application in anion exchange membrane fuel cells. J Electrochem Soc 2017;2:
F71–80.

[40] Zhu QL, Xia W, Akita T, Zou R, Xu Q. Metal-organic framework-derived

honeycomb-like open porous nanostructures as precious-metal-free catalysts for
highly efficient oxygen electroreduction. Adv Mater 2016;30:6391–8.
[41] Feng C, Li Z, Wang J, Yan T, Dong H, Feng J, Zhang Q, Sui J, Yu L, Dong L.

Synthesis of metal-organic framework-derived cobalt disulfide with high-
performance oxygen reduction reaction catalytic properties. J Electroanalyt
Chem 2019;840:27–34.

[42] Jhong HP, Chang ST, Huang HC, Wang KC, Lee JF, Mikito Y, Wang CH. Enhanced
activity of selenocyanate-containing transition metal chalcogenide supported by
nitrogen-doped carbon material for oxygen reduction reaction. Catal Sci Technol
2019.

[43] Unni SM, Mora-Hernandez JM, Kurungot S, Alonso-Vante N. CoSe2 supported on
nitrogen-doped carbon nanohorns as a methanol-tolerant cathode for air-
breathing microlaminar flow fuel cells. ChemElectroChem 2015;9:1339–45.
[44] Wu ZG, Li JT, Zhong YJ, Liu J, Wang K, Guo XD, Huang L, Zhong BH, Sun SG.
Synthesis of FeS@C-N hierarchical porous microspheres for the applications in
lithium/sodium ion batteries. J Alloy Compd 2016:790–7.

[45] Shi C, Maimaitiyiming X. Three dimensional nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur

doped porous graphene as efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts for direct
methanol fuel cell. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;17:10247–58.

[46] Tiwari AP, Kim D, Kim Y, Lee H. Bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis through

chemical bonding of transition metal chalcogenides on conductive carbons. Adv
Energy Mater 2017;14:1602217.

[47] Pu L, Liu D, Li K, Wang J, Yang T, Ge B, Liu Z. Carbon-supported binary transition

metal chalcogenide used as cathode catalyst for oxygen reduction in microbial
fuel cell. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;20:14253–63.

[48] Khalafallah D, Ouyang C, Zhi M, Hong Z. Heterostructured nickel-cobalt selenide
immobilized onto porous carbon frameworks as an advanced anode material for
urea electrocatalysis. ChemElectroChem 2019;20:5191–202.

[49] Askari MB, Salarizadeh P. Ultra-small ReS2 nanoparticles hybridized with rGO as
cathode and anode catalysts towards hydrogen evolution reaction and methanol
electro-oxidation for DMFC in acidic and alkaline media. Synth Met 2019:
116131.

[50] He J, Li Q, Chen Y, Xu C, Zhou K, Wang X, Zhang W, Li Y. Self-assembled

Hwang SJ. Evolution of the chemical bonding nature and electrode activity of
indium selenide upon the composite formation with graphene nanosheets.
Electrochim Acta 2015:48–56.

[63] L ́opez O, Ortega-L ́opez M, Jim ́enez S, Vivaldo I, P ́erez-Luna JG, Ju ́arez-Diaz G.

Synthesis of indium selenide (In2Se3) by prior mechanical pulverization and
mechanical alloying for thermoelectric applications. Mater Res Express 2017;3:
035004.

[64] Fernique RMT, Savoie S, Gari ́epy M, Braidy N, Schulz R. A simple route to

produce tungsten carbide powders by high-energy ball milling and annealing.
Ceram Int 2020;2:1736–42.

[65] Kim SY, Choi DK, Yeo DH, Shin HS, Yoon HG. Influence of ball milling

contamination on properties of sintered AlN substrates. J Eur Ceram Soc 2020;15:
5349–56.

[66] Ma J, Ai D, Xie X, Guo J. Novel methanol-tolerant Ir–S/C chalcogenide

electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction in DMFC fuel cell. Particuology 2011;2:
155–60.

[67] Lee K, Zhang L, Zhang J. A novel methanol-tolerant Ir-Se chalcogenide
electrocatalyst for oyxgen reduction. J Power Sources 2007;1:108–13.
[68] Falkowski JM, Surendranath Y. Metal chalcogenide nanofilms: platforms for

mechanistic studies of electrocatalysis. ACS Catal 2015;6:3411–6.

[69] Falkowski JM, Concannon NM, Yan B, Heazlewoodite Surendranath Y. Ni3S2: a

potent catalyst for oxygen reduction to water under benign conditions. J Am
Chem Soc 2015;25:7978–81.

[70] Li LH, Yuan JH, Xue KH, Xu M, Xu M, Wang JF, Miao XS. Synergic Effect in a New
Electrocatalyst Ni2SbTe2 for Oxygen Reduction Reaction. J Phys Chem C 2020;6:
3671–80.

[71] Masud J, Nath M. Co7Se8 nanostructures as catalysts for oxygen reduction
reaction with high methanol tolerance. ACS Energy Lett 2016;1:27–31.
[72] Li X, Yang X, Liu L, Zhao H, Li Y, Zhu H, Chen Y, Guo S, Liu Y, Tan Q, Wu G.
Chemical vapor deposition for N/S-doped single fe site catalysts for the oxygen
reduction in direct methanol fuel cells. ACS Catal 2021;12:7450–9.

[73] Konar R, Das S, Teblum E, Modak A, Perelshtein I, Richter JJ, et al. Facile and

scalable ambient pressure chemical vapor deposition-assisted synthesis of layered
silver selenide (β-Ag2Se) on Ag foil as a possible oxygen reduction catalyst in
alkaline medium. Electrochim Acta 2021:137709.

[74] Boscher ND, Carmalt CJ, Palgrave RG, Parkin IP. Atmospheric pressure chemical
vapour deposition of SnSe and SnSe2 thin films on glass. Thin Solid Films 2008;
15:4750–7.

[75] Khan MD, Malik MA, Revaprasadu N. Progress in selenium based metal-organic

precursors for main group and transition metal selenide thin films and
nanomaterials. Coord Chem Rev 2019:24–47.

[76] Assili K, Alouani K, Vilanova X. Structural and optical properties of tin (II) sulfide

thin films deposited using organophosphorus precursor (Ph3PS). Semicond Sci
Technol 2017;2:025002.

[77] Cao F, Liu R, Zhou L, Song S, Lei Y, Shi W, Zhao F, Zhang H. One-pot synthesis of

flowerlike Ni7S6 and its application in selective hydrogenation of
chloronitrobenzene. J Mater Chem 2010;6:1078–85.

[78] Wang DW, Wang QH, Wang TM. Controlled growth of pyrite FeS2 crystallites by a
facile surfactant-assisted solvothermal method. CrystEngComm 2010;3:755–61.
[79] Huang T, He M, Zhou Y, Li S, Ding B, Pan W, Huang S, Tong Y. Solvothermal

cauliflower-like FeS2  anchored into graphene foam as free-standing anode for
high-performance lithium-ion batteries. Carbon 2017:111–6.

synthesis of flower-like CoS hollow microspheres with excellent microwave
absorption properties. RSC Adv 2016;102:100392–400.

[51] Gautam J, Tran DT, Singh TI, Kim NH, Lee JH. Mesoporous iron sulfide

[80] Zheng M, Ding Y, Yu L, Du X, Zhao Y. In situ grown pristine cobalt sulfide as

nanoparticles anchored graphene sheet as an efficient and durable catalyst for
oxygen reduction reaction. J Power Sources 2019:91–100.

[52] Wang H, Ma J, Liu S, Nie L, Chai Y, Yang X, Yuan R. CoS/CNTs hybrid structure
for improved performance lithium ion battery. J Alloy Compd 2016:551–6.
[53] Gu W, Hu L, Hong W, Jia X, Li J, Wang E. Noble-metal-free Co3S4–S/G porous
hybrids as an efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. Chem Sci
2016;7:4167–73.

[54] Wang T, Wang Q, Wang Y, Da Y, Zhou W, Shao Y, Li D, Zhan S, Yuan J, Wang H.
Atomically dispersed semimetallic selenium on porous carbon membrane as an
electrode for hydrazine fuel cells. Angew Chem Int Ed 2019;38:13466–71.

bifunctional photocatalyst for hydrogen and oxygen evolution. Adv Funct Mater
2017;11:1605846.

[81] Wang H, Yin S, Li C, Deng K, Wang Z, Xu Y, Li X, Xue H, Wang L. Direct synthesis
of superlong Pt|Te mesoporous nanotubes for electrocatalytic oxygen reduction.
J Mater Chem A 2019;4:1711–7.

[82] Wadia C, Wu Y, Gul S, Volkman SK, Guo J, Alivisatos AP. Surfactant-assisted
hydrothermal synthesis of single phase pyrite FeS2  nanocrystals. Chem Mater
2009;13:2568–70.

[83] Zhou YX, Yao HB, Wang Y, Liu HL, Gao MR, Shen PK, et al. Hierarchical hollow
Co9S8  microspheres: solvothermal synthesis, magnetic, electrochemical, and
electrocatalytic properties. Chem Eur J 2010;39:12000–7.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104421

T. Eisa et al.

[84] Li J, Tang X, Song L, Zhu Y, Qian Y. From Te nanotubes to CoTe2  nanotubes: a
general strategy for the formation of 1D metal telluride nanostructures. J Cryst
Growth 2009;20:4467–72.

[85] Liu B, Wei S, Xing Y, Liu D, Shi Z, Liu X, Sun X, Hou S, Su Z. Complex–surfactant-
assisted hydrothermal synthesis and properties of hierarchical worm-like cobalt
sulfide microtubes assembled by hexagonal nanoplates. Chem Eur J 2010;22:
6625–31.

[86] Fan H, Zhang M, Zhang X, Qian Y. Hydrothermal growth of NiSe2  tubular

microcrystals assisted by PVA. J Cryst Growth 2009;20:4530–4.

[87] Wu Z, Pan C, Li T, Yang G, Xie Y. Formation of uniform flowerlike patterns of NiS
by macrocycle polyamine assisted solution-phase route. Cryst Growth Des 2007;
12:2454–9.

[88] Cao F, Hu W, Zhou L, Shi W, Song S, Lei Y, et al. 3D Fe3S4 flower-like

microspheres: high-yield synthesis via a biomolecule-assisted solution approach,
their electrical, magnetic and electrochemical hydrogen storage properties.
Dalton Trans 2009;42:9246–52.

[89] Bao SJ, Li CM, Guo CX, Qiao Y. Biomolecule-assisted synthesis of cobalt sulfide
nanowires for application in supercapacitors. J Power Sources 2008;1:676–81.

[90] Pan Q, Huang K, Ni S, Yang F, He D. Synthesis of flower-and rod-like nickel

sulfide nanostructures by an organic-free hydrothermal process. Mater Res Bull
2008;6:1440–7.

[91] He Z, Yu SH, Zhou X, Li X, Qu J. Magnetic-field-induced phase-selective synthesis
of ferrosulfide microrods by a hydrothermal process: microstructure control and
magnetic properties. Adv Funct Mater 2006;8:1105–11.

[92] Liu X, Zhang N, Yi R, Qiu G, Yan A, Wu H, Meng D, Tang M. Hydrothermal
synthesis and characterization of sea urchin-like nickel and cobalt selenides
nanocrystals. Mater Sci Eng B 2007;1-2:38–43.

framework-wrapped CdS nanowires for efficient oxygen evolution reaction. Small
2018;20:1704035.

[113] Wei Q, Fu Y, Zhang G, Yang D, Meng G, Sun S. Rational design of novel

nanostructured arrays based on porous AAO templates for electrochemical energy
storage and conversion. Nano Energy 2019:234–59.

[114] Wang W, Wang SY, Gao YL, Wang KY, Liu M. Nickel sulfide nanotubes formed by
a directional infiltration self-assembly route in AAO templates. Mater Sci Eng B
2006;1-3:167–71.

[115] Zhao A, Xu L, Luo T, Qian Y. Synthesis of nickel selenide nanocables and

nanotubes. Chem Lett 2005;8:1136–7.

[116] Wu CH, Wan KC, Chang ST, Chang YC, Chen HY, Yamanaka I, Chiang TC,

Huang HC, Wang CH. High performance of metal-organic framework-derived
catalyst supported by tellurium nanowire for oxygen reduction reaction. Renew
Energy 2020:324–31.

[117] Tian M, Shi S, Shen Y, Yin H. PtRu alloy nanoparticles supported on nanoporous
gold as an efficient anode catalyst for direct methanol fuel cell. Electrochim Acta
2019:390–8.

[118] Tan JL, De Jesus AM, Chua SL, Sanetuntikul J, Shanmugam S, Tongol BJV, Kim H.
Preparation and characterization of palladium-nickel on graphene oxide support
as anode catalyst for alkaline direct ethanol fuel cell. Appl Catal A-Gen 2017:
29–35.

[119] Eisa T, HO Mohamed, Choi YJ, Park SG, Ali R, Abdelkareem MA, Oh SE, Chae KJ.
Nickel nanorods over nickel foam as standalone anode for direct alkaline
methanol and ethanol fuel cell. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;10:5948–59.
[120] Song X, Gao L, Li Y, Chen W, Mao L, Yang JH. Nickel phosphate-based materials

with excellent durability for urea electro-oxidation. Electrochim Acta 2017:
284–92.

[93] Jiang L, Zhu YJ, Cui JB. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide assisted self-assembly

[121] De Rooij MR. Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications. Anti-Corr

of NiTe2 nanoflakes: nanoflake arrays and their photoluminescence properties.
J Solid State Chem 2010;10:2358–64.

[94] Yao WT, Yu SH. Synthesis of semiconducting functional materials in solution:

from II-VI semiconductor to inorganic–organic hybrid semiconductor
nanomaterials. Adv Funct Mater 2008;21:3357–66.

[95] Yao WT, Yu SH, Pan L, Li J, Wu QS, Zhang L, Jiang J. Flexible Wurtzite-type ZnS
nanobelts with quantum-size effects: a diethylenetriamine-assisted solvothermal
approach. Small 2005;3:320–5.

[96] Yao WT, Yu SH, Wu QS. From Mesostructured Wurtzite ZnS-nanowire/amine

nanocomposites to ZnS nanowires exhibiting quantum size effects: a mild-
solution chemistry approach. Adv Funct Mater 2007;4:623–31.

[97] Chen Y, Qin Z, Guo X, Wang X, Guo L. One-step hydrothermal synthesis of

(CuIn)0.2Zn1.6S2  hollow sub-microspheres for efficient visible-light-driven
photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2016;3:1524–34.

[98] Molla A, Sahu M, Hussain S. Synthesis of tunable band gap semiconductor nickel
sulphide nanoparticles: rapid and round the clock degradation of organic dyes.
Sci Rep 2016:26034.

[99] Bose R, Balasingam SK, Shin S, Jin Z, Kwon DH, Jun Y, Min YS. Importance of

hydrophilic pretreatment in the hydrothermal growth of amorphous molybdenum
sulfide for hydrogen evolution catalysis. Langmuir 2015;18:5220–7.

[100] Emadi H, Salavati-Niasari M, Sobhani A. Synthesis of some transition metal (M:
25Mn, 27Co, 28Ni, 29Cu, 30Zn, 47Ag, 48Cd) sulfide nanostructures by
hydrothermal method. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2017:52–74.

[101] Kalpana K, Selvaraj V. Thiourea assisted hydrothermal synthesis of ZnS/CdS/Ag 2
S nanocatalysts for photocatalytic degradation of Congo red under direct sunlight
illumination. RSC Adv 2016;5:4227–36.

[102] Deng X, Wang C, Yang H, Shao M, Zhang S, Wang X, Ding M, Huang J, Xu X. One-
pot hydrothermal synthesis of CdS decorated CuS microflower-like structures for
enhanced photocatalytic properties. Sci Rep 2017;1:3877.

[103] Sobhani A, Salavati-Niasari M. Cobalt selenide nanostructures: hydrothermal

synthesis, considering the magnetic property and effect of the different synthesis
conditions. J Mol Liq 2016:1089–94.

[104] Sobhani A, Salavati-Niasari M. Chromium selenide nanoparticles: hydrothermal
synthesis in the presence of a new selenium source. J Nanostruct 2017;7:141–6.

[105] Sobhani A, Salavati-Niasari M. Synthesis and characterization of FeSe2

nanoparticles and FeSe2/FeO(OH) nanocomposites by hydrothermal method.
J Alloy Compd 2015:26–33.

[106] Sobhani A, Salavati-Niasari M. Optimized synthesis of ZnSe nanocrystals by
hydrothermal method. J Mater Sci Mater Electron 2016;1:293–303.

[107] Murugadoss V, Panneerselvam P, Yan C, Guo Z, Angaiah S. A simple one-step

hydrothermal synthesis of cobaltnickel selenide/graphene nanohybrid as an
advanced platinum free counter electrode for dye sensitized solar cell.
Electrochim Acta 2019:157–67.

[108] Wan J, Ye W, Gao R, Fang X, Guo Z, Lu Y, Yan D. Synthesis from a layered double
hydroxide precursor for a highly efficient oxygen evolution reaction. Inorg Chem
Front 2019;7:1793–8.

[109] Tang C, Cheng N, Pu Z, Xing W, Sun X. NiSe nanowire film supported on nickel

foam: an efficient and stable 3D bifunctional electrode for full water splitting.
Angew Chem Int Ed 2015;32:9351–5.

[110] Zhang T, Meng F, Cheng Y, Dewangan N, Ho GW, Kawi S. Z-scheme transition

metal bridge of Co9S8/Cd/CdS tubular heterostructure for enhanced
photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Appl Catal B-Environ 2021:119853.
[111] Zhou W, Chen W, Nai J, Yin P, Chen C, Guo L. Selective synthesis of peapodlike
Ni/Ni3S2 nanochains and nickel sulfide hollow chains and their magnetic
properties. Adv Funct Mater 2010;21:3678–83.

[112] Wu LL, Wang QS, Li J, Long Y, Liu Y, Song SY, et al. Co9S8  nanoparticles-

embedded N/S-codoped carbon nanofibers derived from metal–organic

Met and Mat 2003;50.

[122] Yang JH, Song X, Zhao X, Wang Y, Yang Y, Gao L. Nickel phosphate materials
regulated by doping cobalt for urea and methanol electro-oxidation. Int J
Hydrogen Energy 2019;31:16305–14.

[123] Elgrishi N, Rountree KJ, McCarthy BD, Rountree ES, Eisenhart TT, Dempsey JL.
A practical beginner’s guide to cyclic voltammetry. J Chem Educ 2019:2197–206.
[124] Feng L, Chang J, Jiang K, Xue H, Liu C, Cai WB, Xing W, Zhang J. Nanostructured
palladium catalyst poisoning depressed by cobalt phosphide in the electro-
oxidation of formic acid for fuel cells. Nano Energy 2016:355–61.

[125] Brightman E, Ivey DG, Brett DJL, Brandon NP. The effect of current density on

H2S-poisoning of nickel-based solid oxide fuel cell anodes. J Power Sources 2011;
17:7182–7.

[126] Ren P, Pei P, Li Y, Wu Z, Chen D, Huang S. Degradation mechanisms proton
exchange membrane fuel cell under typical automotive operating conditions.
Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;80:100859.

[127] Adarsh KS, Chandrasekaran N, Chakrapani V. In-situ spectroscopic techniques as

critical evaluation tools for electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction: a mini
review. Front Chem 2020;8:137.

[128] McPherson I, Ash PA, Jones L, Varambhia A, Jacobs RMJ, Vincent KA.

Electrochemical CO oxidation at platinum on carbon studied through analysis of
anomalous in situ IR spectra. J Phys Chem C 2017;32:17176–87.

[129] Du R, Jin W, Hübner R, Zhou L, Hu Y, Eychmüller A. Engineering multimetallic
aerogels for pH-universal HER and ORR electrocatalysis. Adv Energy Mater 2020;
12:1903857.

[130] Campos-Rold ́an CA, Gonz ́alez-Huerta RG, Alonso-Vante N. Experimental protocol
for HOR and ORR in alkaline electrochemical measurements. J Electrochem Soc
2018;15:J3001–7.

[131] Huang J, Du C, Nie J, Zhou H, Zhang X, Chen J. Encapsulated Rh nanoparticles in

N-doped porous carbon polyhedrons derived from ZIF-8 for efficient HER and
ORR electrocatalysis. Electrochim Acta 2019:134982.

[132] Ray A, Mukhopadhyay I, Pati RK. Electrocatalysts for fuel cells and hydrogen

evolution: theory to design. London: IntechOpen; 2018.

[133] Nakagawa N, Abdelkareem MA, Takino D, Ishikawa T, Tsujiguchi T. PAN Based

Carbon Nanofibers as an Active ORR Catalyst for DMFC. ECS Trans 2011;1:
2219–29.

[134] Beltr ́an DE, Litster S. Half-wave potential or mass activity? Characterizing

platinum group metal-free fuel cell catalysts by rotating disk electrodes. ACS
Energy Lett 2019;5:1158–61.

[135] Wang C, Ma L, Liao L, Bai S, Long R, Zuo M, Xiong Y. A unique platinum-graphene
hybrid structure for high activity and durability in oxygen reduction reaction. Sci
Rep 2013;1:2580.

[136] Wang YH, Pegis ML, Mayer JM, Stahl SS. Molecular cobalt catalysts for O2

reduction: low-overpotential production of H2O2 and comparison with iron-based
catalysts. J Am Chem Soc 2017;46:16458–61.

[137] Sun Y, Sinev I, Ju W, Bergmann A, Dresp S, Kühl S, Sp ̈ori C, Schmies H, Wang H,

Bernsmeier D, Paul B, Schmack R, Kraehnert R, Roldan Cuenya B, Strasser P.
Efficient electrochemical hydrogen peroxide production from molecular oxygen
on nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon catalysts. ACS Catal 2018;4:2844–56.

[138] Qiao J, Saito M, Hayamizu K, Okada T. Degradation of perfluorinated ionomer
membranes for PEM fuel cells during processing with H2O2. J Electrochem Soc
2006;6:A967–74.

[139] Hongsirikarn K, Mo X, Goodwin JG, Creager S. Effect of H2O2  on Nafion®

properties and conductivity at fuel cell conditions. J Power Sources 2011;6:
3060–72.

[140] Rodgers MP, Bonville LJ, Kunz HR, Slattery DK, Fenton JM. Fuel cell

perfluorinated sulfonic acid membrane degradation correlating accelerated stress
testing and lifetime. Chem Rev 2012;11:6075–103.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104422

T. Eisa et al.

[141] Xiao S, Zhang H, Bi C, Zhang Y, Ma Y, Li X, Zhong H, Zhang Y. Membrane

[172] Wang J, Yu F, Guo Z, Yan L, Wang X. Three-dimensional flower-like SnS2-

degradation mitigation using zirconia as a hydrogen peroxide decomposition
catalyst. J Power Sources 2010;24:8000–5.

[142] Zhou R, Zheng Y, Jaroniec M, Qiao SZ. Determination of the electron transfer

number for the oxygen reduction reaction: from theory to experiment. ACS Catal
2016;7:4720–8.

[143] Lee SJ, Pyun SI, Lee SK, Kang SJL. Fundamentals of rotating disc and ring–disc

electrode techniques and their applications to study of the oxygen reduction
mechanism at Pt/C electrode for fuel cells. Isr J Chem 2008;3-4:215–28.

[144] Sohn GJ, Choi HJ, Jeon IY, Chang DW, Dai L, Baek JB. Water-dispersible,
sulfonated hyperbranched poly(ether-ketone) grafted multiwalled carbon
nanotubes as oxygen reduction catalysts. ACS Nano 2012;7:6345–55.
[145] Ferrero GA, Fuertes AB, Sevilla M, Titirici MM. Efficient metal-free N-doped

mesoporous carbon catalysts for ORR by a template-free approach. Carbon 2016:
179–87.

[146] Masa J, Batchelor-McAuley C, Schuhmann W, Compton RG. Koutecky-Levich

analysis applied to nanoparticle modified rotating disk electrodes: electrocatalysis
or misinterpretation. Nano Res 2014;1:71–8.

[147] Xu S, Kim Y, Higgins D, Yusuf M, Jaramillo TF, Prinz FB. Building upon the

Koutecky-Levich equation for evaluation of next-generation oxygen reduction
reaction catalysts. Electrochim Acta 2017:99–108.

supported bimetallic zeolite imidazole compound with enhanced electrocatalytic
activity for methanol oxidation. Front Mater Sci 2021;1:166–75.
[173] Jia J, Zhao L, Chang Y, Jia M, Wen Z. Understanding the growth of NiSe
nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide as efficient electrocatalysts for
methanol oxidation reaction. Ceram Int 2020;46:10023–8.

[174] Shi Y, Li H, Ao D, Chang Y, Xu A, Jia M, Jia J. 3D nickel diselenide architecture on
nitrogen-doped carbon as a highly efficient electrode for the electrooxidation of
methanol and urea. J Alloy Compd 2021:160919.

[175] Hao P, Zhu W, Li L, Tian J, Xie J, Lei F, Cui G, Zhang Y, Tang B. Nickel

incorporated Co9S8 nanosheet arrays on carbon cloth boosting overall urea
electrolysis. Electrochim Acta 2020:135883.

[176] Wang G, Wang H, Chen T, Tan Y. Ni1(cid:0) xMxSe2  (M = Fe, Co, Cu) nanowires as

anodes for ammonia-borane electrooxidation and the derived Ni1(cid:0) xMxSe2(cid:0) yOOH
ultrathin nanosheets as efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution. J Mater
Chem A 2019;27:16372–86.

[177] Zhao L, Chang Y, Jia M, Jia J, Wen Z. Monodisperse Ni0.85Se nanocrystals on rGO
for high-performance urea electrooxidation. J Alloy Compd 2021:156751.
[178] Chandran M, Raveendran A, Vinoba M, Vijayan BK, Bhagiyalakshmi M. Nickel-
decorated MoS2/MXene nanosheets composites for electrocatalytic oxidation of
methanol. Ceram Int 2021.

[148] Treimer S, Tang A, Johnson DC. A consideration of the application of Koutecký-
Levich plots in the diagnoses of charge-transfer mechanisms at rotated disk
electrodes. Electroanalysis 2002;3:165–71.

[149] Yin F, Liu Y, Wang C, Liu H. Assessing the electron transfer and oxygen mass

[179] Radhakrishnan T, Aparna MP, Chatanathodi R, Sandhyarani N. Amorphous
rhenium disulfide nanosheets: a methanol-tolerant transition metal
dichalcogenide catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. ACS Appl Nano Mater
2019;7:4480–8.

transfer of the oxygen reduction reaction using a new electrode kinetic equation.
Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;23:16159–66.

[150] Das D, Raut V, Biswas A, Sharma VK, Yusuf SM. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)

production in oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) proceeding in alkaline medium
employing zinc based metal-organic framework. AIP Conf Proc 2019;1:030546.

[151] Verjulio RW, Santander J, Ma J, Alonso-Vante N. Selective CoSe2/C cathode
catalyst for passive air-breathing alkaline anion exchange membrane μ-direct
methanol fuel cell (AEM-μDMFC). Int J Hydrogen Energy 2016;43:19595–600.
[152] Carbonio EA, Rodrigues-Filho UP, Mesquita A, Landers R, Gonzalez ER. Oxygen

reduction on methanol-tolerant carbon-supported PtxSy  nanoparticles prepared
by a single-step low-temperature method. Electrocatalysis 2019;10:516–23.

[153] Guo F, Ye K, Du M, Huang X, Cheng K, Wang G, Cao D. Electrochemical

impedance analysis of urea electro-oxidation mechanism on nickel catalyst in
alkaline medium. Electrochim Acta 2016:474–82.

[180] Kiani M, Zhang J, Chen J, Luo Y, Chen Y, Fan J, Wang G, Wang R. Facile synthesis

of magnesium ferrite nanoparticles supported on nitrogen and sulfur co-doped
carbon black as an efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction.
J Nanopart Res 2019;5:99.

[181] Yu B, Jin J, Wu H, Wang S, Xia Q, Liu H. Iron and nickel doped CoSe2 as efficient
non precious metal catalysts for oxygen reduction. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;1:
236–42.

[182] Grinberg VA, Mayorova NA, Pasynskii AA, Modestov AD, Shiryaev AA,

Vysotskii VV, Nogai AS. Nanostructured platinum-free catalysts of oxygen
reduction based on metal chalcogenide cobalt clusters. Russ. J Coord Chem 2018;
10:589–95.

[183] Burragoni SG, Koyyada G, Vattikuti SVP, Nam ND, Kim JH. One-pot synthesis of
flower-like MoSe2  nanoflakes for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and
methanol oxidation. Mater Lett 2021;282:128678.

[154] Chang BY, Park SM. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Annu Rev Anal

[184] Luo Q, Peng M, Sun X, Asiri AM. In situ growth of nickel selenide nanowire arrays

Chem 2010;1:207–29.

[155] Chen Y, Yoo S, Choi Y, Kim JH, Ding Y, Pei K, et al. A highly active, CO2-tolerant
electrode for the oxygen reduction reaction. Energy Environ Sci 2018;9:2458–66.
[156] Hosseini MG, Zardari P. Electrocatalytical study of carbon supported Pt, Ru and
bimetallic Pt–Ru nanoparticles for oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline media.
Appl Surf Sci 2015:223–31.

[157] Bera B, Kar T, Chakraborty A, Neergat M. Influence of nitrogen-doping in carbon

on equivalent distributed resistance and capacitance – Implications to
electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction reaction. J. Electroanalyt Chem 2017;805:
184–92.

[158] Ruiz-Camacho B, Baltazar Vera JC, Medina-Ramírez A, Fuentes-Ramírez R,

Carre ̃no-Aguilera G. EIS analysis of oxygen reduction reaction of Pt supported on
different substrates. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;51:30364–73.

[159] Huang T, Fang H, Mao S, Yu J, Qi L. In-situ synthesized TiC@CNT as high-
performance catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction. Carbon 2018:566–73.
[160] Baqu ́e LC, Soldati AL, Teixeira-Neto E, Troiani HE, Schreiber A, Serquis AC.

Degradation of oxygen reduction reaction kinetics in porous
La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3-δ  cathodes due to aging-induced changes in surface
chemistry. J Power Sources 2017:166–72.

[161] Lasia A. Impedance of porous electrodes. J Electroanalyt Chem 1995;1:27–33.
[162] Lucia U. Overview on fuel cells. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014:164–9.
[163] Maeda K, Domen K. New non-oxide photocatalysts designed for overall water

splitting under visible light. J Phys Chem C 2007;22:7851–61.

[164] Asahi R, Morikawa T, Ohwaki T, Aoki K, Taga Y. Visible-light photocatalysis in

nitrogen-doped titanium oxides. Science 2001;5528:269–71.

[165] Alexander AM, Hargreaves JS. Alternative catalytic materials: carbides, nitrides,

on nickel foil for methanol electro-oxidation in alkaline media. RSC Adv 2015;
106:87051–4.

[185] Mi L, Sun H, Ding Q, Chen W, Liu C, Hou H, Zheng Z, Shen C. 3D hierarchically

patterned tubular NiSe with nano-/microstructures for Li ion battery design.
Dalton Trans 2012;40:12595–600.

[186] Sayed ET, Eisa T, HO Mohamed, Abdelkareem MA, Allagui A, Alawadhi H,

Chae KJ. Direct urea fuel cells: challenges and opportunities. J Power Sources
2019:159–75.

[187] Tao H, Liu S, Luo JL, Choi P, Liu Q, Xu Z. Descriptor of catalytic activity of metal
sulfides for oxygen reduction reaction: a potential indicator for mineral flotation.
J Mater Chem A 2018;20:9650–6.

[188] Zhang L, Zhao Y, Banis MN, Adair K, Song Z, Yang L, Markiewicz M, Li J, Wang S,
Li R, Ye S, Sun X. Rational design of porous structures via molecular layer
deposition as an effective stabilizer for enhancing Pt ORR performance. Nano
Energy 2019:111–8.

[189] Wang S, Zhu E, Huang Y, Heinz H. Direct correlation of oxygen adsorption on

platinum-electrolyte interfaces with the activity in the oxygen reduction reaction.
Sci Adv 2021;24:eabb1435.

[190] Feng Y, Gago A, Timperman L, Alonso-Vante N. Chalcogenide metal centers for

oxygen reduction reaction: activity and tolerance. Electrochim Acta 2011;3:
1009–22.

[191] Kim SJ, Lee SC, Lee C, Kim MH, Lee Y. Evolution of silver to a better

electrocatalyst: water-assisted oxygen reduction reaction at silver chloride
nanowires in alkaline solution. Nano Energy 2018:134–43.

[192] Kulkarni A, Siahrostami S, Patel A, Nørskov JK. Understanding catalytic activity

trends in the oxygen reduction reaction. Chem Rev 2018;5:2302–12.

phosphides and amorphous boron alloys. Chem Soc Rev 2010;11:4388–401.

[193] Karlberg GS, Rossmeisl J, Nørskov JK. Estimations of electric field effects on the

[166] Chhowalla M, Shin HS, Eda G, Li LJ, Loh KP, Zhang H. The chemistry of two-

dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets. Nat Chem 2013;
4:263.

[167] Guascito MR, Chirizzi D, Filippo E, Milano F, Tepore A. Synthesis and

characterization of Te nanotubes decorated with Pt nanoparticles for a fuel cell
anode/cathode working at a neutral pH. Catalysts 2019;4:328.

[168] Mollarasouli F, Majidi MR, Asadpour-Zeynali K. Facile synthesis of ZnTe/

Quinhydrone nanocomposite as a promising catalyst for electro-oxidation of
ethanol in alkaline medium. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;39:22085–97.
[169] Huang H, Guo X, Yan M, Meng W, Xue Y, Xiao D, Jiang Q, Yang L, He H. Well-
dispersive Pt nanoparticles grown on 3D nitrogen- and sulfur-codoped graphene
nanoribbon architectures: highly active electrocatalysts for methanol oxidation.
Mater Today Energy 2021;21:100814.

oxygen reduction reaction based on the density functional theory. Phys Chem
Chem Phys 2007;37:5158–61.

[194] Yu L, Pan X, Cao X, Hu P, Bao X. Oxygen reduction reaction mechanism on
nitrogen-doped graphene: a density functional theory study. J Catal 2011;1:
183–90.

[195] Zhao S, Wang K, Zou X, Gan L, Du H, Xu C, Kang F, Duan W, Li J. Group VB

transition metal dichalcogenides for oxygen reduction reaction and strain-
enhanced activity governed by p-orbital electrons of chalcogen. Nano Res 2019;4:
925–30.

[196] Ford DC, Nilekar AU, Xu Y, Mavrikakis M. Partial and complete reduction of O2

by hydrogen on transition metal surfaces. Surf Sci 2010;19:1565–75.

[197] Kolobov AV, Tominaga J. Bulk TMDCs: review of structure and principles. two-

dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenides. Cham: Springer; 2016.

[170] Yi Y, Li J, Cui C. Trimetallic FeCoNi disulfide nanosheets for CO2-emission-free

[198] Lee TH, Elliott SR. Chemical bonding in chalcogenides: the concept of multicenter

methanol conversion. Chin Chem Lett 2021.

hyperbonding. Adv Mater 2020;28:2000340.

[171] Li J, Wang C, Shang H, Wang Y, You H, Xu H, et al. Metal-modified PtTe2

[199] Alonso-Vante N. Transition metal chalcogenides for oxygen reduction. London:

nanorods: surface reconstruction for efficient methanol oxidation electrocatalysis.
Chem Eng J 2021:130319.

Springer; 2013.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104423

T. Eisa et al.

[200] Gao MR, Jiang J, Yu SH. Solution-based synthesis and design of late transition

metal chalcogenide materials for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Small 2012;1:
13–27.

[201] Cao D, Wieckowski A, Inukai J, Alonso-Vante N. Oxygen reduction reaction on
ruthenium and rhodium nanoparticles modified with selenium and sulfur.
J Electrochem Soc 2006;5:A869–74.

[202] Schmidt TJ, Paulus UA, Gasteiger HA, Alonso-Vante N, Behm RJ. Oxygen

reduction on Ru1. 92Mo0. 08SeO4, Ru/carbon, and Pt/carbon in pure and
methanol-containing electrolytes. J Electrochem Soc 2000;7:2620–4.
[203] Ramaswamy N, Allen RJ, Mukerjee S. Electrochemical kinetics and X-ray
absorption spectroscopic investigations of oxygen reduction on chalcogen-
modified ruthenium catalysts in alkaline media. J Phys Chem C 2011;25:
12650–64.

[204] Lewera A, Inukai J, Zhou WP, Cao D, Duong HT, Alonso-Vante N, Wieckowski A.

Chalcogenide oxygen reduction reaction catalysis: x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy with Ru, Ru/Se and Ru/S samples emersed from aqueous media.
Electrochim Acta 2007;18:5759–65.

[205] Tritsaris GA, Nørskov JK, Rossmeisl J. Trends in oxygen reduction and methanol
activation on transition metal chalcogenides. Electrochim Acta 2011;27:9783–8.

[206] Gago AS, Morales-Acosta D, Arriaga LG, Alonso-Vante N. Carbon supported

ruthenium chalcogenide as cathode catalyst in a microfluidic formic acid fuel cell.
J Power Sources 2011;3:1324–8.

[207] Park IS, Kim OH, Kim JW, Cho YH, Sung YE. Carbon-supported Pt-RuS2

nanocomposite as hydrogen oxidation reaction catalysts for fuel cells. J Appl
Electrochem 2016;1:77–83.

[208] Zhang Y, Shao J, Tao Y, Wang S. Pentlandite-MoS2 as sulfur tolerant anode

materials for solid oxide fuel cells. J Alloy Compd 2018:477–83.

[209] Ghoshal S, Jia Q, Li J, Campos F, Chisholm CRI, Mukerjee S. Electrochemical and

in situ spectroscopic evidences toward empowering ruthenium-based
chalcogenides as solid acid fuel cell cathodes. ACS Catal 2017;1:581–91.
[210] Ma J, Habrioux A, Morais C, Alonso-Vante N. Electronic modification of Pt via Ti
and Se as tolerant cathodes in air-breathing methanol microfluidic fuel cells. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2014;27:13820–6.

Tasnim Eisa is an Environmental Engineering PhD candidate
in Korea Maritime and Ocean University. She received her MS
pursuing  the  same  field  after  transferring  from  Energy  Engi-
neering.  She  finished  her  bachelor  in  Energy  Engineering  at
University of Sharjah, UAE. Her research focuses on materials
preparation,  electrochemical  characterization,  fuel  cells,  and
electrochemical methods application for waste removal. She is
a published first author in number of articles discussing fuel
catalysis  towards  fuel  cells  application.  She  also  actively
participated as a co-author in numerous internationally coor-
dinated articles.

Prof. Mohammad Ali Abdelkareem got his PhD from Japan
in 2008. Right now, he is professor in sustainable and renew-
able  energy  engineering  department,  university  of  Sharjah,
UAE. He is working on the development of the electrodes for
the  different  electrochemical  energy  conversion/storage  de-
vices, such as direct methanol fuel cells, direct urea fuel cells,
and  supercapacitors.  He  is  editor  in  International  journal  of
thermofluids and journal of carbon resources and conversion.

Dr.  Dipak  Ashok Jadhav  did PhD  at  the Indian  Institute  of
Technology (IIT) Kharagpur on the scaling up microbial fuel
cell  for  sanitation  applications.  Currently,  he  is  serving  as  a
Research  Professor  at  Department  of  Environmental  Engi-
neering at Korea Maritime and Ocean University (KMOU). He
has received several prestigious awards and fellowship sucha
as Young Technological Innovation Award (GYTI). To his credit
there are over 40 papers in peer-reviewed SCI journals and 15
book  chapters  (3  books)  in  the  area  of  bioelectrochemical
systems  and  bioenergy.  He  is  also  serving  as  editorial  board
member for many International Journals.

Dr.  Hend  Omar  Mohamed  has  received  her  Ph.D.  in  bio
nanosystem  engineering  at  Chonbuk  national  university,
Jeonju,  South  Korea.  She  has  started  her  career  as  a  post-
doctoral  researcher  in  the  National  Institute  of  Environment
Research  center  in  Korean  Maritime  and  Ocean  University,
Busan  (South  Korea).  She  has  strong  knowledge  in  bio-
electrochemistry, wastewater treatment, and the fabrication of
advanced  materials.  She  has  extensive  experience,  more
than10  years,  at  synthesizing  nanomaterials  such  as  nano-
catalysts  and  nanofibers  electrodes  for  the  different  fuel  cell
applications,  especially  microbial  electrolysis  cell,  microbial
fuel cells, ethanol methanol, and urea fuel cells.

Prof. Enas Taha Sayed is associate professor at chemical en-
gineering  department,  Minia  university,  Egypt.  She  got  her
PhD  in bio-electrochemical  systems from  chemical and  envi-
ronmental  engineering  department,  Gunma  university,
Gunma, Japan. Dr. Enas’ research focuses on the fabrication of
high  conductive,  high  surface  area,  and  biocompatible  elec-
trodes of the MFCs for simultaneous wastewater treatment and
electricity  generation.  Dr  Enas  is  Editor  in  Scientific  reports
(Nature).

Prof. Abdul-Ghani Olabi is the Director of Sustainable Energy
and Power Systems Research center at the University of Shar-
jah “UoS”. Previously, he was Head of Department, Director of
research  institute,  and  many  other  academic  and  industrial
position. He has supervised postgraduate research students (38
PhD) to successful completion. He has patented two innovative
projects  on  PEM  Fuel  Cells.  He  is  the  Subject  Editor  of  the
Elsevier  Energy  Journal,  EiC  of  the  Encyclopedia  of  Smart
Materials (Elsevier), Editor of the Reference Module of Mate-
rials  Science  and  Engineering  (Elsevier),  EiC  of  Renewable
Energy  section  of  Energies  and  board  member  of  few  other
journals.

Prof.  Pedro  Casta ̃no  is  an  Associate  Professor  of  Chemical
Engineering  in  the  King  Abdullah  University  of  Science  and
Technology (KAUST), Physical Science and Engineering (PSE)
division and KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC), where he leads the
Multiscale Reaction Engineering (MuRE) group. He completed
his PhD–Chemical Engineering degree in 2006 from the Uni-
versity  of  the  Basque  Country  (UPV/EHU),  where  he  is  an
Adjunct Professor. His-research interests are in catalytic reac-
tion engineering for waste valorization, sustainable production
of chemicals and  hydrogen, catalyst deactivation, and multi-
scale modeling. More information can be found at https://mu
re.kaust.edu.sa.

Prof.  Kyu-Jung  Chae  is  a  Full  Professor  of  Environmental
Engineering at Korea Maritime and Ocean University, and also
serves  as  a  Vide-Dean  of  the  College  of  Ocean  Science  and
Engineering.  He  completed  his  PhD  in  environmental  engi-
neering  from  Gwangju  Institute  of  Science  and  Technology,
South Korea, 2010. He has led more than 50 research projects,
published 122 papers for highly ranked journals and achieved
40 patents. Prof. Chae’s areas of expertise span a wide range of
environmental  science  and
including  bio-
electrochemical cells, biohydrogen, advanced water treatment,
and environmental nanomaterials. He is an Associate Editor of
Environmental  Engineering  Research  journal,  Frontiers  in

technology,

Marine Science, and Energies.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience94(2023)10104424
