Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Advances in thermal energy storage: Fundamentals and applications

Hafiz Muhammad Ali a,b, *, Tauseef-ur Rehman c, Müslüm Arıcı d, Zafar Said e,f,g,
Benjamin Durakovi ́c h, Hayder I. Mohammed i, Rajan Kumar j, Manish K. Rathod k,
Ozge Buyukdagli h, Mohamed Teggar l
a Mechanical Engineering Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, 31261, Saudi Arabia
b Interdisciplinary Research Center for Renewable Energy and Power Systems (IRC-REPS), King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, 31261, Saudi
Arabia
c School of Mechanical Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41566, South Korea
d Mechanical Engineering Department, Engineering Faculty, Kocaeli University, Umuttepe Campus, 41001, Kocaeli, Turkey
e Department of Sustainable and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of Sharjah, P.O. Box 27272, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
f Department of Industrial and Mechanical Engineering, Lebanese American University (LAU), Byblos, Lebanon
g U.S.-Pakistan Center for Advanced Studies in Energy (USPCAS-E), National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan
h Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, International University of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
i Department of Physics, College of Education, University of Garmian, Kalar, Kurdistan, Iraq
j Department of Mechanical Engineering, Dr B R Ambedkar National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar, Punjab, 144011, India
k Mechanical Engineering Department, Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology, Surat, Gujarat, 395007, India
l Laboratory of Mechanics, Laghouat University, 03000, Laghouat, Algeria

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: Christof Schultz

Keywords:
Energy storage
Latent heat
PCMs
Smart materials
Thermal energy

Thermal  energy  storage  (TES)  is  increasingly  important  due  to  the  demand-supply  challenge  caused  by  the
intermittency  of  renewable  energy  and  waste  heat  dissipation  to  the  environment.  This  paper  discusses  the
fundamentals  and  novel  applications  of  TES  materials  and  identifies  appropriate  TES  materials  for  particular
applications. The selection and ranking of suitable materials are discussed through multi-criteria decision making
(MCDM) techniques considering chemical, technical, economic and thermal performance. The recent advance-
ments in TES materials, including their development, performance and applications are discussed in detail. Such
materials  show  enhanced  thermal  conductivity,  reduced  supercooling,  and  the  advantage  of  having  multiple
phase  change  temperatures  (cascade  PCMs).  Nano-enhanced  PCMs  have  found  the  thermal  conductivity
enhancement of up to 32% but the latent heat is also reduced by up to 32%. MXene is a recently developed 2D
nanomaterial with enhanced electrochemical properties showing thermal conductivity and efficiency up to 16%
and  94%  respectively.  Shape-stabilized  PCMs  are  able  to  enhance  the  heat  transfer  rate  several  times  (3–10
times)  and  are  found  to  be  best  suited  for  solar  collector  and  PV-based  heat  recovery  systems.  Cascade  and
molten  slats PCMs find their best applications in  the thermal management  of buildings and the power  sector
(concentrated  solar  plants).  Microencapsulated,  nanoPCMs  and  shape-stabilized  PCMs  effectively  reduce  the
supercooling of hydrated salts. The recent trends of TES materials in various applications, including building,
industrial, power, food storage, smart textiles, thermal management, and desalination are also briefly discussed.
Finally, future research in advanced energy storage materials is also addressed in this study, which is intended to
help create new insights that will revolutionize the thermal management field.

1. Introduction

An energy analysis predicts a 48% increase in energy utilization by
2040  [1].  According  to  the  International  Energy  Agency,  total  global
final energy use has doubled in the last 50 years. In 2020, the energy

consumption  was  dropped  by  4.64%  [2].  The  decrease  in  2020  is
reportedly due to the slowdown in commercial activities caused by the
Covid-19 crisis. The finite reserves of fossil fuels, their GHG emissions
upon combustion,  and  their  rising  prices  impose an  increasing  use of
renewable  energy  toward  green  and  clean  energy  sustainability.

* Corresponding author. Mechanical Engineering Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, 31261, Saudi Arabia.

E-mail address: hafiz.ali@kfupm.edu.sa (H.M. Ali).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101109
Received 13 September 2022; Received in revised form 16 July 2023; Accepted 17 July 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)101109Availableonline29September20230360-1285/©2023ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

H.M. Ali et al.

Sustainable sources such as solar power, ocean waves, wind, and biogas
have  been  acting  as  key  tasks  in  restoring  the  real  equilibrium  and
supplying the demands of the growing population requirement [3]. This
demand has guided the development of efficient methods for saving and
managing energy. The intermittent nature of renewable energy sources,
notably  solar  and  wind  energy,  poses  a  great  challenge  to  the  power
sector, making it difficult to meet the rigorous power demands [4]. An
unstable supply will lead to an increased problem in power grid peak
shaving.  Additionally,  current  renewable  energy  technologies  cannot
balance the power market demand through immense inventory storage.
Various industries such as health care, food, agriculture and data centres
require  24  h  continuous  energy  supply.  The  gap  between  the  energy
demand and supply can also be caused by the difference in the energy
availability time and consumption, the difference in energy cost at peak
hours, and the distance between the energy source and the consumption
site. Today, TES systems are prevalent and are applicable in engineering
solutions  such  as  integrating  renewable  energy  systems  and  shifting
peak load energy demand to off-peak. The supply—demand cannot be
met unless the incorporation of energy storage systems for the smooth
supply of power. Otherwise, fossil fuel consumption would be increased
to ensure a smooth energy supply, resulting in continuous depletion and
global  warming.  TES  systems  are  also  useful  engineering  solutions  in
bridging gaps between energy supply and demand in cooling or heating
applications.

Hence, researchers introduced energy storage systems which operate
during the peak energy harvesting time and deliver the stored energy
during the high-demand hours. Large-scale applications such as power
plants,  geothermal  energy  units,  nuclear  plants,  smart  textiles,  build-
ings, the food industry, and solar energy capture and storage are ideal
candidates for TES systems.

Even though each thermal energy source has its specific context, TES
is a critical function that enables energy conservation across all main
thermal energy sources [5]. In Europe, it has been predicted that over
1.4 × 1015 Wh/year can be stored, and 4 × 1011 kg of CO2 releases are
prevented in buildings and manufacturing areas by extensive usage of
heat and cold applications  [6]. TES section saves around 12 MWth  of
cooling in municipalities like Nagar, Bangalore, New Delhi, and Chen-
nai. Adopting this technique in the country’s industrial region has been
gradually happening for over a decade [7]. Including Europe and Asia,
other  regions  have  also  been  focusing  on  the  implications  of  energy
storage technologies as current research has given rise to an exponential
upsurge  in  scientific  publications.  Numerous  experimental  studies
explored the viability of TES using various configurations. For instance,
Sajawal  et  al.  [8]  showed  the  performance  enhancement  of  the
double-pass  solar  air  heater  by  3  h  when  a  thermal  storage  medium
(PCM) was used. The overall efficiency of the system was augmented by
18.7%. Bouadila et al. [9] analyzed the flat plate solar collector system
integrated with the TES material and found a back period of 5 h after
sunset at the uniform heat rate of 400 W/hr with an energy efficiency of
25–35%. Lin et al. [10] calculated the backup period for the hot water
supply  at  38
C  and  found  it  3  h  after  sunset  using  TES  medium  as
paraffin. The most popular TES material is the phase change material
(PCM) because of its extensive energy storage capacity at nearly con-
stant temperature. Some of the sensible TES systems, such as, thermo-
cline packed-bed systems have higher energy densities than low grade
PCMs  storing  energy  at  lower  temperatures.  Such  systems  are
cost-effective  and  commercially  mature  [11].  Many  other  advanced
PCMs  and  TES  materials  have  been  discussed  in  the  later  section
including their fundamentals and thermophysical properties.

◦

A variety of review articles existed previously on similar topics, for
instance, Huang et al. [12] and Kenisarin and Kanisarina [13] discussed
the shape-stabilized PCMs and the summary of their applications. Zhang
et al. [14] discussed the fundamentals of heat transfer in encapsulated
PCMs. Li et al. [15] reviewed the TES system based on shell and tube
thermal devices and molten salts-based PCMs and their application in
power  generation.  Sarbu  and  Dorca  [16]  provided  details  about  the

thermophysical  properties  and  heat  transfer  characteristics of  various
PCMs while omitting the application aspect. Wu et al. [17], Fan et al.
[18], Liu et al. [19], Qureshi et al. [20], Jiang et al. [21], and Zhang
et al. [22] discussed the ways to enhance the thermal conductivity of the
PCMs. Lin et al. [23] also overviewed the basic applications of PCMs
shortly. Ibrahim et al. [24] and Rehman et al. [25] reviewed the heat
transfer  enhancement  techniques  for  PCMs.  Numerous  researchers
published  reviews  and  research  studies  on  particular  applications,
including thermochemical energy storage for high temperature source
and  power  generation  [26–29],  battery  thermal  management  [30],
textiles [31,32], food, buildings [33–36], heating systems [37] and solar
power  plants  [38].  The  scope  of  this  review  paper  is  to  provide  an
extensive and detailed overview of TES materials mainly the PCMs. It
covers a wide range of topics, including the fundamentals and thermo-
physical, ranking and selection process of PCMs, recent advancements,
novel  applications  and  the  challenges  of  their  implementation.  By
exploring these various aspects, this paper aims to provide a complete
and  comprehensive  understanding  of  PCMs  and  their  potential  uses,
limitations, and areas for improvement.

Section 2 delivers insights into the mechanism of TES and classifi-
cations based on temperature, period and storage media. TES materials,
typically PCMs, lack thermal conductivity, which slows down the energy
storage and retrieval rate. There are other issues with PCMs for instance,
inorganic PCMs (hydrated salts) depict supercooling, corrosion, thermal
degradation and leakage of the molten PCM. Section 3 broadly presents
the advanced PCMs including nano-enhanced PCMs (NePCMs), cascade
PCMs (multiple PCMs in descending melting order), Form-stable PCMs
(FS-PCMs), encapsulated and hybrid PCMs. These advanced materials
significantly  improve  the  thermophysical  properties  reported  by
numerous researchers [39–52]. Section 4 discusses the applications of
PCMs in various sectors. Based on the suitability of the various types of
PCMs, numerous applications of the TES materials have been discussed
in detail. It involves buildings, solar energy storage, heat sinks and heat
exchangers,  desalination,  thermal  management,  smart  textiles,  photo-
voltaic thermal regulation, the food industry and thermoelectric appli-
cations. As described earlier, PCMs have some limitations based on their
thermophysical  properties  and  compatibility  with  storage  containers.
The limitations and the challenges associated with the PCMs have been
discussed based on important investigations. Low thermal conductivity,
supercooling,  leakage  of  the  molten  PCMs,  thermal  instability,  phase
segregation  and  corrosion  of  the  energy  storage  containers  are  un-
avoidable  challenges.  All  such  limitations  and  challenges  have  been
gone  through  a  detailed  discussion,  and  recommendations  have  been
proposed  concerning  prospects.  At  the  end  of  this  article,  the  pre-
liminary  ranking  and  selection  procedure  of  the  PCMs  is  introduced
using MCDM, which helps select suitable materials for typical applica-
tions. Fig. 1 picturizes the brief structure of the paper. The literature,
discussions and recommendations will assist future researchers and in-
dustrialists towards the commercialization of TES materials on a large
scale.

2. Thermal energy storage system

Renewable energy systems require energy storage, and TES is used
for  heating  and  cooling  applications  [53].  Unlike  photovoltaic  units,
solar systems predominantly harness the Sun’s thermal energy and have
distinct efficiencies. However, they rely on a radiation source for ther-
mal support. TES systems primarily store sensible and latent heat. Sen-
sible  heat  storage  (SHS)  involves  heating  a  solid  or  liquid  to  store
thermal  energy,  considering  specific  heat  and  temperature  variations
during phase change processes. Water is commonly used in SHS due to
its abundance and high specific heat, while other substances like oils,
molten  salts,  and  liquid  metals  are  employed  at  temperatures  above
100
C [54,55]. Latent heat storage (LHS) utilizes phase change mate-
rials  (PCMs)  that  absorb  or  release  heat  to  maintain  a  constant  tem-
perature. These PCMs have excellent heat storage properties [56–59].

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011092

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig. 1. Illustration of the main structure of the review paper.

Fig. 2. Families of phase change heat storage materials [64].

Fig.  2  illustrates  the  classification  of  TES  and  the  families  of  energy
storage materials. PCMs consists of three types: organic, inorganic, and
eutectic.  Organic  PCMs  includes  paraffin  wax,  which  releases  consid-
erable latent heat during crystallization, making it ideal for heat fusion
storage  [54,60],  and  non-paraffin  substances,  which  melt  and  freeze
without  phase  separation.  Inorganic  PCMs,  such  as  salt  hydrates  and
metallic substances, mimic the thermodynamics of melting and solidi-
fication,  and  maintain  consistent  fusion  temperatures  [61].  Eutectic
materials undergo simultaneous melting and freezing, ensuring minimal
segregation and lower likelihood of component separation during phase
transitions [62,63].

TES units can be classified into different types according to various
characteristics, as shown in Fig. 3. Thermal energy storage (TES) sys-
tems store heat or cold for later use and are classified into sensible heat
storage, latent heat storage, and thermochemical heat storage. Sensible
heat storage systems raise the temperature of a material to store heat.
Latent heat storage systems use PCMs to store heat through melting or
solidifying. Thermochemical heat storage systems store heat by breaking
or  forming  chemical  bonds.  TES  systems  find  applications  in  space

heating  and  cooling,  industrial  processes,  and  power  generation.  The
choice of TES system depends on factors such as the specific application,
desired  operating  temperature,  storage  duration,  and  efficiency  [65].
The latest applications and technologies of TES are concentrating solar
power systems [66,67], passive thermal management in batteries [68,
69], thermal storage in buildings [70,71], solar water heating [72], cold
storage [73], photovoltaic-thermal [74,75], storage integrated thermo-
photovoltaics  [76],  thermal  regulating  textiles  [77],  and  microelec-
tronics [78].

Various  models  are  utilized  to  improve  the  performance  of  the
thermal systems, involving design modification [79–81] integrating fins
[82,83], nano- or microparticles [84–86] encapsulation, and metal foam
[84,87–90]. Every method could be used alone or combined with two or
more  effects;  for  example,  nanomaterials  could  be  combined  with
extended surfaces or a porous medium to enhance heat [91,92].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011093

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig. 3. Classification of TES systems based on various criteria.

2.1. Based on storage media

2.1.1. Sensible heat storage

The three types of TES models include Sensible Heat Storage (SHS),
which uses materials like water, molten salts, and rocks to store heat.
These  systems  are  employed  in  space  heating  and  cooling,  industrial
processes, and power generation. Efficiency is influenced by the storage
material,  heat  source,  and  sink  temperatures,  with  improved  perfor-
mance achieved using high-specific heat capacity materials and specific
temperature conditions. Despite their benefits, including ease of design
and  low  operational  cost,  SHS  systems  have  lower  energy  density
compared  to  latent  heat  storage  and  are  more  vulnerable  to  thermal
shock [93].

SHS systems can be liquid or solid-based. Liquid systems are cheaper
but less energy dense and more thermally susceptible than solid ones
[94,95]. The choice depends on the application and system character-
istics [96]. Current SHS technologies include high-temperature systems
with  molten salts, concrete units with embedded  pipes, and rock  bed
units using boreholes for heat transfer. Large-scale water systems store
excess  thermal  energy  during  off-peak  periods  [97–100].  Advanced
Control Systems improve SHS management using predictive algorithms
and machine learning [101].

2.1.2. Latent heat storage

Latent heat storage (LHS) leverages phase changes in materials like
paraffins  and  salts  for  energy  storage,  used  in  heating,  cooling,  and
power generation. It relies on the absorption and release of heat during
phase  change,  the  efficiency  of  which  is  determined  by  factors  like
storage  material  and  temperature  [102].  While  boasting  high  energy
density and efficiency, LHS is hampered by costs and maintenance de-
mands.  The  advancements  include  composite  PCM  systems  and  ther-
mochemical units for more efficient heat storage and release, as well as
advanced encapsulation for durability and scalability [102–104]. Three
essential elements must be included for the classic model of the latent
heat  storage  unit  [105,106]:  (i)  The  working  material  (PCM),  which
stores and releases the heat. (ii) An enclosure that contains PCM, and
(iii) an HTF that exchanges heat with PCM across a separation wall. To
utilize any PCM with the LHTES efficiently, a few of the requirements
are summarized in Fig. 4.

2.1.3. Thermochemical storage systems

Thermo-chemical  storage  utilizes  chemical  reactions  to  store  and
release  heat.  It  can  convert  stored  energy  to  heat,  cool,  or  generate

Fig. 4. Conditions of PCMs utilized in LHTES.

electricity [107]. The technology includes open units, such as desiccant
units, where gaseous fluids release entropy, and closed systems where
entropy is released through a heat exchanger [108]. Thermo-chemical
storage has high performance per mass or volume, surpassing sensible
and latent heat storage systems, and can retain heat indefinitely [109].
Recent  advancements  include  the  development  of  advanced  reactive
materials  and  redox  reactions,  as  well  as  integration  with  renewable
energy sources for efficient capture and storage of excess thermal energy
[110–112].  Some  of  the  findings  were  based  on  the  sorption  and
CaCO3-based thermochemical systems which highlighted the in-depth
analyses of such systems [113–115].

2.1.4. A brief comparison among sensible, latent, and thermochemical
storage

As described earlier, TES systems are based on sensible heat storage,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011094

H.M. Ali et al.

latent heat storage or thermochemical storage [116]. TES system storage
medium can be based on latent heat, sensible heat, or chemical energy
[117]. Latent heat thermal energy storage (LHTES) systems are based on
PCMs and their latent heat of fusion/solidification. Depending on the
LHTES system application, the process can transition from solid to liquid
and liquid to solid or solid to solid [116]. Some advantages of LHTES are
a  high  heat  of  fusion,  non-reactivity,  non-toxicity,  compatibility  with
conventional  construction  materials,  and  relatively  low  cost.  As  a
disadvantage,  it  can  be  considered  flammability  of  organic  PCM,
possible leakage in the liquid state, low thermal conductivity in the vi-
cinity of 0.2 W/m K associated with organic PCMs, high costs associated
with eutectic PCMs, and corrosives. The advantages and disadvantages
of  a  sensible  heat  storage  system  are  availability,  non-flammability,
non-toxicity  [118],  low  environmental  impact  [119], and  low  capital
costs, applicable for higher temperature TES up to 1000
C. A low heat
storage capacity per storage material volume is considered a disadvan-
tage.  Thermochemical  heat  storage  systems  have  a  very  high  energy
density and storage capacity. Disadvantages include potential chemical
hazards,  complexities  associated  with  storing  and  releasing  thermal
energy and high capital costs.

◦

2.2. Based on temperature

There are numerous categories of TES operation methods because of
the multiple standards. The system can be divided into low-temperature
thermal energy storage (LTTES) and high-temperature thermal energy
storage (HTTES) if the underlying theory is related to the temperature
range of heat energy that is saved or the phase change temperature point
[120,121]. LTTES under 200
C has been extensively studied. LTTES is
used  in  solar  greenhouses  [122]  and  solar  cooking,  water,  and
air-heating  units  [54,123].  Sustainable  energy  and  waste  energy
reduction  require  HTTES.  Construction  materials,  mining,  and  metal-
lurgy industries recover lost to heat [124]. Most HTTES applications are
solar  thermal  energy  [125].  The  intermediate  temperature  range  is
◦
0–120
C, and water is the primary storage medium like space heating.
LTTES relies on HVAC and internal hot water [126,127].

◦

2.2.1. Low-temperature storage

Researchers have widely investigated the properties of various PCMs
while studying different parameters in this field. Using a low-working-
temperature  material  means  the  system  will  use  less  power.  Most  of
the commercial materials (such as paraffin, dual aqueous solutions, and
capric and lauric acid mixtures) described in the current section for cold
◦
storage (phase change temperatures up to 7
C) are presented by Cabeza
et al. [128].

These materials are promising alternatives to cold water for ordinary
cooling applications and allow efficient chilled storage. Peng et al. [129]
found that paraffin has a phase change temperature 12 and latent heat of
◦
128–198 kJ/kg. They also found phase change points of 13–187
C and
latent  heat  of  80–280  kJ/kg  for  non-paraffin  organics.  Huang  et  al.
[130] measure the heat capacity of an emulsion with 30 wt% paraffin
◦
and a phase change temperature of 9
C. 43 kJ/kg has a melting point of
◦
4–11.5
C and weak fusion heat. The phase change temperature of PCM
scale should be familiar to configure melting and solidification methods.
Incorrect phase change temperature in TES unit design will lower ca-
pacity and economic loss [131]. Based on the data from the literature,
the  operation  temperature  of  LTTES  systems  varies  between  7  and
(cid:0) 51
C for different materials. The material selection is based on the
application and the thermal diffusion, which generally increases with a
lower phase change temperature.

◦

2.2.2. High-temperature storage

Developed HTTES units and efficient thermal storage capability are
the  key  features  of  concentrated  solar  power  (CSP)  and  coal  power
stations. TES plays a significant role in CSP stations due to its exposure to
the supply’s intermittences and the transformation between the power

(cid:0) 2 s

demands  and  the  solar  provides.  The  CSP  plants,  from  sink  to  main
towers,  supplied  a  rise  in  the  concentrated  temperature,  needing  the
◦
C [132]. An innovative combined
improvement of HTTES to over 1000
coal fuel cell joint cycle unit, which contains the exergy recovery process
by recycling waste heat from fuel cells for coal steam, is planned for coal
power stations by Guan et al. [133]. They quantified that the TES unit
needs to be conducted in high density, temperature, and solid flux states
(cid:0) 1) to appropriately transmit thermal energy at
(some 102–103 kg m
C  [134].  The  sensible  heat  storage  model,  including  ce-
about  1000
ramics, has previously been developed and employed as the traditional
HTTES; though, the heat storage efficiency is weak for high-performance
applications,  requiring  HTTES  with  enhanced  heat  storage  capacity.
Latent heat storage (LHS) has received more interest in such cases. LHS
is used as a cutting-edge TES rather than SHS and is utilized in solar heat
applications  [135]  and  industrial  waste  heat  [136],  particularly  in
low-temperature  under  200
C.  The  selection  of  the  HTTES  materials
requires several conditions, as shown in Fig. 5.

◦

◦

When  choosing  a  PCM  [137,138],  the  system  consideration  is
important. Thus, HTTES design depends on material properties, thermal
capacity, operation conditions (temperature, HTF flow rate), required
output values, and system configuration and size [139]. Different ap-
plications of the nominated materials will affect heat storage efficiency
and  thermal  charging/discharging.  TES  unit  and  PCM  efficiency  are
intertwined. TES unit operation should be assessed using many param-
eters.  Kemick  [140]  advised  nominated  PCMs  to  consider  thermody-
namics, kinetics, chemistry, and economics.

2.3. Based on the time

TES  can  be  classified  as  long-term  and  short-term.  Salt  hydrates
reveal  promising  results  for  short-term  TES  in  residential  building
heating. Storage density, determined by mass, materials, and working
temperature, affects cost and space constraints [141]. Fig. 6 illustrates
key parameters of the TES system, including thermal capacity, power,
efficiency,  and  cycle  period.  The  storage  period  varies  based  on  the
operational medium: hot water (day to month), PCM (hour to month),
and chemical reactions (hour to day).

Short-term TES units store sensible heat using molten salts and liquid
metals, while certain latent heat units are suitable for short-term heat
storage. Salt hydrates have been studied extensively for short-term TES,
but  further  research  is  needed  to  understand  their  impact  in  various
building heating scenarios. Challenges like phase split and super-cooling
can impair TES effectiveness and lifespan [142]. LHS using salt hydrates
faces challenges such as high costs compared to water tank heat storage
and uncertain economic viability. Space systems have the maintenance
life  of  a  few months,  whereas commercial  HSU can  last 20–30 years.
Recent studies have focused on the thermal stability of high-temperature
PCMs.

Long-term TES units require significant PCM material, operate at low
◦
temperatures (below 80
C), and commonly utilize cost-effective natural
materials like rock, sand, and water. Chemical storage materials are also
suitable for long-term storage due to their heat-loss properties. Adequate
insulation reduces heat losses and extends storage time [143].

3. Advanced thermal energy storage materials

3.1. Addition of nanoparticles in the base PCMs (NanoPCMs)

PCMs with high energy density can store and release energy but have
lower thermal conductivity. Adding nanoparticles to PCMs can improve
thermal conductivity and alter the melting and solidification rate [108,
144].  Nanomaterials  like  aluminum  oxide  (Al2O3),  titanium  oxide
(TiO2),  gold  (Au),  silver  (Ag),  copper  oxide  (CuO),  zinc  oxide  (ZnO),
graphene  oxide  (GO),  silicon  carbide  (SiC),  titanium  carbide  (TiC),
single-walled  and  multi-walled  carbon  nanotubes  (SWCNTs  and
MWCNTs)  are  commonly  used  in  thermal  applications  [145,146].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011095

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig. 5. Conditions requirement of the materials used in an HTTES.

Fig. 6. Parameters of the TES system.

Adding nanoparticles to PCMs would alter thermal conductivity, latent
heat  capacity,  sub-cooling,  phase  change  temperature,  density,  and
viscosity. Babapoor et al. [147] described that introducing nanoparticles
into PCM improves thermal and rheological properties. Two techniques
for  preparing  nano-enhanced  PCM  are  the  single-step  and  two-step
techniques.  Using  chemical  or  physical  processes,  the  two-step
approach  is  preferred  for  fabricating  nanoparticles,  nanofibers,  and
nanotubes. Because of their thermal, optical, and magnetic properties,
nanoparticles improve thermal conductivity in PCMs, critical for energy
storage and release. Despite difficulties like low stability and agglom-
eration, their effectiveness can be increased by considering temperature,
particle  properties, and  distribution.  The Brownian  motion  also helps
improve  this  by  encouraging  particle  collisions  and  nanoscale
convection.

Alumina and carbon black nanoparticles have been found to increase
thermal  conductivity,  with  carbon  black  having  the  highest  improve-
ment of over 25% [148]. Suresh and Praveen [149] investigated the heat
transfer performance of a neopentyl glycol/CuO composite PCM with
varying  CuO  nanoparticle  concentration,  as  displayed  in  Fig.  7  (a),
which  demonstrates  a  strong  agreement  between  theoretical  and
experimental  values  obtained  from  the  Maxwell-Eucken  model  at
decreasing weight fractions of CuO particles. The model, however, de-
viates from the reported results at greater nanoparticle loadings. This
disparity is caused by the model’s failure to account for the interface
resistance between the PCM material and the nanoparticle. As a result,
the departure from the predicted value tends to rise as the amount of

Fig.  7. (a)  Thermal  conductivity  of  nano-enhanced-PCM  (inset:  indicates
enhancement  ratio)  [149],  and  (b)  Thermal  conductivity  of  Al2O3-tricosane
nano-enhanced-PCM at different temperatures [150].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011096

H.M. Ali et al.

CuO nanoparticle loading increases. Solomon and his team found that
adding Al2O3 nanoparticles to Tricosane as an energy storage medium in
a heat pipe for electronic cooling applications [150], see (Fig. 7 (b)),
which shows the thermal conductivity of PCM at various temperatures,
with nanoparticle incorporation improving conductivity across phases.
Compared  to  pure  Tricosane,  maximum  conductivity  enhancement  is
12% in the solid phase and 32% in the liquid phase with 2 vol% alumina
nanoparticles.  Despite  this,  increasing  the  concentration  of  nano-
particles does not appreciably enhance the thermal conductivity of PCM.
The latent heat of PCMs, determined by heat absorption/release during
phase  change,  is  important.  Some  studies  suggest  that  nanoparticles
increase  latent  heat,  while  others  contradict  this.  As  in  the  study  by
Fedele et al. [148], it was noticed that maximum latent heat enhance-
ment  was  reported  at  more  than  10%  for  Al2O3-based  nano-PCMs.
Adding  silver  nanoparticles  (7.2  wt%)  to  PEG  reduced  latent  heat  to
32.4%, according to a study by Tingting et al. [151]. Latent heat prop-
erties can improve with increased collaboration between nanoparticles
and  PCM,  but  higher  nanoparticle  concentration  reduces  latent  heat
[152].  Nanoparticles  increase  viscosity,  disrupting  liquid  flow  and
requiring  increased  pumping  power.  Increased  viscosity  is  due  to
interaction and friction between nanoparticles.

Numerous investigations have been studied on nano-enhanced PCM
applications consisting of heat exchangers, heat pipes, solar water sys-
tems, solar still, air conditioning, and cooling electronic devices [153].
Nano-enhanced  PCM  can  be  efficiently  utilized  in  building  through
building envelope optimization. Ma et al. [154] analyzed the behavior of
the  PCM  ceiling  ventilation  system  with  the  dispersion  of  copper
nanoparticles.  Fig.  8  (a)  shows  variations  in  TES  in  pure  and
nano-enhanced  PCM
layers  under  different  winter  conditions.
Nano-enhanced PCM reached 86.5% of design capacity, exceeding pure
PCM’s 80.4%, and exhibited higher melting and solidification rates. This
indicates potential for increased heat charge/discharge efficiency with

Fig.  8. (a)  Percentage  of  thermal  energy  stored  in  PCM  and  nano-enhanced
PCM  [154],  and  (b)  Comparison  of  SSPCM,  SSNPCM-1,  SSNPCM-2,  and
SSNPCM-3 [155].

nano-enhanced  PCM.  Davies  et  al.  [155]  investigated  the  impact  of
nano-enhanced PCM on solar still operation and performance. Fig. 8 (b)
shows  an  overall  comparison  for  SSPCM,  SSNPCM-1,  SSNPCM-2,  and
SSNPCM-3. This study reported an increase in thermal conductivity and
a reduction in melting and solidification temperatures. Considering the
productivity and cost per liter, SSNPCM-2 can be considered an excellent
solar still compared to SSPCM, SSNPCM-1 and 3. Bahiraei et al. [156]
experimentally and numerically analyzed carbon-based nano-enhanced
PCM  for  thermal  management  applications.  Maximum  thermal  con-
ductivity  enhancement  was  reported  at  around  1100%  at  10  wt%.
Moreover, a significant increment in viscosity was observed even at a
small volume concentration. The findings of this investigation can be the
optimal design of PCM-based thermal management of lithium-ion bat-
teries or photovoltaic cells.

Regarding  applications,  it  was  observed  that  most  nano-enhanced
PCM  applications  were  focused  on  the  TES  systems.  Several  in-
vestigations were focused on the solar collector, cooling storage, engine
gas heat recovery and PV-PCM cooling, but limited research topics are
carried  out  on  electronics,  cooling  of  batteries  and  solar  distillers.
Further  exploration  efforts  should  be  addressed  to  develop  enhance-
ment. It was believed that the base materials for nanocomposites were
used as paraffin bases, and water was the base fluid for nanofluids. The
key  challenge  is  developing  nano-enhanced  systems  to  study  agglom-
eration as various parameters impact it.

3.2. Cascade PCMs

Cascaded  Thermal  Energy  Storage  (CTES)  utilizes  Cascaded  Phase
Change Materials (CPCMs) that contain two or more PCMs with different
melting temperatures to solve thermal deterioration in single-stage PCM
charging  or  discharging.  This  breakthrough  enables  TES  at  numerous
temperature levels, providing more efficient heat transfer and greater
flexibility  in  storing  and  supplying  different  grades  of  heat.  Scholars
have  concentrated  on  the  advancement of  latent  heat  TES.  Gong  and
Mujumdar  [157],  for  example,  observed  an  outstanding  heat  transfer
improvement of up to 34.7% in a five-stage PCM system. Watanbe and
Kanzawa [158] found that cascaded PCM provided outstanding exergy
efficiency,  whereas  Wu  and  He  et  al.  [159]  demonstrated  quick  dis-
charging and charging rates with 5 cascaded phase change temperatures
(Fig.  9).  It  was  reported  that  5  cascaded  phase  change  temperature
shows rapid discharging and charging rate. It was also found that the
PCM melting time for the systems with cascaded PCM capsules is lower
than that for those with uniform PCM capsules. The charging ratio of the
non-cascaded  system  was  reported  at  around  40%,  while  for  the
five-stage system was 77%. Further research, such as those undertaken
by Tian and Li and He et al. [160] and Zhai and Cheng [161] Further
research,  such  as  those  undertaken.  Fig.  9  (d)  shows  cold  charging
decreasing with higher mass proportion in the first stage, while charging
time  exhibits  the  opposite  trend.  Optimal  energy  efficiency  favors  a
larger mass proportion of PCM in the higher stage.

While the research indicates that cascaded PCM has various advan-
tages, some doubts remain. The effect of cascaded PCM on temperature
evolution during  charging, discharging, and  heat retention phases  re-
mains unknown, and a detailed evaluation of the cascaded TES system’s
real thermal storage capability is required [162]. Furthermore, current
study reveals that more research is needed to determine the effects of
many parameters such as mass flow rate, heat transfer fluid inlet tem-
perature,  type  of  PCM,  and  volume  percentage.  The  organization  of
PCMs (order, size, and position) and the layout of PCMs (both in terms of
uniform  mixing  and  boosting  thermal  qualities)  are  key  issues  to
consider for commercial applications. The potential for CPCMs in a wide
range of applications, from building systems to industrial processes, is
enormous.  However,  a  thorough  grasp  and  optimization  of  the  tech-
nology are still required. Further research and development in this area
could revolutionize TES, increasing energy efficiency and lowering costs
in a variety of industries.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011097

H.M. Ali et al.

to  better  understand

stabilized PCMs. Fernandes et al. [169] discussed the potential of porous
materials  for  TES.  Later  on,  Rehman  et  al.  [25]  produced  a  detailed
review on the advancement of heat transfer using porous metal foams
and  carbon-based.  Umair  et  al.  [170]  reviewed  the  production  of
shape-stabilized  organic  PCMs.  Huang  et  al.  [12]  also  reviewed  the
literature
the  development  of  efficient
shape-stabilized  PCMs.  Table  1  presents  the  studies  on  porous
shape-stabilized PCMs and their properties and findings on heat transfer.
Different literature studies report that expanded graphite is extensively
used in shape-stabilized PCMs due to its high porosity, low density, and
excellent
of
shape-stabilized TES materials such as solar thermal, energy conserva-
tion, air-conditioning systems, thermal regulating textile materials, and
so on. It is believed that shape-stabilized PCMs will be explored in textile
applications to enhance thermo-regulating efficiency.

conductivity.  Different

applications

thermal

Table 1 summarizes numerous studies that investigated the use of
porous shape-stabilized PCMs. The following are some critical analyses
of the findings:

According  to  the  investigations,  porous  materials  such  as  metal
foams  (copper,  aluminum,  nickel)  and  carbon-fiber  brushes  improve
heat transfer performance and phase change heat transfer [171–181].
These materials, in particular, can improve heat transfer performance by
up to tenfold [171], solidification rates by up to 600% [174], and heat
exchange  rates  during  charging  and  discharging  [180].  Interestingly,
according to Ref. [179], graphite foams beat aluminum foams in thermal
charging augmentation, demonstrating the possibility of multiple ma-
terials  and  their  individual  features  to  further  optimize  heat  transfer
processes. However, the table lacks complete information on porosity
and pore size for certain PCMs ([175,179]), which could be important
factors  influencing  these  materials’  thermal  properties.  A  thorough
investigation into how the porous material’s properties (e.g., metal type,
pore size, density) affect the overall efficiency of the PCM is required.
The extensive investigation of porous shape-stabilized PCMs reveals
their potential for better TES. However, careful selection of PCMs and
porous  materials  is  required  depending  on  individual  application  re-
quirements.  While  technical  performance  is  encouraging,  practicality
and  cost-effectiveness  in  real-world  circumstances  require  more
thought. Finally, the discoveries’ worth is determined by their ability to
improve cost-effective sustainable energy storage technologies.

3.4. Molten salts as PCMs

According  to  the  International  Energy Agency  (IEA),  concentrated
solar power (CSP) will generate 11% of global energy by 2050 [182].
Because  of  their  excellent  volumetric  heat  capacity,  temperature  sta-
bility,  and  low  cost,  molten  salts  are  heavily  used  in  TES,  which  is
critical  for  CSP  [137,183].  Despite  these  benefits,  its  application  is
limited  by  a  number  of  problems,  the  most  significant  of  which  is
corrosion [184]. With its low cost, high breakdown temperatures, and
natural  availability,  molten  chloride  is  a  viable  TES  material  [185].
However, corrosion in this setting, particularly the relationship between
surrounds,  molten  salts,  and  metallic  alloys,  necessitates  extensive
research [184].

Solar salt, another extensively explored TES material, has advantages
such  as  low  cost,  non-toxicity,  and  non-flammability  [186].  Nano-
particle  enhancements  (alumina,  silica,  iron,  titanium,  copper  oxide,
zinc oxide) yield encouraging results, with Devaradjane and Shin [187]
showing  a  31.1%  increase  in  specific  heat  capacity.  Because  of  their
outstanding  thermal  properties,  fluoride-based  molten  salts  are
frequently utilized as nuclear coolant fluids [188,189]. Carbonate-based
materials, on the other hand, are used in fuel cells and exhibit stability
even when exposed to CO2 [190]. However, there is currently a lack of
precise  understanding  of  the  solubility  of  various  pollutants  in  these
salts, their impact on thermal properties, and the ultimate stability of the
system, underscoring the need for additional research in this field.

Fig.  9. Schematic  of  the  molten  salt  packed-bed  TES  system  using  spherical
PCM capsules (a) non-cascaded, (b) 3 PCT cascaded, and (c) 5 PCT cascaded
[159], and (d) cold stored and charging in cascaded TES with different mass
distributions [161].

3.3. Shape-stabilized PCMs

The  lower  thermal  conductivity  of  PCM  deteriorates  heat  transfer
performance,  and  the  exposure  to  the  high-temperature  environment
increases [163]. Another approach is integrating porous supports with
PCMs  to  build  shape-stabilized  PCMs  [164].  Based  on  the  size,  such
supports are categorized as macroporous (>50 nm), mesoporous (2–50
nm),  microporous  (<2  nm)  and  hierarchical  porous  materials  [165].
Such  support  materials  possess  distinct  properties  and  functions  as
macroporous  material  shows  remarkable  thermal  conductivity  and  is
used  as  heat  delivery  promoter,  meso-  and  microporous  material
demonstrate strong guest-host interaction that offers transport route and
capillary force to restrain PCMs and prevents leak, whereas hierarchical
porous materials stores PCM by acting as a cavity [166]. Such stabilized
PCMs are produced by inserting PCMs into shape stabilization supports
such  as  high-density  polyethylene  (HDPE),  styrene,  butadiene,  poly-
methacrylic  acid,  polystyrene  resin,  etc.,  both  liquefied  by  warming
support above the glass transition temperature and blended at elevated
temperature,  then  cooled  until  they  turn  into  solid  [164].  Nanosized
foams have attracted promising attention among researchers in recent
years  that  can  be  utilized  as  significant  heat-insulated  materials  to
enhance energy efficiency and sustainability. The advantages of chem-
ical  stability,  high  durability,  poor  thermal  conductivity,  and  large
mechanical and thermoregulation property can be improved by incor-
porating PCMs [167]. Numerous factors such as preparation technique,
shell thickness in encapsulation, length, particle size and pore size and
chemical  composition  should  be  considered  to  improve  thermal  per-
formance in shape-stabilized PCMs [168].

Numerous scholars have reviewed the advancement of porous shape-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011098

H.M. Ali et al.

Table 1
Summary of studies on porous shape-stabilized PCMs and their findings.

Ref.

Porous/PCM

Porosity

Pore size
(mm)

0.85–2.54
2.82

Phase change point of
PCM (

C)

◦

Findings

58
55–60

• Heat transfer performance increased by 3–10 times
• Metal foam improves solid-liquid phase-change heat transfer.

2.54–5.08
0.635–5.08

35
28

• "Copper foam, due to low density, enhances heat transfer efficiency.
• Melting and solidification rates are improved by 200% and 600%.

2.54
2.54

15
218–228

0.847

29

• The cooling energy charging is more reasonable by adding foam.
• Natural convection prominent during heat storage."
• Metal foam boosts heat retrieval process.
• Porous materials double heat transfer rate during melting

0.90–0.95
0.9137

0.91
0.87–0.96

–

0.975

0.815

0.946
0.905–0.912
–
0.992–0.9932

0.64
0.635–2.54
–
–

0
37
55.2
40–53

• Foam boosts heat transfer during solidification and melting.
• With low density and small pore size, graphite foams outperform aluminum

foams in thermal charging enhancement.

• Heat exchange rate is better during charging and discharging.

0.88–0.96

1.27–5.08

24

• The melting time decreased by using metal foam.

[171]
[172]

[173]
[174]

[175]
[176]

[177]

[178]
[179]

[180]

[181]

Copper foam/paraffin
Aluminum foam/
paraffin
Copper foam/paraffin
Aluminum foam/n-
octadecane
Aluminum foam/PCM
Nickel foam/NaNO3
and KNO3
Copper foam/
CaCl2.6H2O
Aluminum foam/water
Aluminum foam/PT37
Graphite foam/paraffin
Carbon-fiber brushes/
paraffin
Aluminum foam/
coconut oil

3.5. Hybrid PCMs

By  combining  solar  and  electric  heat  sources,  hybrid  TES  systems
(HTESS) have showed potential for enhancing energy management and
storage. These systems employ hybrid materials that improve charging/
discharging  performance  and  have  proven very  useful in  applications
like  as  building  heating  systems  and  solar  water  heating  installations
[191–196].

Numerous studies have found that HTESS designs boost exergy ef-
ficiency  and  utility  factors  [193,194].  Furthermore,  the  inclusion  of
thermally conductive phase change composites and hybrid-material TES
made up of multi-layer PCMs revealed enhanced phase change behavior,
higher  thermal  conductivity,  and  greater  stored  and  released  energy
[195,196].  While  HTESS  and  hybrid  materials  are  promising

improvements, the literature is still relatively limited, highlighting the
need  for  more  intensive  investigation.  The  improvements  mentioned,
such  as  enhanced  charging/discharging  performance  and  energy  effi-
ciency,  are  encouraging,  but  they  require  further  evaluation.  Future
study should concentrate on these systems’ long-term stability, perfor-
mance  under  a  variety  of  operating  situations,  and  cost-effectiveness.
The pictures (

Fig.  10  (a(cid:0) f)  presented  in  the  text  apparently  highlight  the
comparative  advantages  of  various  hybrid  systems  and  serve  as  vital
visual aids in evaluating and validating the discussed findings. Explo-
ration of HTESS and hybrid materials in depth will be critical for future
energy efficiency and thermal management solutions.

Fig. 10. Schematic of (a) single-tank TES system and hybrid TES systems, (b) for thermocline storage, (c) for outlet temperature control, thermal and economic
performance of HTESS, (d) utility factor (e) exergetic efficiency (f) unit cost for heat storage [193].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)1011099

H.M. Ali et al.

3.6. MXene-based PCMs

Presently,  a  novel  category  of  PCM  has  been  introduced  by  re-
searchers  named  MXene-based  PCM,  exhibiting  excellent  thermal
properties. MXenes were initiated by Naguib et al. [197] and fabricated
via  selective etching out the ‘A’  layer from Mn+1AXn  phases (M is  an
early transition metal, A is an A-group element, X is either C or N, and n
= 1,2,3). MXenes are a class of two-dimensional transition metal car-
bides or nitrides with good electrochemical performance, making them
promising  materials  for  energy  storage  applications  such  as  super-
capacitors and batteries. They exhibit high surface area, good conduc-
tivity, and stability in aqueous and organic electrolytes, which can lead
to high energy and power density. Research is ongoing to improve the
performance and scalability of MXene-based energy storage devices. The
remarkable features of MXene to be utilized for TES are as follows:

1.  Superior electrical conductivity
2.  Remarkable mechanical properties (higher flexibility and stiffness)
3.  Transparency in thin films
4.  Effectively heat up by a light source
5.  Properties control through the arrangement
6.  MXene is stable in aqueous suspension due to negative zeta potential

MXenes  have  received  significant  research  attention  for  energy
storage applications due to their unique properties, such as high surface
area,  good  conductivity,  and  electrolyte  stability.  Investigations  are
working to explore novel synthesis methods and precursors to produce
high-quality MXene materials with tunable properties. The MXene/rGO
composite  prevents  self-stacking  between  the  graphene  and  MXene
sheets,  increasing  the  specific  surface  area  and  the  properties  of  the
materials [198]. Also, the effect of surface functionalization, electrolyte
selection, and device architecture on the electrochemical performance
of MXenes. Noked et al. [199] studied a non-conventional single-step
atomic  surface  reduction  (ASR)  technique  for  the  surface  functionali-
zation of Ti3C2Tx MXene. It was reported that a significant improvement
could be seen in electrochemical performance with superior rate capa-
bility and cycling stability.

MXenes  are  a potential  candidate for electromagnetic  interference
(EMI)  shielding  applications  because  of  exceptional  charge  transport
properties, large aspect ratio, and hydrophilic surface functional groups
[200,201]. It can be believed that MXene is an ideal filler to integrate
with PCM for improving thermal conductivity and the system’s perfor-
mance. MXene-based PCM shows remarkable light-to-heat conversion,
electro-to-heat conversion, and thermal energy storage properties [202].
PCM possesses high latent heat of the phase change, and MXene-PCM
composites show improved thermal conductivity that accelerates heat
absorption  and  dissipation.  Table  2  shows  a  summary  of  studies  on
MXene-based PCM composites.

It can be concluded that MXene-based PCMs are a new type of PCM
that is made from a two-dimensional (2D) material called MXene. It is a
conductive, hydrophilic material with a high surface area and can store
and release large amounts of thermal energy. MXene-based PCMs have
been  shown  to  have  several  advantages  over  traditional  PCMs.  For
example, they have high thermal conductivity and a large TES capacity.
Luo et al. [211] studied high thermostability and thermal conductivity
for  TES,  where  MXene  with  a  porous  architecture  is  the  supporting
skeleton for PCMs. MXene-based PCMs were observed to possess large
thermal conductivity of 0.486 W/m K and are form-stable upon heating
up to 90

C.

◦

Additionally, MXene-based PCMs are relatively inexpensive and easy
to produce. However, there are also some challenges associated with the
use  of  MXene-based  PCMs.  For  example,  the  stability  of  the  MXene-
based PCMs is not well understood, and further research is needed to
ensure  that  they  can  withstand  the  high  temperatures  and  thermal
cycling that they will be exposed to in real-world applications. Another
challenge is the toxicity of some MXene materials, which are still under

Table 2
Summary of studies on MXene-based PCMs for different thermal applications.

Ref.

MXene-
based PCM

Application

Findings

[203]

Ti3C2Tx-PEG

Solar thermal

• Reported efficiency up to

[204]

Ti3C2Tx-
Paraffin wax

Thermal energy
storage

[205]

Ti3C2Tx-PEG

Solar energy
conversion

[202]

Ti3C2-PEG

Thermal energy
storage

[206]

Ti3C2Tx
@PDA-PEG

Solar energy

[207]

Ti3C2-PVC

Electronics energy
storage

[208]

Ti3C2-epoxy
composite

Thermal
management in
electronic devices

[209]

Ti3C2Tx-PVA

Electronics

[210]

Ti3C2-
palmitic acid

Solar thermal

94.5%.

• Notable energy storage density.
• Form-stable properties

maintained throughout phase
transition.

• Thermal conductivity increased

by ~16%.

• UV-Vis absorbance in

nanocomposite improved by
~39%.

• Photothermal storage efficiency

reached ~92.5%.

• Enhanced thermal stability and
decomposition temperature.
• MXene-based PCM showed

strong light-to-thermal, electro-
to-thermal conversions and TES
performance.

• Achieved up to 90.1%
conversion and storage
efficiency.

• Noted exceptional form

stability, thermal reversibility,
and stability.

• MXene thin films displayed

superior thermal/mechanical
stability and improved thermal
conductivity.

• MXene-based PCM composite
reported a record dielectric
constant of 11800.

• Thermal conductivity of 1.0 wt

% Ti3C2 MXene epoxy
composite reached 0.587W/
mK, a 141.3% increase over
neat epoxy.

• Improved glass transition

temperature, thermal stability,
and lower thermal expansion
coefficient noted.

• Flame-delayed composite

showed exceptional thermal
and electrical conductivity due
to a compact network.
• Enthalpy and thermal

conductivity improved by
4.34% and 14.45%,
respectively.

• Observed a stable composite.

investigation. Overall, MXene-based PCMs are a promising new type of
PCM that can potentially improve energy efficiency in various applica-
tions. However, more research is needed to fully understand and over-
come the challenges associated with their use. Analyzing the cost and
scale-up  roadblocks  can  lead  to  advancement  in  energy  application.
MXene applications should be augmented to develop advancements in
research sectors, especially thermal management.

4. Applications of TES materials

Application of  TES  systems  can be  found  in various  fields such  as
solar heating systems [212,213], building thermal comfort [214,215],
air-conditioning,  thermal  protection  of  electronic  components,  food
transportation  [216],  the  transportation  of  blood  samples  or  organic
tissues [217], thermally regulated textiles [218,219], electronic thermal
management,  etc.  [220].  The  objective  of  thermal  protection  is  to
decrease  or  shift  the  heating/cooling  load  of  a  system,  while  the
objective  of  an  energy  storage  system  is  to  store  the  thermal  energy
released from the system on demand [215,221,222].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110910

H.M. Ali et al.

The  application  of  PCMs  in  the  thermal  protection  of  electronic
components acts as a heat sink and keeps the temperature of the power
device  at  an  appropriate  level  [223].  To  achieve  this  goal,  a  suitable
material has to be selected, as well as the optimum geometric position of
the  heat sink  [224,225]. Heat sinks are  usually made from copper or
aluminum. The reason for using copper is due to its desirable properties
for thermally efficient and cheap material [225]. The primary principle
of selecting the right material is the melting temperature [226], which
has  to  be  above  the  ambient  temperature  and  below  the  approved
maximum temperature of the device [227]. Organic PCMs  (paraffins)
are commonly used for thermal management of power devices. Besides
the practical melting temperatures for electronics cooling, other criteria
must  be  considered,  such  as  price,  toxicity,  accessibility  and  thermal
properties selection [228]. Solid-liquid PCMs such as salt hydrates and
paraffin  waxes  are  mostly  used  for  thermal  protection  applications
[229],  whereas  organic  PCMs  tend  to  leech  out  during  the  melting
process  and  are  not  desirable  as  part  of  thermal  protection  systems.
Fig. 11 shows the melting temperature and latent heat of the fusion of
PCMs in thermal protection applications.

Applications  of  PCM  in  textile  clothing  keep  the  user  in  comfort
temperature  range  even  in  extreme  weather  conditions.  Examples  of
PCM applications in textiles are aerospace textiles, protective clothing,
automotive  textiles,  medical  textiles,  quilts,  pillows,  bed  sheets  and
mattress  covers, footwear, and  helmets [218,230].  Different PCM  has
been applied in textiles such as polyethylene glycol, salt hydrates, and
linear long-chain hydrocarbons, with the melting temperature ranges of
◦
PCMs applied in textiles in the range of 15–35
C [231,232]. A common
challenge for PCM-based textiles is to reduce the thermal conductivity of
PCM. The thermal conductivity of  PCM microcapsules and  their shell
must  be  improved  to  address  these  challenges  and  achieve  a  fast
response to environmental temperature change.

Applications of PCM in food transport solutions, such as cold chain
transportation  applications,  show  potential  in  maintaining  a  high
quality of perishable food products. These materials reduce temperature
variance and maintain the low temperature of food, vaccines, or clinical
trial during transportation [233,234]. Depending on the transportation
material, the temperature range of PCM can vary from (cid:0) 78.5 to 8
C
[235,236].

◦

Enhancing building thermal properties, such as reducing daily tem-
perature  variance,  can  be  achieved  by  the  application  of  PCMs  in
buildings. PCMs are used in buildings in passive and active modes by
integrating these storage materials in building structures such as floors,
windows,  roofs,  shading  elements,  etc.,  incorporated  in  the  building

materials or installed as separate objects. However, disadvantages often
include integration and maintenance cost and performance that climate
conditions can largely affect [237–239]. Various studies confirmed that
PCMs with different chemical, thermal and physical compounds could
be used in thermal storage applications by applying them as PCM slur-
ries,  micro-encapsulation  or  macro-encapsulation  [240–246].  Table  3
shows the common advantages, disadvantages, and challenges of using
PCMs in various areas, such as batteries, CPUs, solar PV, and capacitors.
The common advantages of using PCMs for all types of applications
are  to  reduce  peak  temperature  and  to  improve  thermal  behavior.
However, it is complex to design and results as additional weight for the
system.  It is  essential  to  put  attention on  some important  application
issues such as their protection within devices, long-term chemical sta-
bility or health and safety disposal [215,239,265].

4.1. Materials cost

Materials cost is usually analyzed as price per unit of volume ($/m3
or as $/kWh) [266]. The cost of storage materials varies over time, and
currently,  there  is  no  clear  definition  of  “inexpensive  material”.
Maximum energy costs from storage are supposed to be 2.5 $/kWh to
4.5 $/kWh with a payback period of 25 years and an interest rate of 1%
[267].

The material cost of PCMs Salt hydrate is the highest at 7376 $/m3,
while the average cost of paraffins is about 1707 $/m3 [268]. The ma-
terial cost range applied in sensible heat thermal energy storage (SHTES)
systems  is  from  1.76  to  7216  $/m3  [269].  Overall,  paraffins  and  salt
hydrate  PCMs  are  cost-competitive  over  SHTES  materials  per  unit  of
energy stored. Also, it is necessary to develop low-cost storage materials
to make them more affordable, like ettringite, at a lower price [270].
Fig. 12 shows the average costs and cost interval of storage materials for
each type of storage system.

Referring to Fig. 13, the cost of storage materials is just an item in the
total TES system cost. In addition to this, the cost of the storage tank and
equipment must be included. The lowest material storage cost is asso-
ciated with SHTES systems, while chemical reactions have the highest
costs. In LHTES, the main expenditure goes to purchasing PCMs, while in
SHTES, the main expenditure goes to purchasing storage tanks, which is
approximately 17% of the total cost [271]. Some researchers reported
that the acceptable cost of the TES system is 0.7 to 1.6 $/kWh with a
payback period of 20 years and an interest rate of 5%. Accordingly, only
large LHTES may be qualified, considering seasonal TES and neglecting
operating costs over time [266].

Fig. 11. Melting temperature and latent heat of fusion of PCMs in thermal protection applications (Source: Authors).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110911

H.M. Ali et al.

Table 3
Advantages, disadvantages, and challenges of using PCM in certain areas.

Advantages

Disadvantages

Challenges

Ref

Type

Batteries

CPU

Solar PV

Capacitors

Thermally

regulated
textiles

Thermal

protection

Air-conditioning

Solar heating
system

Building thermal

comfort

• Better temperature uniformity
• Reduced peak temperature
• Reduced system volume

• Reduced need for reliance on measures
• Throttling of component power
• Delay temperature rise
• Reduced loss in electric efficiency
• Low vapor pressure
• Improved thermal behavior
• Reduced peak temperature
• Reduced temperature variance
• Improved thermal properties

• Suitable PCMs can be used to reduce the
rise of temperature in high-heat flux
objects

• Reduced CO2 emissions
• Selectable melting temperature for work

with standard heat pumps for each
application

• Mitigate fluctuating availability of solar

energy

• Defrosting solution for air-conditioning

equipment

constant temperature

• PCMs can be used for both active and
passive space heating and cooling
systems

• Stored energy can be utilized when

energy is not available
• Reduced peak demand
• PCMs overcome the problem of temporal

unavailability of sunlight

• Positive environmental impact
• Reduced energy consumption, reduce

temperature and temperature
fluctuations

• Wide application possibilities

• Heat accumulation
• Additional weight
• Undesirable thermal inertia

• Adds weight
• Design complexity
• Undesirable thermal inertia

• Melting point in the desired operating

[247–249]

temperature range

• Changes in density to avoid problems with the

storage tank
• Small unit size
• Long-term chemical stability
• Latent heat should be as high as possible to

minimize the physical size of the heat storage

• Design complexity

• Long-term chemical stability

• Reduced thermal conductivity of PCM
• Flammability of organic PCM

• Improve thermal conductivity of PCM
microcapsules as well as their shell

• Design complexity
• Additional weight

• Low heat transfer between HTF and PCM
due to the low thermal conductivity of
PCM

• Cost of implementation

• Small unit size
• Long-term chemical stability
• Health & safety and disposal
• Low heat transfer greatly affects the charging

time of the PCM storage systems

• Thermo-physical properties and the geometry of
encapsulation of PCMs must be considered and
improved

• Charging and discharging of PCM

• Melting point of storage material
• PCM mass
• PCM phase separation
• PCM should keep its original configuration and

composition under
• Various external factors
• Thermophysical properties of PCM should not
• Change after repeated cycles

[250,251]

[252–254]

[249,255]

[218,230]

[250,251]

[256–258]

[259–261]

• Cost
• PCM performance affected by ambient

• Climate conditions
• Damage to the bearing capacity of construction

[262–264]

conditions

materials

• Heat is stored and released at an almost

• Heat loss in two ways: Inside the device

and between the device and users

• Poor thermal conductivity
• Slow thermal diffusion
• Reduced storage capability

Fig.  12. Average  cost  of  energy  storage  materials  in  building  applications
(Source: Authors).

Fig. 13. Cost of energy storage materials in 2016–2021 (Source: Authors).

4.2. Thermal storage materials in buildings applications

Heating and cooling applications consume 60–70% of total energy in
the building sector, with fossil fuels accounting for most of this [272,
273]. As a result, one of the most promising alternatives to a low-carbon
economy is the advancement and employment of TES-based low-carbon
energy measures [274]. Furthermore, roughly half of the world’s current
buildings will be created by 2050, with more than 70% in Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development member nations. Energy

efficiency should focus on new constructions and retrofitting [275,276].
There  is  various  passive  and  active  TES  integration  applications  in
buildings. Passive applications enhance building comfort conditions by
reducing peak temperatures, energy consumption, and heating/cooling
capacity  required  to  meet  peak-load  demand.  Integration  of  efficient,
trustworthy, and sustainable low-carbon energy measures based on TES
materials  in  buildings  is  required  for  the  successful  and  widespread
application  of  efficient  heating/cooling  systems  [277,278].  Compara-
tive values of the storage capacity for common materials used in TES

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110912

H.M. Ali et al.

systems for building applications are shown in Fig. 14. The values are
obtained  for  one  cubic  meter  of  the  storage  material  under  the  same
conditions and the same temperature interval.

It is observed that PCMs have the capacity to store approximately 4
times  more  energy  than  water  and  10  times  more  energy  than  dense
concrete. Average paraffin wax is used for this comparison. Compared
with the other PCMS, such as salt hydrates, the storage capacity of the
salt hydrates can go up to 600 MJ/m3, 12 times more than water storage
capacity and 24 times more than dense concrete storage capacity.

4.2.1. Passive systems

Heat  storage  within  the  building  structure  and  components  is  a
passive storage system. Traditionally the passive storage system is based
on SHTES. The heat is directly stored in the building structure and is
released  to  the  living  space  due  to  natural  heat  transfer  (convection,
conduction and radiation) [279]. The conceptual representation of heat
storage in passive building systems is shown in Fig. 15.

Kim and Norford [280] investigated the performance of a commer-
cial cooling-based building integrated with TES, and the results showed
a positive effect with PCM integration. Meng, Yu [281] also analyzed the
two  bricks,  one  with macro-encapsulated  PCM  and  the  other without
PCM.  The  study  used  the  RT18  as  a  PCM  and  steel  as  encapsulating
material, as shown in Fig. 16. The result showed a delay period of 3 h for
achieving  the  peak  temperature,  and  thermal  amplitude  was  reduced
between 5 and 10

C.

◦

Kong,  Lu  [282]  investigated  the  two-room  systems,  one  with
encapsulated PCM and the other without PCM. The study used the RT18
PCM for the north and south walls and the SP29 PCM for the encapsu-
lated room system’s ceiling, flooring, and west wall. The result showed a
temperature reduction between 11.2 and 14.1
C on winter days and a
temperature increase between 6.9 and 9.5
C on summer days. There-
fore, microencapsulated PCM integration in buildings improves indoor
building thermal management in terms of reduction in thermal ampli-
tude, decrease in peak temperature, and time lag.

◦

◦

TermoDeck [283] sells a concrete block system (prefabricated) with
hollow  cores  as  TES  in  construction  structures.  The  daytime  heat  is
stored using the floor panels, and outside air is circulated through the
hollow  cores  at  night  to  discharge  the  stored  heat.  This  system  was
adopted by buildings (more than 300) in the United Kingdom, Norway,
and  Sweden  and  showed  positive  results.  Barton,  Beggs  [284]  and
Andersson, Engstr ̈om [285] investigated the TermoDeck [283] system, a
hollow  core concrete slab  system for  different applications of  cooling
and heating. This strategy can reduce cooling and heating energy usage
by 10–30%. In warm or mild climates, aero-thermal energy can mini-
mize cooling demand by 15–30% by reducing 70–90% of peak cooling

Fig.  14. Storage  capacity  of  materials  used
(Source: Authors).

in  building  applications

loads. Products based on encapsulated PCM for radiant floors or ther-
mally activated suspended ceiling systems are marketed by PCM Prod-
ucts  [286]  as  TES  in  building  components.  For  radiant  heating  and
cooling  systems,  products  are  promoted  by  ThermaCool  [287]  and
Emcoklima [288] using PCM (microencapsulated) in plasterboards.

Table 4 shows typical results for materials applied in passive building

design.

4.2.2. Active systems

Heat storage in separate TES modules usually requires active com-
ponents (fans or pumps) and control systems to transport stored energy
to  the  occupant  space.  Heat  storage  tanks,  various  types  of  heat  ex-
changes,  solar collectors,  air ducts, and  indoor heating bodies  can be
considered elements of an active system. Heat storage tanks and heat
exchangers are the most frequent solutions in active TES systems. The
heat source comes from the Sun, biomass boiler  or heat pump  and is
stored  in  the  storage  elements.  Various  solutions  for  energy  storage
materials  are  developed,  such  as  bulk  storage  tanks,  packed  beds,  or
modules. Recent research trends focus on investigating more efficient
heat  storage  tanks  based  on  latent  heat  energy  storage  [301].  Heat
storage  tanks  are  critical  components  in  active  building  TES  systems
through heating/cooling assistance [302]. The upcoming sections will
discuss TES in heat exchangers and solar collectors.

4.3. Thermal energy storage in the heat exchanger

TES materials have been applied in various types of heat exchanges
such as solar domestic hot water systems [303], building heating sys-
tems [304], or as various arrangements the storage tanks (heat bank)
[305,306].  The  published  research  reported  that  heat  exchangers  are
based on sensible and latent energy storage materials. Table 5 presents
major published results on applying TES materials in heat exchanges.
This section focuses on heat exchangers applied within the heat bank,
while the heat exchanger used in typical solar applications are discussed
in separate sections. Particularly, heat exchanger configurations such as
a packed bed for sensible and latent heat storage, bulk storage for sen-
sible and latent storage, and storage in modules are discussed. Further
discussion was done on storage in modules such as flat plate module,
shell, tube (pipe module), shell and tube (cylinder module).

Heat  banks  containing  various  arrangements  of  finned  tubes  are
often found in research literature. Typical arrangements of fins are axial,
circular, spiral, and plate fins. Packed bed heat exchangers can contain
macro-encapsulated  PCM  or  solid  materials  for  sensible  heat  storage
[315]. Some research reported that a packed bed could accumulate 89%
of the cooling load overnight [297]. Bulk storage is usually a tank with
storage material inside [316]. This type of heat exchanger configuration
consists of a tank (shell) passing metal tubes. These types of storage units
require more extensive heat transfer [315].

4.4. Thermal storage materials for solar energy applications

Research  attention on  solar  energy storage has  been attractive for
decades. The thermal behavior of various solar energy storage systems is
widely  discussed  in  the  literature,  such  as  bulk  solar  energy  storage,
packed bed, or energy storage in modules. The packed bed represents a
loosely  packed  solid  material  (rocks  or  PCM  capsules)  in  a  container
through which air as heat transfer fluid passes. In a charging process, the
heated air from the solar collector flows from the top to the bottom of
the bed, while in discharging, the air flows in the opposite direction.
Packed beds can be accommodated in solar heat collectors, heat tanks,
or  as  part  of  the  heating  body  inside  the  building.  Bulk  solar  energy
storage  is  based  on  bulk  storage  materials  such  as  water,  oil  or  bulk
PCMs.

Flat plate, evacuated tube and PV/collectors are solar collectors and
are  common  technologies  for  converting solar  energy to  heat  using  a
greenhouse  effect.  Thermal  energy  storage  in  solar  cookers  shows

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110913

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig. 15. Heat storage in passive building systems (Source: Authors).

application  of  storage  materials  in  solar  systems  is  provided  in  the
supplementary information.

4.5. Thermal energy storage materials for industrial applications

According  to  IEA  [322],  19%  of  CO2  emissions  are  caused  by  in-
dustrial processes. This large amount of energy consumption requires
good energy management to obtain efficient and sustainable systems.
Operational temperature differs in different industries depending on the
processes. Some of them are given in Fig. 17 for selected sectors and
their group of selected operations. The technologies and materials to be
selected for energy systems, such as thermal storage units, to operate
efficiently, considering these operational temperature ranges are one of
the critical points (see Fig. 18).

Most energy systems used in industry are still based on fossil fuels.
The use of solar thermal and geothermal energy sources doubled their
amount but still only less than 0.05% of the total energy consumption in
the industry [324]. Table 6 shows the energy consumption distribution
by source for 2010 and 2020.

Fig. 16. Bricks with PCM microencapsulated PCM (RT18) [281].

promising results in using abundant solar radiation and stabilizing the
mismatch between the solar source and domestic demand [317]. Energy
storage  materials  in  solar  cookers  enhance  solar  energy  absorption
during  the  charging  period  and  extend  cooker  usage  in  the  evening
[318].

Solar  dryers  with  energy  storage  extend  fruits,  crops/vegetable
drying period to off-sun hours. PCMs integrated into solar dryers reduce
heat loss and improve system efficiency. Most solar dryers studied so far
have incorporated paraffin wax as storage material. Despite the low cost
and  availability,  paraffin  wax  has  a  low  thermal  conductivity  as  a
weakens. This issue was addressed in many studies, and proposed so-
lutions include the addition of carbon fibers, graphite and metal foams
that  can  increase  conductivity  [319–321].  More  information  on  the

Table 4
Illustration of the results for passive heating.

Application

Material

Results

The TES system is considered a passive system for industrial waste
heat recovery, where the energy is utilized in the thermal form at the
temperature level of industrial heat or less. PCM thermal storage is also
widely used for waste-heat recovery. Considering the amount of energy
consumption in some of the manufacturing processes such as iron/steel
making  (1450–1550
C),
waste-heat recovery is of utmost importance. Depending on the industry
and environmental conditions, waste-heat recovery can be achieved by
45–80% [325].

C)  and  nickel  refining  furnace  (1370–1650

◦

◦

Thermal energy from diverse industries must be gathered and stored
to  improve  the  industrial  processes’  performance.  In  the  industrial
sector, energy is used for various operations, including process cooling
and heating, space conditioning, processing and assembly, and lighting
[326]. Process heat generation on-site accounts for 74% of total indus-
trial energy usage. Low temperature (less than 150
C), mild tempera-
ture (150–400
C) are the

C), and high temperature (more than 400

◦

◦

◦

Building

envelope

Building

envelope

Building

envelope

Wall
Wall

Wallboard
Night

ventilation
Hybrid cooling
Floor
Glazing system

PCM, Brick

Yearly energy savings between 17 and 23%.

◦

Paraffin wax (melting point
44
PCM

C)

PCM, Brick
Bricks, n-Eicosane, n-
Octadecane, P116

Paraffin

Reduced indoor temperature by 2.2

◦

C and cooling load by 20.9%.

Energy demand was reduced by 17.5% in warm/dry climates, 10.4% in mild/semi-arid climates, 12.3% in the
cold and 9.8% in mild/humid climates.
The PCM layer in the wall reduced the instantaneous heat flux.
Heat flux in the indoor space can be reduced by 17.5%.

Energy consumption was reduced by 10% during winter.
Reduction of cooling energy by almost 47%.

shape-stabilized PCMs
Paraffin granules (Packed bed)
Paraffin wax (melting point
26

C)

◦

Has the potential to save 76% of the daytime cooling load.
The air-conditioning system is active for 3 h daily and provides 89% of daily cooling demand.
An optimum PCM layer thickness in glazing is 24 mm, which provides a surface temp of 26

◦

C for 17 h.

Ref

[289]

[290]

[291]

[292]
[293]

[294]
[295]

[296]
[297]
[298–300]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110914

H.M. Ali et al.

Table 5
Energy storage materials in heat exchangers.

Material

Remark

Heat
exchanger

PCM

packed
bed

Paraffin granules,
fatty acid, and
hydrated salt

Circular fin

Paraffin

Spiral fin

PCM

Axial fin

Paraffin RT50,
Water

Ref

[297]
[307]
[308]
[309]

[310]

[311,
312]

[312]
[313]

• 89% of the cooling load is

accumulated overnight in the
packed bed granules

• Ventilation load is reduced by

about 62.8%

• TES systems with 1 m3of PCM
can potentially reduce cooling
energy in the evaporator by
21–38%

• The charging and discharging
time reduction for the m-PCM
system is 30% for non-uniform
fin distribution and 9% for PCM
block length ratio optimization
• The melting and solidification
time of PCM can be reduced by
57.6% and 74.1% compared to
the axial fins

• Reduction of charging and

discharging time by 41.5% and
22.2%, respectively.

• 2.85% of longitudinal fins of

total annulus volume can reduce
melting time by 34%

• Long fins are more useful than

short fins

Plate fin

Paraffin RT30

• The effectiveness of plate fins is

[314]

increased up to 3 times

• Conduction is improved 3 times

three  categories  of  process  heat  [327].  TES  can  be  utilized  in
low-temperature processes and manufacturing applications to store heat
produced  by  on-site  variable  solar  thermal  power  plants  and  heat
received from heat pumps powered by variable renewable energy [328].
Industries that consume much energy, such as glass, cement, steel,
gas and oil, and food processing, are in the interest because they use
much energy, and WH is emitted directly into the atmosphere. Because
the  bulk  of  industrial  WH  is  unutilized  and  sent  directly  to  the  sink,
industrial operations have an enormous potential for WH recovery. As a
result, WH recovery systems need to focus more on improving energy

efficiency and lowering environmental effects. An accurate and precise
estimation of WH recovery may be made by connecting the TES system
to  a  heat-releasing  waste  system.  The  amount  of  WH  recovered  can
range  from  45  to  85%,  dependent  on  the  TES  material  properties,
environmental  conditions,  size  of  the  processing  industry,  and  so  on
[329]. TES is a novel technology that may be utilized flexibly to use WH
energy in conjunction with other systems by storing and using it later
[330]. Furthermore, by limiting CO2 emissions, this WH recovery aids in
the  reduction  of  environmental  pollutants.  WH  can  be  used  for  sec-
ondary heating in a variety of applications, including preheating water
in thermal power plants and preheating pigments in textile mills. TES
systems are divided into two types based on the distance between the
heat demand and the WH supply. One is an on-site TES system, while the
other is an off-site heat storage system [331].

Arce  et  al.  [332]  evaluated  the  potential  energy  savings  from
implementing TES in Europe. The building and industrial sectors were
reviewed and classified as examples of where TES may be used. Case
studies  for  the  industrial  sector  included  combined  heat  and  power
(CHP),  also  called  cogeneration,  power  plants  and  transportation,  in-
dustry  (heating  and  cooling  systems),  and  concentrated  solar  power
plants.  The  calculated  thermal  load  reduction  and  thermal/electrical
energy savings for determining the TES potential are connected to en-
ergy and CO2  emissions. Table 7 and Table 8 show the TES potential
results reported by Arce, Medrano [332]. Potential savings account for
7% in the EU-27 countries for an estimated average value of 7.5% energy
savings as a result of TES application. It is worth noting that the Spanish
savings  account  for  20%  of  the  rest  of  the  countries  of  the  EU-27
(excluding  Germany  and  Spain)  total  potential  savings,  pointing  out
that Spain has the most active CSP plants and a considerable number of
buildings,  aside  from the  regasification terminals  it  owns  (whose pri-
mary  contribution  to  the  TES  potential  is  the  reduction  of  electricity
consumption), and as a result, it has established itself as the nation with
the most significant potential in terms of TES. Savings account for only
0.1% in EU-27 countries due to the still small employment of applica-
tions that can hold TES and deliver electricity savings simultaneously
(passive dwellings, regasification terminals, and CSP plants) than stor-
age implementation. Because numerous CSP plants are currently under
construction  or  in  the  last  stages  of  design,  especially  in  Spain,  it  is
believed  that  TES  will  be  considered  [333].  In  the  EU,  the  potential

Fig. 17. Some industrial processes and operational temperatures for their processes (Source: Authors).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110915

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig. 18. Commercial readiness of TES technologies for use in the industrial sector [323].

Table 6
Industrial energy consumption by the source.

Parameter

Industry Energy Consumption by Source

Year
Fossil fuels
Electricity
Imported heat
Bioenergy
Other renewables

2010
72%
18%
4%
6%
0.01%

2020
68%
22%
4%
6%
0.03%

Table 7
TES potential for Spain and Germany compared to the enlarged EU-25 [332].

Parameter

EU-25

Spain

Germany

Thermal load reduction (GW)
Replaced electrical energy (TWh)
Replaced thermal energy (TWh)
CO2 emissions reduction (Mt)

5,850
17.5
9,530
2,580

541
3.4
826
208

481
Not available
662
166

Table 8
Breakdown of TES potential results by industrial sector of Spain and Germany as
compared to the enlarged EU-25 [332].

System

Parameter

Combined heat and power
(CHP) (cogeneration)

Heating

Cooling

Concentrated solar power

Load reduction
(thermal) (GW)
Replaced thermal
energy (TWh)
CO2 emissions r
eduction (Mt)
Load reduction
(Thermal) (GW)
Replaced thermal
energy (TWh)
CO2 emissions r
eduction (Mt)
Replaced thermal
energy (TWh)
Replaced electrical
e
nergy (TWh)
CO2 emissions r
eduction (Mt)
Replaced electrical
e
nergy (TWh)
CO2 emissions r
eduction (Mt)

EU-
25

188

Spain

Germany

9.4

5.9

127

6.3

5.3

34.4

1.58

1.33

3,760

374

401

6,660

633

565

1,800

159

141

31.4

5.2

8.97

1.50

4.27

0.97

2.1

1.46

0.99

0.95

Not
available
Not
available

Not
available
Not
available

Not
available

decrease in CO2 emissions is predicted to be 5.5% on average (based on
1990 and 2005 levels).

The technical maturity of each TES technology is determined using a
common technology readiness level (TRL). There are nine technology
readiness  levels.  A  technology  is  upgraded  to  TRL  3  when  applied
research starts and TRL 3 often includes a proof-of-concept model. TRL 4
includes  developing  small-scale  prototypes  of  the  technology  compo-
nents,  identifying  operational  and  scaling-up  bottlenecks,  and  per-
forming the initial validation of the process simulation. TRL 5 involves
testing  the  technology  at  a  larger  scale  with  improved  hardware,
refining  the  process  modelling,  validating  life  cycle  assessment  and
economic  assessments,  and  identifying  health  and  safety,  environ-
mental, regulation, and resource constraints. TRL 6 involves integrating
all up-scaled components to create an energy system that addresses and
resolves the issues previously identified, designing and modelling a full
commercial-scale  system,  and  refining  economic  and  circularity.
Demonstration system (TRL 7), first-of-its-kind commercial system (TRL
8),  and  full  commercial  application  (TRL  9)  are  the  next  three  levels
[334].  TES  technologies  are  used  in  various  industries,  depending on
their development or implementation stages, such as the initial applied
research phase (TRL3), prototype stage (TRL4-6), demonstration stage
(TRL  7),  and  commercial  fruitfulness  (TRL  8–9)  (Fig.  29).  Solid-state
technologies  of  TES  have  reached  TRL  7  and  are  expected  to  store
large quantities of energy cost-effectively. Water tanks can manage the
thermal demand by absorbing the heat from solar thermal collectors for
low-temperature  industrial  applications.  Therefore,  water  tank  TES
systems  have  reached  TRL  9  and  are  more  commercially  viable  than
other TES technologies for industrial applications. The following para-
graph  summarizes  current  use  cases,  prospective  future  deployments,
and the innovation required to promote wider adoption. By the end of
2018, 741 solar thermal plants for industrial processes had been erected
worldwide, with a total capacity of 567 MW [335]. The top markets are
Austria, India, France, Germany, Mexico, China, and Spain.

and

heat

recovery,

conversion,

reintegration

Salt hydration is increasingly being researched in WH processes such
as
[336].
High-temperature composite PCMs have been suggested for industrial
applications such as WH recovery and solar energy system coupling in
the case of medium-temperature applications. Chemical looping could
be utilized to boost the usage of renewables in the industrial industry,
where high temperatures (over 400
C) are required [331]. Chemical
looping, in the form of high-efficiency calcium looping technology, has
been investigated as a carbon capture method in Taiwan’s cement in-
dustry [337]. Chemical looping, on the other hand, aimed at boosting
the integration of renewables in industry, is not quite there yet.

◦

Industrial solar uses are only found in a few nations, usually small-
scale installations. By the end of 2018, only 741 solar thermal indus-
trial plants with a total collector area of 663,000 m2  (567 MWth) had
been erected worldwide. There are 333 large-scale solar heat industrial

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110916

H.M. Ali et al.

◦

◦

plants, and 300 have TES units. In June 2013, the solar thermal system
designed for the brewery Goess, Austria, was turned on [338]. The solar
thermal system had a gross collector area of 1500 m2 that was directly
connected to a 200 m3  pressurized solar energy storage tank for steam
C  and  finished  at
storage.  The  mashing  process  was  initiated  at  58
around 78
C. Heat is removed from the storage system when the tem-
perature is sufficient for mashing. Solar energy contributed 30% of the
mashing  process’s  energy  demand  through  this  integration.  Further-
more, 1.57 GWh of natural gas and 38 kt of CO2 emissions were saved
annually. By spring 2014, a solar thermal system delivering heat to a
tunnel pasteurizer in Valencia, Spain, was operational. Large-area flat
plate collectors (1620 m2  gross collecting area) were mounted on the
ground and hydraulically connected to a 350-m3 atmospheric solar en-
ergy storage tank. The solar thermal system can supply over 45% of the
thermal process energy demand for the existing can pasteurizing plant in
the future, replacing 1100 MWh of natural gas each year. This equates to
an  annual  savings  of  26.7  kt  of  CO2  equivalents.  The  most  extensive
demonstration system for drying green malt was completed in Vialonga,
Portugal, in April 2014, with 315 large-area flat plate collectors (Gross
collecting area: 4725 m2) installed on the ground and connected to an
atmospheric solar energy storage tank having a capacity: 400 m3. This
amounted to 3.67 GWh of natural gas saved yearly or nearly 89 kt of CO2
equivalent.  Qiu,  Li  [339]  conducted  energy  evaluations  of  the
solar-assisted heat pump drying system for heat recovery and TES. Heat
recovery and TES solar assisted-heat pump system provided up to 58.2%
energy savings. Atalay, Çoban [340] used a packed bed TES system in
conjunction with a solar dryer to dry apple (Golden Delicious) slices at
◦
temperatures ranging from 45 to 55
C while using 76.8% less energy. In
a pasta company in Sicily, Italy, Buscemi and Panno [341] investigated
the possibility of Sensible TES combined with linear Fresnel collectors.
Concrete was employed as the Sensible TES material in this system, with
a density of 2340 kg/m3  and a specific heat of 920 J/kgK. The system
can  be  used  in  operations  that  operate  at  intermediate  temperatures
(80–250

C).

◦

Application of LHTES systems in various industrial processes showed
notable energy-saving potential. In a food industry sterilization process,
energy  saving  was  15%  [342].  The  other  benefits  are  noticeable  in
medical  applications  [343],  textile  industry  applications  [232],  agri-
cultural drying process [344], industrial refrigeration applications [345]
and cold supply chains [346]. Considering the amount of energy con-
sumption and its environmental effects (such as high CO2  emissions),
immediate action is required to increase the use of renewable energy
sources and improve the efficiency of processes, such as implementing
effective waste-heat recovery methods.

4.6. Application of thermal storage materials in seawater desalination

Today,  increasing  water  demand  associated  with  fast  population
growth results in water scarcity in many regions worldwide, affecting
billions of people. The inefficient use of natural water sources combined
with the effect of climate change shows the need for immediate action in
effective water management activities. The latest estimates show that
the population facing water scarcity will increase up to 60% by 2025
[347]. Among the other strategies like water reuse and augmented water
supply,  desalination  is  considered  the  most  promising  method.  The
decreasing operating costs over the years make this method appealing
because  of  technological  developments  and  its  capacity  to  provide
additional supply to conventional water sources. In 2021, the total ca-
pacity of desalination plants worldwide was estimated to be around 95.4
million m3/day [348]. Seawater desalination has accelerated over the
past  decade,  becoming  a  hope  for  “unlimited”  and  safe,  clean  water.
Even though seawater is the most energy-intensive, as shown in Table 9,
it is still the most attractive considering the limited availability of the
other sources, which cannot meet the increasing demand.

Desalination  processes are categorized  under three  main methods:
membrane-based,  thermal-based,  and  electrochemical-based.  Fig.  19

Table 9
The energy required to produce 1 m3 drinking water [349].

Water source

Surface water (lake or river)
Groundwater
Wastewater treatment
Wastewater reuse
Seawater

Energy (kWh/m3)

0.37
0.48
0.62–0.87
1.0–2.5
2.58–8.5

gives the current desalination technologies under each category [350].
Thirty years ago, thermal desalination plants were dominantly used
for water production. However, the carbon footprint was very high for
this  production  process.  Later,  membrane  techniques  such  as  reverse
osmosis  desalination  plants  became  more  attractive  considering  their
low  footprint  and  yet  high  water  production  capacity  [351].  Today,
membrane  technology  is  used  in  around  70%  of  all  systems  globally,
whereas thermal techniques are only 27% [348].

Considering  the  need  for  sustainable  systems  today,  assisting  the
desalination process with RES technologies is becoming more desirable.
Solar  and  wind  energy  are  the  most  used,  yet  bringing  the  risk  of
intermittent  energy  supply.  Among  desalination  technologies,  multi-
stage flash (MSF), multiple effect distillation (MED), low-temperature
desalination  (LTD),  humidification–dehumidification  (HD),  and  mem-
brane distillation (MD) require a considerable amount of heat energy
and continuous or semi-continuous-energy-supply, where energy stor-
age technologies play an important role. Also, waste-heat utilization has
a great potential for increasing energy efficiency for these techniques,
which require large quantities of thermal energy.

◦

◦

Among the TES systems, sensible heat systems using a water storage
C. Therefore, this limits
medium can store thermal energy up to 100
their  application  to  desalination  systems  that  require  lower  tempera-
tures,  such  as  LTD,  MD,  and  HD.  Sensible  heat  systems  with  solid  or
liquid  salt  materials  can  store  thermal  energy  in  the  range  of
200–500
C, which makes them applicable for MSF and MED desalina-
tion processes. Phase change storage mediums are as commonly used as
sensible heat materials. Their larger energy storage capacity makes them
preferable over sensible heat storage systems. Their high heat storage
capacity makes them suitable for MSF and MED desalination systems.
Thermochemical TES systems have the highest energy storage capacity
compared to the other two systems. However, the application of these
systems is in the very early stages of the development process [352].

Desalination plants based on the LHTES system already exist all over
the world. Some of the applications with their findings are presented in

Fig. 19. Illustration of the various desalination technologies.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110917

H.M. Ali et al.

Table  10.  A  comprehensive  review  is  presented  by  Bundschuh  et  al.
[348],  listing  the  use  of  renewable  energy  sources  (RES)  in  different
desalination systems with different water sources worldwide.

Existing  desalination  processes  require  further  improvements  to
obtain a less energy-intensive and environmentally friendly approach.
The research and recent applications of combining RES with desalina-
tion systems are promising. When we consider RES, TES applications are
also  inevitable.  Efficient  TES  technologies  are  also  critical  to  obtain
sustainable, safe, and uninterrupted clean water with desalination.

4.7. Thermal management of cooling devices using thermal storage
materials

As  the  size  of  electronic  components  shrinks,  their  power  density
rises  considerably.  This  high-power  density  exacerbates  the  issue  of
component  heat  dissipation.  Temperature  and,  eventually,  heat  dissi-
pation  significantly  impact  the  dependability  of  any  electrical  equip-
ment. High temperatures cause the failure of about half of all electronic
components.  Consequently,  maximizing  the  heat  dissipation  rate  uti-
lizing  thermal  management  strategies  is  crucial.  As  discussed  earlier,
thermal management may use TES materials such as sensible and latent
heat storage materials.

In  sensible  heat  storage  materials,  heat  absorption  manifests  as  a
change in temperature. A liquid substance with high specific heat and
thermal conductivity is used. These liquids are used in immersion, spray,
and indirect cooling. In immersion cooling, the electronic equipment is
submerged in a dielectric fluid or coolant with low and high thermal
conductivity.  The most  often-used liquids are water,  ethanol, mineral
oil, ethylene glycol, or a combination. It was discovered that immersion
cooling  enhanced  performance  by  around  46%  compared  to  natural
convection  [359].  In  other  experiments,  water  was  superior  to
water-ethylene glycol in heat transmission [360]. In spray cooling, fluid
droplets are fragmented into a vast number of minute droplets by high
pressure.  Both  single-phase  and  two-phase  heat  transfer  occurs  using
this approach. The hybrid cooling technology combines immersion and
spray cooling and has shown a 65% improvement in heat flow [360].

Table 10
Desalination and thermal energy storage applications.

The  latent  heat  storage  technology  uses  phase  change  material
(PCM)  to  absorb  the  heat  emitted  by  electronic  chips,  as  shown  in
Fig. 20. Periodic heat production gives PCM a significant advantage in
electrical  devices.  PCM  absorbs  heat  during  periods  of  high-power
production  and  emits  heat  during  periods  of  low-power  usage.
Although its thermal conductivity is low, PCM can offer superior cooling
than natural or forced air cooling. The issue of lower thermal conduc-
tivity  is  addressed  by  utilizing  fins  [361],  expanded  graphite  [362],
nanoparticles  [363],  etc.  Including  a  substance  with  a  high  thermal
conductivity increases the thermal conductivity. However, metal-based
additives pose a significant danger of short circuits in electronic devices.
Therefore,  the  appropriate  quantity  of  PCM  must  be  used.  Table  11
presents  the  thermal  management  of  electronic  devices  and  batteries
using sensible heat storage systems.

Further, as internal combustion engines are phased out, the car in-
dustry must focus on electric vehicles (EVs). Using electric vehicles may
result in significant savings of fossil fuel and even reduced emissions,
which  help  mitigate  the  effects  of  climate  change.  The  rechargeable
battery is the most important part of an electric vehicle (EV), and it is
part of the battery that is used to power the vehicle through a series of
charging and discharging cycles. Electrochemical processes are used to
store and release energy in batteries. A major issue with batteries is that
they generate much heat while being used. This heat production gets
exorbitant under hot temperature conditions and during quick charging
of the battery. The excessive heat output raises the battery temperature,
degrading its cycle life and negatively affecting its performance. Thus, a
robust battery thermal management system (BTMS) for electric vehicles
is  essential.  The  maximum  battery  temperature  and  the  temperature
differential inside the battery may be reduced using BTMS, reducing the
harmful impact of high temperatures. Owing to the need for a battery
cooling  approach,  TES  material  may  be  used  due  to  its  high  energy
storage capacity. For use as a coolant, a material with a high specific
heat capacity and sensible heat storage is ideal. These substances are
inserted into the battery pack or allowed to flow via the piping system.
Water, mineral oil, ethylene glycol, or other liquid with high specific
heat is often employed. Sometimes, batteries are completely immersed
in liquid, and the liquid’s sensible heat absorbs the heat produced by the
battery. In other methods, batteries are attached to a single plate, and a
heat storage  medium is  circulated. Recent techniques include a  mini-

Desalination System

Hybrid (based on MED

process)

Integrated Kalina

cycle driven by solar
flat plate collectors
with PCM and
auxiliary heater
system
Autonomous

desalination solar-
driven membrane
distillation plant
Solar driven MSF plant

Thermal Energy
Storage Application

24 m3 thermal
storage tank using
water as the heat
transfer fluid
Mg(NO3)2⋅6H2O) is
utilized as the PCM

3 m3 storage tank
with water

A fire tube boiler

MSF (experimental

study in Switzerland
subsystem)

Thermal energy
storage unit
integrated to solar
pond (salts and
sand)

Ref

[353]

[354]

[355,
356]

[357]

[358]

Results

100% increase in the
thermal efficiency of
the overall desalination
system.
-  Thermal efficiency of
the proposed Kalina
cycle is shown to be
6.12%.

Increase in the energy
efficiency and the
drinking water output
rate.
Two parabolic trough
collectors of a total
aperture area of 3160
m2 can provide about
76% of the MSF energy
requirements.
-  Desalination with

solar pond
technology is
economically and
technically feasible.
-  For small units, the

water cost is reduced
with the larger units
and serial production.

Fig. 20. PCM-based electronic chip cooling [364].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110918

H.M. Ali et al.

Table 11
Sensible heat storage material-based electronic/battery cooling: overview and outcomes.

Electronic material

Storage Material

Specific heat
(J/kg-K)

Enhancement

Remarks

Cylindrical battery

Water

cell

Water/ethylene
glycol
R134a

SF33

High power density

Novec 649

electronic

4182

3650

–

1200

–

Prismatic battery

Novec 7000

1300

Silicon oil

1500

Al2O3/water

4170

Light-emitting diode

Ethanol

–

◦

Maximum temperatures drop by
6.1
Heat dissipation up to 562 W/cm2

C

–

◦

C during 3 C rapid

Reaching 34
charging
Critical heat flux improved by 30%

◦

C

Battery temperature maintained
below 40
Maximum temperature rise was
◦
not more than 5
Temperature reduction up to 50%

C

Maintained temperature below
120

C

◦

Mini channel-based water cooling with several channels and
flow directions performed optimum.
Ethylene glycol is used with water due to high thermal
conductivity.
Battery pack temperatures can be controlled in summer and
C, resp.
winter, even at 35
SF33 immersion cooling cools better.

C and 0

◦

◦

BTMS with flow boiling in mini-channels was suitable at
higher discharge rate.
Novec 7000 is dielectric coolant, works on boiling

Water is preferable to silicone oil since it requires less
pumping force
Nanofluids with a low mass fraction of nanoparticles were
found to be better than water.
Ethanol was used as direct contact immersion coolant

Refs.

[365–367]

[359,368]

[369]

[370]

[371,372]

[372]

[373]

[374]

[375]

channel through which fluid is continually circulated to cool the battery.
Nowadays,  PCMs  are  more  efficient  and  commonly  employed  in
battery cooling applications. PCM is often packed around battery cells
and  absorbs  battery  heat  via  phase  changes.  PCM-based  BTMS  was
shown to be more successful than other active BTMS, yet PCM has a very
poor  heat  conductivity  [376].  Most  PCM  investigations  focused  on
enhancing heat conductivity using metal or carbon-based materials. The
PCM-based  cooling  technique  is  more  effective  than  sensible  storage
materials due to its high heat storage capacity without a change in its
temperature. Tables 12 and 13 reports the latent thermal storage-based
electronic and battery cooling respectively.

4.8. Application of thermal storage materials in the textile industry

Comfort  in  clothing  is  widely  studied  concerning  the  dynamic  in-
teractions between the environment, the human body, and clothing. A
single environmental, physical, physiological, or perceptual factor may
be  responsible  for  the  discomfort.  In  terms  of  thermo-physiological
comfort,  a  person  feels  at  ease  when  the  energy  metabolism  of  the
human body is equal to the heat loss from the body to the environment
[398]. The human body and its environment reach a dynamic thermal
balance state, which the thermal equilibrium equation for the human
body  per  unit  of  naked  body  surface  area  may  quantitatively  charac-
terize. This condition of dynamic thermal balance occurs between the
human body and its environment [399].

ΔS = M (cid:0) W (cid:0) R (cid:0) C (cid:0) E

(1)

Where  M  is  the  energy  metabolism  rate  produced  by  the  human
body, in W/m2, W is the mechanical work accomplished in W/m2, R is
the radiation heat exchange from the outside surface of the clothed body
to surroundings, W/m2, C is the convective heat exchange between the
human body and its environment, W/m2, and E is the evaporation heat
dissipation from body skin in W/m2. To achieve thermal equilibrium,
the rate of heat storage must be zero (ΔS = 0). If there is a net heat gain
(ΔS > 0), storage will be positive, and body temperature will increase. In
contrast (ΔS < 0), the body’s temperature will fall.

The thermal balance of the human body is solely influenced by body
heat generation and heat dissipation. In reality, the measurement of the
thermal balancing condition of the human body involves human char-
acteristics  (body  heat  generation  and  dissipation),  clothing  insulation
and thermal environment factors. Changes in any factor may alter the
condition of thermal equilibrium in the human body [400]. In order to
maintain  a  comfortable  temperature,  the  human  body,  which  is  an
thermo-regulated  organism,  uses  a  variety  of
automatically
thermo-regulatory functions, such as metabolic rate, blood circulation,

sweating,  and  shivering.  New  clothing  materials  and/or  indoor  air
quality must be developed to keep humans comfortable from cold and
heat  stress.  It  can  also  be  adjusted  when  environmental/climatic  cir-
cumstances change significantly or the heat load on the body exceeds its
thermo-regulatory capacity. Even without a heater or air conditioner,
clothing significantly impacts the body’s heat exchange with the envi-
ronment  and  helps  regulate  body  temperature  [401].  However,  con-
tradictory  difficulties  develop  when  clothing  regulates  heat  flow
between the human body and its surroundings. For example, clothing is
required  in  a  hot  climate  to  prevent  further  heat  input  from  the
environment.

Nevertheless, it also limits the evaporation of sweat. This results in
an  increase  in  human  body  temperature  and  a  decrease  in  thermal
comfort [402]. Personal Temperature Management (PTM) has recently
been recognized as a potential technology. It intends to direct adequate
thermal  regulation  to  a  person  for  his/her  localised  thermal  comfort.
PTM apparel was designed utilizing additional active thermal regulating
materials and passive thermal regulating textiles. Active thermal textiles
include  liquid  cooling,  air  cooling,  semiconductor  refrigeration,  and
Joule  electric  heating  garments.  Passive  thermal  controlled  textiles
include  Phase  Change  Material  (PCM)  clothing,  Radiative  cooling
clothing, Radiative heating clothing, and Evaporative cooling clothing.
Wearing  or  removing  clothing  is  essential  in  controlling  the  tem-
perature at which one is most comfortable. However, thermoregulation
may  also be accomplished  by  adding PCMs  to  the  surfaces of  textiles
without engaging in either of these activities. Because of PCMs, when
the environment is warm, PCMs change their phase from solid to liquid
by  absorbing  heat  from  the  body,  which  results  in  the  body  cooling
down.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  environment  is  cold,  the  PCMs
release heat to change back to the solid phase. In the 1980s, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was the first organisation
to use thermoregulated clothing to shield space-based equipment from
extreme  temperature fluctuations in space. After that, in 1991  [403],
Outlast introduced its first commercially available items to the general
public.  Nowadays,  various  products,  including  mountaineering  and
snowboarding  gear,  running  and  rallying  shoes,  motorcycle  helmets,
gloves, and even golfing shoes, include PCM technology. PCMs may also
be  found  in  the  materials  that  make up  automobile  seats.  Car  ceiling
coverings, safety helmets, diving suits and firefighting clothing are other
uses for PCM textiles.

Crystalline alkyl hydrocarbons are the only kind employed in PCM
technology applications currently being used in the textile sector. Fig. 21
shows  the  phase  change  characteristics  of  several  alkyl  hydrocarbons
appropriate  for  integration  into  textiles.  It  has  been  shown  that  most
hydrocarbons have latent heat values ranging from 170 to 280 kJ/kg

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110919

H.M. Ali et al.

Table 12
Details of electronic chip cooling using PCMs.

Enhancement

Remarks

Refs.

PCM

Melting
◦
point (

C)

Organic
PCM

54–58

Latent
heat
(kJ/
kg)

200

In97Ag3

156.6

28.7

Peak
temperature
reduced from
◦
◦
85
C
C to 69

Chip
temperature
reduced by
26
C

◦

Erythritol

167

–

RT54,

RT44
and
RT35HC

54
44
35

200
250
240

RT-44 is the
best choice
for STP of
60
C.

◦

n-eicosane

36.5

237.4

Paraffin
wax

56–58

173.6

Paraffin

–

204.9

◦

◦

C

C, the 72

At 8 W and
43
pin fin heat
sink enhances
by 21.
SPT at 60
yields the
highest
enhancement
ratio.
Energy
savings up to
23%

Paraffin

40.22–46.9

234

Paraffin

40.22–46.92

234

Paraffin
wax

51.8

160

61%
maximum
temperature
was reduced

Cooling time
reduced up to
6% as
compared to
the PCM
Chip
temperature
reduced up to
14.3
C.

◦

paraffin

60–90

205

–

liquid

metal

–

–

Without
phase-change
activity,
temperature
rises 100%
faster.

[377]

[378]

[379]

[361]

[380]

[381]

[362]

[382]

[363]

[383]

[384]

[385]

◦

PCM boosts
numerous
sprint and
cooldown
cycles.
Cooling
capability of
PCM can be
evaluated by
its figure of
merit.
System
worked
between 25
and 120
C
but failed at
140
C.
Triangular
pin-fins are
best for heat
transmission
with and
without PCM.
PCM amount
substantially
affects
thermal
performance.
With PCM, 3
mm fins
performed
best.

◦

◦

Paraffin/
graphene
composite
heat sinks
outperformed.
45
C is the
ideal phase
transition
temperature
for PCM.
Nano-PCM
outperformed
PCM in free
convection.

Thermal
conductivity
affects
performance
of FPCM film.
Thermal
resistances are
highest at
silicon-CNT
interface.
With enough
PCM, the
customised
power module
can handle
three times its
normal
current for 3 s.

◦
and temperatures between 20 and 40
Celsius. The properties of alkyl
hydrocarbons  include  being  non-toxic,  non-corrosive,  and  non-
hygroscopic. One of the drawbacks of hydrocarbons is their poor resis-
tance to ignite; however, this issue may be remedied with fire retardants.

Although most used PCMs are organic PCMs, inorganic PCMs may also
be  employed  in  textile  products.  When  the  temperature  changes,  the
phase of PCMs will shift from solid to liquid. Because of this, PCMs must
maintain their stability in the textile structure during the phase transi-
tion.  For  this  reason,  techniques  like  micro/nanoencapsulation,  elec-
trospinning, and grafting are used to integrate PCMs onto the surfaces of
textiles.

4.8.1. Micro/nanoencapsulation

It is necessary to microencapsulate the liquid PCM in order to stop
them from migrating inside a fibrous substrate. The process of micro-
encapsulating PCMs includes enclosing them in polymer shells that are
both  thin  and  durable.  This  allows  the  PCMs  to  be  transformed  from
solid to liquid and back again while still contained inside the shells. In
order to create various kinds of PCMs encapsulated in microcapsules,
several chemical and physical processes are available. Coacervation and
interfacial  polymerization  are  two  of  the  most  significant  chemical
processes  used  for  encapsulation.  The  microencapsulation  process,
known  as  coacervation,  begins  with  the  core  particles  being  evenly
distributed throughout the medium, followed by the deposition of the
coacervate layer all around the particles in a consistent manner. After
that, the coating is made more durable using a reagent such as formal-
dehyde. This causes the coacervate to become cross-linked. In the pro-
cess  known  as  interfacial  polymerization,  the  capsule  wall  is  created
immediately surrounding the core material, which involves polymeri-
zation processes.

The most important factors for microencapsulated PCM are particle
size and uniformity; core-to-shell ratio (with as much PCM content as
possible);  thermal  and  chemical  stability;  and  mechanical  action  sta-
bility. MicroPCMs may have a diameter ranging from 0.5 to 1000 μm. To
be  incorporated  into  textile  fibres,  very  small  microcapsules  with  a
diameter ranging from 1 to 10 μm are utilized [405]. Large-size micro
PCM, i.e. 10–100 μm microPCM particles, may be included in foams or
coatings applicable to textiles [405,406]. Both the procedure of micro-
encapsulation and the size of the microcapsules have an impact on the
phase  change temperatures. The material of the shell should be good
enough to conduct heat and should be able to withstand frequent fluc-
tuations in the core’s volume while it undergoes a phase change. Mul-
ligan  et  al.  [407]  demonstrated  experimentally  that  throughout  the
phase change process of the core, microPCMs undergo an expansion and
contraction on the order of magnitude of 10%. Dimples appeared on the
surface of the microcapsules after the core had solidified. These dimples
may be explained by the shell having a lower contract coefficient than
the core. In order to increase the thermal stability of microencapsulated
PCMs,  various  shell  materials  have  been  investigated  in-depth  and
tested. As shell materials, urea-formaldehyde [408], cross-linked nylon
[408],  melamine-formaldehyde  [409–413],  polyurethane  [411,414],
ureamelamine-formaldehyde copolymer [413] have been used to syn-
thesize micro PCMs.

4.8.2. Electrospinning

Electrospinning was intensively studied over two decades as a rela-
tively easy, convenient, and adaptable method for producing ultrafine
fibres.  Electrospinning has been used since  2006  to produce  ultrafine
phase change fibres (PCFs) as high-performance textiles for TES. In this
technique, the polymer solution or melt is directed to the collector plate
after being subjected to a strong electric field. This results in forming a
very thin nonwoven surface with fibre diameters of nano or micro di-
mensions. As of now, electrospinning is the only method that can create
continuous ultrafine fibre with diameters between a few micrometres
and a few hundred nanometers. Electrospinning is a technique that has
recently gained much interest in both the academic and industry sectors.
This is because electrospinning can uniquely fabricate ultrafine fibres of
different  materials  in  various  fibrous  assemblies.  These  materials
include synthetic and natural polymers, polymer blends, and polymers
loaded with nanoparticles, drugs, or active agents. As shown in Fig. 22,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110920

H.M. Ali et al.

Table 13
Illustration of the battery cooling using PCM.

PCM (Enhancer)

Melting point
◦
(

C)

Latent heat
(kJ/kg)

Lauric acid

43.5–48.2

187.2

n-heptadecane (Extended

21.9

graphite)

Paraffin (Carbon fibres)

Graphene-PCM mixture

Paraffin (copper fiber)

Paraffin (metal mesh)

Octadecane (aluminium foam)

42–49

37, 48
55
–

50

–

Paraffin wax (Expanded

42.8

graphite)

Paraffin wax (Longitudinal and

40

circular fins)

n-eicosane (fin, metal foam,

42.55

nanoparticle)

Paraffin wax (Copper foam)

42–46

n-eicosane (fins)

36.1

214

242

170

–

255.8

243.5

135

123.8

248

139

776

Enhancement

Remarks

◦

Temperature uniformity within
0.12
Maximum temperature 45.9

C

C.

◦

◦

C at

Carbon fibres doubled PCM thermal
conductivity.
Highest temperature below 40
4C discharge rate.
Temperature rising decreased about
50%.
More than a 5
maximum temperature
7.3 times longer discharge than pure
PCM.
◦
Highest temperature noted of 45.1

C reduction in

◦

◦

C

Battery temperature was reduced to
29.1
Battery temperature was reduced to
6 K at 9.2 W
◦
Max. temp. At 1C is reduced by 7
under 40
Max. temp. 13.2
liquid cooling method

C lowers than

C

C

◦

◦

Cell to cell layout of PCM was proposed

PCM/CENG cooling strategy optimization depends on
graphite-matrix bulk density.
Temperature distribution is more uniform in high-carbon
PCM.
Phase change composite material has a smaller temperature
gradient than liquid cooling.
Thermal performance is optimum with 90% porosity CPCM.

Outstretched copper mesh lowers battery internal
temperature effectively.
Al foam with 0.88 porosity is favored as it lowers surface
temperature and improves uniformity.
BTMS with PW/EG/SiO2/Al-Hc offers excellent thermal
management performance
Optimized fin structure lowers temperature and narrows
temperature range.
The metal foam was found to be more effective than fin and
nanoparticles.
Change in Porosity from 95% to 85% did not affect the
performance.
Proposed BTMS is useable in the continuous cycle.

Refs.

[386]

[387]

[388]

[389]

[390]

[391]

[392]

[393]

[394]

[395]

[396]

[397]

coaxial  electrospinning  [416,417],  and  multifluid  compound-jet  elec-
trospinning [418] are the three most common kinds of electrospinning
setups that are used in the production of PCFs.

To  produce  ultra-fine  PCFs,  uniaxial  electrospinning  is  the  most
frequent  method.  This  is  because  of  its  easy  setup  and  incredibly
adjustable operating conditions. In most cases, the initial step in making
a  polymer/PCMs  mixed  homogeneous  solution  with  the  appropriate
proportion is to solve by first concurrently dissolving the polymer and
the solid-liquid PCMs in the same solvent system. The uniaxial electro-
spinning process is then used to produce ultrafine PCFs. It includes a
variety of PCMs in varying amounts. The disadvantage of this technique
is that PCMs have not been entirely encapsulated due to some of them
dispersing on the PCFs’ surface. Compared to uniaxial electrospinning,
coaxial electrospinning allows PCMs to be entirely encapsulated within
the PCFs. Multifluidic electrospinning with several spinnerets is widely
regarded  as  an  enhancement  over  coaxial  electrospinning.  This
approach uses two or more solid-liquid PCM solutions as the core so-
lution [418]. The apparatus is difficult to set up, and the electrospinning
method is unstable. Fig. 23 shows the different PCMs used in the textile
application by the researchers using electrospinning approaches.

4.8.3. Graft onto the textile

In manufacturing solid-state PCMs, physical and chemical processes
may  be  separated  into  two  categories.  The  PCM  is  disseminated  in  a
polymer  with  a  higher  melting  point  in  the  physical  process.  PCM  is
bonded  to  the  polymer  surface  via  chemical  bonds  in  the  chemical

Fig. 21. Hydrocarbons used in textiles [404].

uniaxial  electrospinning  [415],  solution-solution  or  solution-melt

Fig. 22. Schematic of (a) uniaxial, (b) coaxial and (c) multi-fluidic electrospinning [415–418].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110921

H.M. Ali et al.

The  primary  purpose  of  thermal  regulation  is  to  manage  the  tem-
perature of the PV system to ensure that it is as low as feasible. Two
cooling  techniques  are  commonly  employed:  active  and  passive,  to
lower the temperature of the PV module.

4.9.1. Active cooling techniques

The mainly active cooling approach is used for cooling solar mod-
ules.  Cooling  fluids  are  employed  for  back-side  flow.  The  suitable
cooling  fluids  include  air,  water  and  refrigerants.  External  power  is
needed in all active cooling systems to remove heat from the module.
Using air-based PV/T, Solanki et al. [432] discovered electrical ef-
ficiency of 8.4% thermal efficiency of 42%. Because of the weak thermal
characteristics  of  air,  the  electrical  efficiency  of  an  air-based  PV/T  is
low. According to Chow et al. [433], a water-based PV/T system ach-
ieved an electrical efficiency of 10.7% and thermal efficiency of 48%.
Liquids are more effective in cooling PV panels than air because of their
superior thermal characteristics.

According to a computational model, a water-based PV/T system by
Yazdanifard et al. [434] has a 70% overall efficiency. Ahmed et al. [435]
investigated  PV/T  to  measure  electrical  and  thermal  output  under
500–800  W/m2  solar  radiation  with  different  water  mass  flow  rates
varying from 0.011 kg/s to 0.041 kg/s. They observed the highest per-
formance  at  800  W/m2  and  0.041  kg/s  mass  flow  rate.  Some  disad-
vantages  of  water-based  systems  include  decreasing  heat  removal
efficiency  over  time  owing  to  increasing  water  temperatures  and
freezing  problems  in  the  winter.  The  major  disadvantage  of  air  and
water-based  PV/T  system  is  that  it  fails  to  support  the  domestic  hot
water requirement, especially on cloudy days.

Vaishak and Bhale [436] conducted experimental research on 100
Wp PV/T panel cooling fluid with R-134a refrigerant. Fig. 24 shows the
experimental test rig developed by Ref. [436] for the refrigerant-based
cooling system of the PV panel. They achieved an electrical efficiency
of  15.2%  and  a  performance  coefficient  of  2.96.  Comparing  the
PV/T-SAHP  (PV/T  solar  assisted  heat  pump)  system  with  air  and  the
water-based system demonstrates that the PV/T-SAHP system is a more
dependable supply of hot water than the air and water-based system,
circumstances.  However,
irradiance
particularly  under
refrigerant-based systems have disadvantages such as leakage, unequal
refrigerant distribution in evaporator tubes, evaporator coil length, etc.
It is observed that it is difficult to maintain a constant temperature
throughout the panel in the active cooling technique. Thus, due to the
temperature gradient, thermal stresses will be generated, affecting the
life of the solar panel.

low

4.9.2. Passive cooling techniques

Generally,  PCMs  and  heat  pipes  are  used  in  the  passive  cooling
approach. For thermal storage and to maintain a uniform temperature of
the PV system, phase change material (PCM) is best. It will provide a
constant temperature at a low temperature.

Fig. 24. Refrigerant-based (active) cooling system [436].

Fig.  23. PCMs  used  in  textile  applications  using  electrospinning  approaches
(PCM no. 1 [419], 2 [420], 3 [421], 4 [422], 5 [415], 6 [423], 7 [424], 8 [424],
9 [424], 10 [425], 11 [426], 12 [427], 13 [427], 14 [428], 15 [429], 16 [418],
17 [418]).

process.  Solid-state  phase-change  textiles  were  created  by  grafting
polyethylene glycol (PEG) onto the surface of cotton fabric by Kuru and
Aksoy [430]. It was discovered that the material could absorb up to 33.8
J/g of heat when the temperature was 33.0
C and that it could release
31.5 J/g of heat when the temperature was 29.4

C.

◦

◦

4.9. Thermal storage materials for thermal regulation of photovoltaics

PV panels convert solar radiation into electricity. PV panels convert
20% of solar energy into electricity. The rest is converted to heat. Ac-
cording to previous studies, the PV panel’s surface temperature is pro-
portional to its electrical output. The bandgap of the PV reduces as the
temperature of the solar cell rises, increasing short-circuit current and a
drop in open-circuit voltage.

The performance of a photovoltaic module is mainly influenced by
the cell’s semiconductor material, irradiation intensity, operating tem-
perature,  and  wind  velocity.  The  electrical  efficiency  of  a  crystalline
◦
silicon solar module drops by 0.5% with a temperature increase of 1
C,
whereas the efficiency of an amorphous silicon solar cell drops by only
0.25% [431]. It is necessary to remove the heat accumulated on the PV
module and use it for other purposes to utilize the available solar radi-
ation  and  increase  its  efficiency  efficiently.  PV  thermal  (PV/T)  tech-
nology controls the PV temperature by extracting this waste heat and
using it for other purposes.

The electrical efficiency of PV cells depends on their temperature.
The  relation  between  PV  cell  temperature  and  electric  efficiency  is
suggested by Evans and Folourschutez [431] as an equation:

η = ηref

[

1 (cid:0) βref

(cid:0)

Tpv (cid:0) Tref

)]

(2)

ηref is module electrical efficiency at the standard test condition, and
C, βref
its value is 12.4%. The temperature at STC is Tref,  which is 25
reference temperature coefficient, and its value is taken as 0.00392/K,
respectively.

◦

The expression for the power output variation with operating tem-

perature is;

P = GT τpvηref A

]
[
1 (cid:0) γref (Tc (cid:0) 25)

(3)

Where  GT  is  the  incident  global  solar  radiation,  τpv  is  the  trans-
mittance of the PV module, A is the solar cell area, and γref  is the power
temperature coefficient ranging from 0.22 to 0.71%/K.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110922

H.M. Ali et al.

Gang  et  al.  [437]  introduced  the  heat  pipe-based  PV/T  concept
experimentally and numerically. Results showed that the daily thermal
and electrical efficiencies of the heat-pipe photovoltaic/thermal system
were  41.9%  and  9.4%,  respectively,  and  that  the  average  heat  and
electrical gains were 276.9 and 62.3 W/m2. Zhao et al. [438] performed
a numerical study between the heat-pipe solar water heating (HP-SWH)
system  and  the  heat-pipe  photovoltaic/thermal  (HP-PV/T).  They
observed that the HP-SWH system had 15.29% more energy efficiency
and  63.2%  lower  exergy  efficiency  than  the  HP-PV/T  system.  Huang
et al. [439] discussed the concepts of PV-PCM structures in 1998 and
2000  for  the  first  time.  Then  Huang’s  research  team,  considered  the
inventor of PV-PCM technology, conducted a series of studies. Stropnik
and  Stritih  [440] investigated the  use of PCM  to boost electrical  effi-
ciency  and  power  generation  on  a  PV  panel  in  experimental  and
computational  research. The panel Canadian Solar CS6PM  was tested
using  an  RT28HC  as  PCM  (as  shown  in  Fig.  25).  The  findings  were
evaluated with and without PCM from a panel’s cell temperature. A PV
simulation  with  and  without  PCM  was  also  performed  using  TRNSYS
software, and the results were compared to simulation and experimental
data. The experimental results showed that the temperature differential
◦
in the PV panel without the PCM surface was 35.6
C higher than in the
PCM panel.

Rajvikram et al. [441] performed experimental studies on PV with a
PCM system to analyze the effect of PCM thickness. They observed that
increasing channel thickness leads to a reduction in cell temperature.
They experimentally verified that PV-PCM with an aluminum sheet at
the backside of a module has an average decrease of 10
C in solar cell
temperature.  Hasan  et  al.  [442]  performed  experimental  studies  on
conventional  PV  modules  and  PV-PCM  systems  in  UAE  and  observed
increased PV power output due to PCM use. They concluded that there
was a 5.9% average yearly improvement in electrical efficiency. Preet
et al. [443] investigated experimental studies on three different systems,
i.e. PV system, water-based PV/T system, and PV/T-PCM system, with
different  mass  flow  rates  to  evaluate  the  effect  on  the  electrical  and
thermal efficiency of the system. It was observed that PV/T-PCM ach-
ieved the highest overall efficiency compared to both approaches.

◦

4.10. Application of thermal storage materials in food storage

Since the global population is expected to exceed 9.7 billion by 2050,
fresh fruit and vegetable consumption has increased significantly [444,
445]. 820 million people are hungry, mostly owing to food loss from
inappropriate  storage  and  non-uniform  preservation  temperature,  ac-
cording to the UN’s World Population Prospects 2019 [446]. Every stage
of  food  production—harvesting,  processing,  marketing,  and  dis-
tribution—must minimize food waste. It will balance global population
growth and food supplies. Frozen, cooled, or refrigerated foods improve
quality  and  microbiological  safety.  Maintaining  the  cold  chain
throughout  distribution  and  sale  helps  food  stay  fresh.  Food  loses
freshness and  flavour due to  inadequate refrigeration and  processing.
Many  developing  countries  experience  agricultural  food  losses.  Fruit
and  vegetable  post-harvest  losses  are  estimated  at  30–40%  of  overall
yield [447], a major factor in rising food costs.

Fig. 25. Thermal management of PV with PCM (passive) [440].

One solution to this problem is ensuring food safety and quality by
utilizing the cold chain [448]. A continuous supply chain is needed to
transfer low-temperature items from the manufacturer to the consumer.
Therefore, it increases storage duration, preserves freshness and func-
tioning of fresh goods and medicines, and reduces quality deterioration
by preventing microbial development [449,450]. To maintain quality,
every product link in the cold chain, from manufacturing to consump-
tion, must be kept at the proper preservative temperature [451]. As a
result, food cold chain applications have attracted significant research
interest  in  recent  years  [452].  The  cold  chain  currently  uses  fossil
fuel-powered  mechanical  vapor-compression  equipment  [453].  These
methods  have  significant  drawbacks,  including  high  operating  and
maintenance  costs,  low  efficiency,  high  particulate  matter  emissions,
and refrigerant leakage [454,455]. TES systems could solve these issues.
Cold chain applications often employ sensible heat (SH) and sub-zero
and  low-temperature  latent  heat  (LH)-based  TES  materials.  SH-based
TES materials need a high volume and are difficult to transport owing
to  loss  [456].  Still,  they  have  the  advantages  of  being  low-cost  and
having  well-established  technology  [457].  In  contrast,  LH-based  TES
materials have higher energy storage density (ESD) and need less space
than  SH-based  ones  [458].  PCMs  may  be  used  to  provide  a  specific
output temperature in applications like food and pharmaceutical prod-
ucts that need a narrow working range.

PCM will be integrated into food transportation systems with PCM-
integrated  walls,  goods  packaging  and  containers,  commercial  super-
market  refrigerators  and  storage  cabinets  for  display,  soft  drink  dis-
pensers, warehouses, and large-scale refrigerated systems in cold chain
research.  Conventional  and  PCM-based  refrigeration  have  been
compared  by  researchers  [459,460].  The  recent  COVID-19  pandemic
may have necessitated the use of PCM in medical product packaging to
ensure the safe and timely transport of temperature-sensitive medica-
tions, blood samples, and immunizations across borders. This is espe-
cially  pertinent  in developing  nations where  energy and  refrigeration
are limited.

4.10.1. PCMs for cooling or freezing of food

The global population is predicted to exceed 9.7 billion people by
2050; due to that, there has been a substantial increase in the demand
for fresh fruits and vegetables in recent years [444,445]. According to
the World Population Prospects 2019 of the United Nations, 820 million
people suffer from hunger, primarily caused by fresh goods waste due to
improper  storage  and  non-uniformity  of  preservative  temperature
[446]. One solution to this problem is ensuring food safety and quality
by  utilizing  the  cold  chain  [448].  It  is  necessary  to  have  a  continual
supply chain to transport products that must be kept at a low temper-
ature from the manufacturer to the consumer. Therefore, it extends the
storage time, maintains the freshness and functionality of fresh goods
and  pharmaceuticals,  and  lowers  the  danger  of  quality  degradation,
avoiding microbiological growth [449,450]. The cold chain is a supply
chain in which every product link, from manufacture to consumption,
must be kept at the desired preservative temperature to ensure optimal
quality [451]. As a result, food cold chain applications have attracted
significant research interest in recent years [452]. Currently, the cold
chain relies on mechanical-based vapor-compression systems powered
by  fossil  fuel  engines  [453].  Still,  these  techniques  face  several  chal-
lenges, including high operating and maintenance costs, poor efficiency,
high particulate matter-based environmental emissions, and the possi-
bility of refrigerant leakage [454,455]. As a result, these difficulties can
be mitigated by utilizing TES systems. The most commonly used mate-
rials for cold chain applications are sensible heat (SH) and sub-zero and
low-temperature  latent  heat  (LH)-based  TES  materials.  However,
SH-based  TES  materials  have  the  disadvantages  of  requiring  a  large
volume and having limited transportability due to loss over time [456].
Still,  they  have  the  advantages  of  being  low-cost  and  having
well-established technology [457]. In contrast, LH-based TES materials
offer  benefits  over  SH-based  TES  materials  due  to  their  high  energy

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110923

H.M. Ali et al.

storage density (ESD) and reduced volume requirements [458]. Because
PCMs have a constant charging and discharging temperature, they can
be chosen to offer a specified output temperature in applications such as
food  and  pharmaceutical  drugs  where  a  confined  operating  range  is
required.

the  heat

transfer  rate  while  retaining

The  drawbacks  of  LH-based  TES  materials  are  their  low  thermal
conductivity  and  the  lower  thermal  conductivity  constraints  on  their
uses in cold chain applications [461]. The critical problem in increasing
the thermal conductivity of PCMs is to identify a host material that can
efficiently  boost
the
cost-effectiveness of materials and assuring strong affinity under oper-
ational  settings  at  the  time  of  their  use  in  cold  chain  applications.
Currently, cold chain research will concentrate on integrating PCM into
various  applications,  such  as  food  transportation  systems  with
PCM-integrated  walls,  goods  packaging  and  containers,  commercial
supermarket  refrigerators  and  storage  cabinets  for  display,  soft  drink
dispensers, warehouses, and large-scale refrigerated systems. Different
researchers have conducted a comparison study between conventional
and  PCM-based  refrigeration  [459,460].  Because  of  the  recent
COVID-19 pandemic [462], the use of PCM in the packaging of medical
products might have played a crucial role in the safe and timely transfer
of temperature-sensitive medical items such as pharmaceuticals, blood
samples and vaccinations between and across countries. This is highly
relevant in impoverished countries where energy and refrigeration are
scarce.

Because of the changes in lifestyle and the increase in population,
freezing and storing food at low temperatures has become a significant
problem on a global scale. The most typical and successful methods of
food preservation are the use of refrigerators and freezers. The research
suggests  that  the  methods  to  increase  insulation  and  improve
compressor efficiency are either costly or difficult. On the other hand,
PCMs for thermal applications have gained much interest due to their
relevant  advantages.  The  latent  TES  systems  using  PCM  for  the  tem-
perature  range  covering  from  AC  applications  (25
C)  to  low-
temperature  freezing  food  ((cid:0) 10
C)  are  termed  cold  thermal  storage
systems  (CTES).  PCMs  have  been  used  in  food  storage  applications
because of the following points mentioned below:

◦

◦

1.  To maintain the food temperature at its desired temperature.
2.  To keep the food for longer periods.
3.  To prevent food spoilage and avoid physical, chemical and microbial

changes.

4.  To minimize the electricity cost of refrigeration systems.

◦

Or’o et al. [131] presented a detailed study on using PCMs in cold
applications (below 20
C), outlining issues related to their utilization,
such as encapsulation and heat transfer improvement. The authors also
discussed  using  these  materials  in  various  commercial  applications,
including  food  storage,  transportation,  and  air  conditioning.  They
categorized  PCMs  as  commercial  and  non-commercial.  The  authors
reviewed  the  recent  developments  in  cold  TES  applications  and
concluded that PCM that has received the most research for use in cold
storage
is
cost-effective,  and  has  a  good  cycling  performance.  However,  water
cannot be used in transportation, packaging, or containers. Thus, PCM
would be required in these contexts in order to reach temperatures that
can be controlled.

is  water.  Water  has  advanced  thermal  properties,

4.10.2. PCM integration in the walls of refrigerated vehicles

PCMs have been integrated into the walls of refrigerated vehicles to
absorb the heat exchange with the environment so that food is main-
tained at recommended temperature. The main objective is to decrease
the maximum and average heat transfer rate from the surroundings to
the refrigerated space. PCM integration in the walls of refrigerated ve-
hicles will benefit greatly from the years of expertise acquired in PCM
integration in building materials. There has been a steady increase in

interest over the last few years because of the immediate need to pre-
serve  the  cold  chain  from  higher  environmental  temperatures.  The
required temperature in refrigerated transport ranges between (cid:0) 25
C
◦
(ice cream) to 15
C (typical fruits) [463]. PCMs integration can be done
by keeping PCM layers in the insulating walls [464,465] or by making a
composite  insulation  material  and  dispersing  an  mPCM  into  an  insu-
lation material.

◦

Ahmed et al. [466] reduced peak and average heat transfer rates by
incorporating RT-5 as a PCM into copper pipes in refrigerated vehicle
walls. Experimental results demonstrated a 29.1% drop in average peak
and  daily  heat  transfer  rates.  Glouannec  et  al.  [464]  found  that  inte-
grating a 5 mm layer of Energain PCM plates into a standard refrigerated
vehicle wall increased peak heat flux by 3.2 W/m2, while the reference
wall increased by 7.5 W/m2. Fioretti et al. [465] built a multi-layer PCM
(RT35HC)  wall.  The  container  wall  has  an  inside  metal  sheet,  poly-
urethane foam insulation, the PCM in a polyethylene panel, a polyvinyl
chloride film, and an external metal sheet (Fig. 26). The maximal or peak
heat  transfer  rate  decreased  between  5.6%  and  8.6%  in  two  days  of
Ancona summer testing.

Michel  et  al.  [467]  used  COMSOL-Multiphysics  tool  to  simulate  a
multi-layer  wall.  PCM/polyurethane  (PU)  foam  combines  the  usual
insulation and PCM layers in the multi-layer wall. Numerical findings
revealed that heat transfer exchange rate reduced from 0.3% to 4.1%.
Wu et al. [468] studied the multi-walled carbon nanotube-based eutectic
salt PCM (MgCl2-H2O) to address the growing need for low-temperature
transportable  chiller  systems  for  vaccines,  fruits,  vegetables,  and
chemicals.  The  suggested  PCM  possesses  10.7%  higher  thermal  con-
ductivity,  greater  thermal  stability  after  400  cycles,  higher  LH,  and
lower supercooling than pure eutectic PCM.

A summary of reviewed literature on PCM integration in the wall of
refrigerated  vehicles  is  shown  in  Table  14.  Refrigerated  vehicles  and
container  walls  have  been  studied  extensively  throughout  the  past
decade  using  experimental  and  numerical  methods.  Multi-layer  insu-
lation materials, particularly PCMs, were given particular attention to
replacing refrigeration vehicles’  conventional sandwich walls. Table 4
shows that the most researched PCM for refrigerated vehicles is paraffin
wax, which has a melting temperature that ranges from 20 to 35

C.

◦

4.10.3. PCM integration into food packaging and containers

PCM in food packaging and containers absorbs heat from the envi-
ronment to maintain storage temperature. Hubbard employed eutectic
PCM plates in refrigerated trucks for ice cream and deep-freezing [470].
The  University  of  Birmingham’s  Centre  for  Energy  Storage  built  a
40-foot  PCM-integrated  container  with  CRRC  China’s  support.  From
production  through  market  distribution,  it  was  recommended  to  pre-
serve fresh fruits and vegetables. As shown in Fig. 27, it was maintained
by a charging facility. Using cold-stored PCM, the container was able to
◦
maintain a temperature of 5–12
C for up to 120 h. It was the first goods
container  for  cold  storage  and  properly  tested  for  35000  km  of  road
travel and 1000 km of rail travel [471].

As illustrated in Fig. 28, Or’o et al. [472] investigated the benefits of
adding PCMs to an insulated bin to keep food hot or cold. The numerical
model was solved using a fully implicit finite volume approach. Leducq
et  al.  [473]  suggested  salt-hydrate  PCM  packaging  for  transportation
and ice cream storage. Standard cardboard boxes and boxes insulated
with expanded polystyrene were used to compare the design.

◦

◦

Oro’ et al. [475] suggested adding a layer to the PCM E-21 tray sides
to boost thermal heat capacity. After 3 h at 25
C, the center of the ice
◦
cream rose 3
C. Hoang et al. [476]
C while the outside dropped 10
packaged cold food in biodegradable polyester plates with PCM RT5. A
computational heat transfer model produced satisfactory experimental
results  with  a  maximum  temperature  variation  of  less  than  0.8  and
1.9
C at the PCM plate center and surface, respectively. Leducq et al.
[473] suggested ice cream packing with a salt-hydrate PCM. The design
was compared against a cardboard box and a polystyrene-insulated box.
During a 40-min heat load test at ambient temperature, the cardboard

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110924

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig. 26. Construction of a PCM layer for a multi-layer wall: (a) polyethylene panel, (b) RT35HC encapsulation (PCM), (c) polyvinyl chloride closing layer [465].

Table 14
Summary of PCM integration in the walls of refrigerated vehicles.

PCM

Melting
point

Latent heat
(kJ/kg)

Heat transfer
reduction

Parrafin based RT5
Energain
RT35HC
Composite PU/PCM

C18 Inertek

Inorganic salt water

Paraffin based RT27
Paraffin based
RT28HC

Paraffin based RT31
Paraffin based RT35

◦

5
21
35
18

C
◦

C
C
C

◦

◦

156
72.9
105
50

(cid:0) 26.8

◦

C

154.4

◦

C

27.5
◦
28

C

30.5
32.5

◦

◦

C
C

55
140

24.4
26

16.3%
25%
4.5%
0.3–4.1%

C

Maintain
◦
(cid:0) 18
4.4%
4.0%

4.5%
4.5%

Refs.

[466]
[464]
[469]
[467]

[453]

[469]
[469]

[469]
[469]

box,  conventional  insulation,  and  PCM  packaging  increased  their
product surface temperatures by 18, 9, and 1

C, respectively.

◦

Table  15  summarizes  some  literature  on  PCM  integration  in  food
packaging  and  containers.  It  has  been  found  that  PCM  integration  in
food  packaging  and  containers  gives  appropriate  thermal  comfort  to
foods  throughout  severe  environmental  conditions.  It  ensures  food
quality between cold chain links, from the food supplier warehouse to
the retailer’s refrigerated display cabinets. It would be vital in devel-
oping nations, where infrastructure such as electricity and refrigeration
is often lacking.

The  following  are  some  of  the  limitations  and  prospects  of  TES

materials and systems in cold chain applications:

o  Corrosion  is  a  problem  with  most  PCMs,  mainly  inorganic  PCMs
[483].  Therefore,  more  research  is  needed  to  determine  the  best
coating and container material to eliminate the corrosion effect and
extend the device’s life.

o  Eutectic inorganic PCM used for food preservation and refrigerated

transported vehicles should be cost-effective.

o  The lowest sub-zero temperature is produced using liquid nitrogen.
Liquid  air  may  be  cheaper  since  it  doesn’t  require  gas  separation.
Therefore, research on TES-based liquid air in cryogenic engines for
refrigeration is needed.

o  In cold chain applications, preventing heat loss during transportation
is  crucial.  Thus,  cold  TES  charging  performance  needs  further
investigation.

o  TES system performance has been studied, however design concepts

for cold chain applications need to be studied.

o PCMs-based TES has technical limitations. Future cold chain appli-
cations  should  have  higher  ESD,  faster  charging  and  discharging
rates, extended lifecycles, simplified end-user supply systems, lower
heat losses, and so on.

4.11. Thermal storage material applications in thermo-electric generator

Approximately 36.7% of the world’s power is now produced by coal,
23.5% by gas, and 10.4% by nuclear energy. Low-temperature thermal
energy  is  still  wasted  despite  the  efficiency  of  this  energy-producing
method. Using thermoelectric (TE) devices, it is  possible to recover a

Fig. 27. (a) Exterior and (b) interior views of a PCM-integrated shipping container [471].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110925

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig. 28. Bin with PCM for transport and storage of food [472].

Fig. 29. Different configurations of TE-PCM [474].

Table 15
Summary of PCM integration in the food packaging and containers.

Applications

PCM

Encapsulation Technique

Melting point

Latent Heat (kJ/kg)

Refs.

Storage container for food
Storage container for ice cream

Packaging for chilled food
Food packaging
Smart food packaging
Food packaging
Drying of sweet potato
Chilly bins
Chilled food refrigerated cabinets.
Food refrigerated cabinets

RT-2
Cristopia
E-21
RT5
Paraffin waxes of Rubitherm RT4
Dodecane
Rubitherm RT6
Paraffin wax
Rubitherm RT2
Paraffin RT-4 and water
De-ionized water (98%) and borax (2%)

–
–

–

Electrospinning
Uniaxial and co axial Electrospinning
Physical entrapment
–
–
–
–

◦

2
C
◦
(cid:0) 21

C

◦

◦

5
C
4
C
(cid:0) 9.6
◦
6
C
◦
46

C

◦

C

◦

C

4
–

198
233

156
53
36.8
–

200

175
–

[477]
[475]

[478]
[479]
[421]
[480]
[481]
[472]
[477]
[482]

part  of  this  energy.  TE  devices  are  beneficial  for  converting  low-
temperature  thermal  energy  into  electricity,  enhancing  the  process’s
overall  efficiency.  In  addition  to  the  aforementioned  applications,  TE

has  found  use  in  automobiles,  refrigerators,  geothermal  systems,  etc.
The  primary  categories  for  TE  devices  are  thermoelectric  generators
(TEG)  and  thermoelectric  chillers  (TEC).  TEG  operates  based  on  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110926

H.M. Ali et al.

Seeback effect, whereas TEC operates based on the Peltier effect. TEG is
used  for  directly  converting  thermal  energy  into  electricity,  whereas
TEC  is  utilized  for  directly  converting  electrical  energy  into  heat  or
refrigeration. In addition, TE devices have no moving parts and work
quietly; hence, they are easy to maintain, have a long service life, and
exhibit predictable performance characteristics.

Existing  economics,  materials,  and  production  procedures  restrict
the typical TE system. As a result, the standard TE system has an effi-
ciency of no more than 20%. The industry has not embraced them due to
their inefficiency and unsustainable costs. In actual applications, how-
ever, the source and sink temperatures are not constant and continue to
change. Thus, elements such as heat management become significant for
enhancing  the  performance  of  TEG.  Here  is  where  phase  transition
material shines. As the flywheel manages engine jerks, PCM regulates
the temperature of the target region for a certain period (according to its
design) by smoothing out temperature troughs and peaks and producing
a nearly constant temperature output. It is accomplished by isothermally
altering the phase of the substance by absorbing/releasing the latent/
vaporization heat. Additionally, PCM offers a high energy storage den-
sity and thermal stability.

Since  TEG  systems  are  highly  reliant  on  temperature  difference,
combining PCM and TE results in a steady operating temperature dif-
ference and the optimal operation of TE. It also expands the potential

uses  of  TEG  for  tasks  involving  a  wide  range  of  temperatures.  It  also
results in better TE efficiency because it operates in its optimal working
conditions by using peak heat more effectively. A longer lifespan can be
expected as it is not subject to thermal stresses caused by temperature
variations. As per need, the PCM-TE system can be configured in one of
three possible configurations, as shown in Fig. 29 [474].

a) PCM/TEG - This System is used when the sink temperature is con-

stant and the source temperature is variable

b)  TE/PCM - This System is used when sink temperature is variable, and

source temperature is constant

c)  PCM/TE/PCM - This System is used when both sink temperature and

source temperature are variable

Due to its small weight, minimal mechanical complexity, and great
durability,  it  has  found  employment  in  automobile  and  aircraft  heat
recovery  applications.  When  idling,  the  source  temperature  is  lower
than the ideal temperature, and when cruising, the source temperature is
greater than the optimal temperature, making it difficult for a standard
TEG  system  to  operate  effectively.  A  bypass  flow  is  given  at  higher
temperatures to avoid TEG deterioration, resulting in energy loss. Thus,
a TEG-PCM is employed since the source temperature is variable (as per
load)  and  the  sink  temperature  is  almost  constant  (atmospheric),

Table 16
Latent heat storage material based thermoelectric generator cooling: overview and outcomes.

PCM

Paraffin/EG

D-Mannitol

CaCl2.H12O6

Paraffin wax,
D-Mannitol

OM32

Melting point
◦
(

C)

Latent heat
(kJ/kg)

50
60
70
80
120.2–166.4

30
65
165
32

165.8
161.1
160.6
163.5
219.5
281.9
161.2–192
173.6
294–341
191

Pentaerythritol

167.2–183.8

225.6–244.5

Paraffin with expanded

graphite

31.14
38.4 42.1

Silicon grease

Capric acid

Erythritol

-NM-

CaCl2.H12O6

Paraffin wax/paraffin

wax with metal foam

n-octadecane

n-octadecane

PEG,

PEG/aerogel
composite,
1-TD
RT1 0hc

RT1 1hc
RT12

Paraffin wax/Al2O3

Worm graphite/paraffin

wax

–

30.5

118

–

30

30
50
28

28

68.60
68.38
45.01

–

44

–

105
116.2
130.7
–

159

339.8

–

161.15–192

138.9
156.6
240

189

181.77
181.24
223.78

–

190

–

Improvement

Remarks

Refs.

Maximum voltage 2.69 V was achieved

• PCM with 80
effective

◦

C melting point was found most

[484]

Power generated was 0.23, 0.31 and 0.39 W
for heat flux of 4.5, 5 and 5.5 kW/m2 resp.
After heater removal, it generated over 1 V for
1800 s against 600 s.

Efficiency increased 36.7%, 33.8%, and 30%
for heat inputs of 0.1 W, 0.15 W, and 0.2 W
with PCM
0.7% and 1.16% improvements in open
circuit voltage and power output,
respectively.
PCM layer thickness decreases temperature
fluctuation.

Optimal thermal conductivity was found as
0.6 W/m K
During melting of PCM, electrical properties
of the unit were stable
34.6% harvester efficiency was achieved

PCM-TEG has 29% higher energy yield than
the conventional TEG
TTEG generates 27% more electric potential
than one-stage TEG.
Hot/cold side temperatures of TEG reduced
C
from 135 to 72.5
f-HS TEG provide high power for 33 min

◦

Power output and efficiency were increased
by 49 and 19%, respectively
The highest harvesting current was 10 mA and
the harvesting field was 1900 and 850

• TEG modules’ reverse functioning helps solar power

[485]

generation’s day-night cycle.

• PCM on the hot side improved system stability

[486]

• PCM improves significantly TEG thermal

[487]

performance

• PCM and TE recover heat in cars

• TEG electrical energy is affected by PCM phase
change temperature, thickness, and thermal
conductivity

[488]

[489]

• Source temperature increases voltage and power

[490]

output regardless of TIM

• PCM increases TE power output, according to the

[491]

report

• Energy production was strongly correlated with

[492]

heat source temperature slope

• PCM-equipped TEG increased electrical energy

[493]

significantly

• The TTEG is ideal for noise-sensitive applications

[494]

since it is acoustically silent

• Foam/PCM composite with lower porosity offered

[495]

the highest improvement

• PCM-based flexible heatsinks are smaller and lighter

[496]

than metal heat sinks

• Under intense sun radiation, PCM protects the STEG

[497]

• The lower harvesting efficiency on cooling than

[498]

heating because some stored energy was dissipated
to the environment

28.9 kg of PCM and 5000 TEGs retrieve 6 kJ
each 1200 m dive cycle

• PCMs outperform seawater and stainless steel as

[499]

energy storage materials

Electrical efficiency was improved by 12.3%

• Compared to photovoltaic panels, it could harness

[500]

Output voltage around 90.8 mV was achieved
with composite PCM

solar energy more effectively

• Composite PCMs reduce output voltage variation by

[501]

30% when solar irradiation changes

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110927

H.M. Ali et al.

allowing it to maintain a stable temperature for a longer time, resulting
in an improvement in performance and an increase in energy efficiency.
PV systems are a further application of interest. As a PV cell converts
a  specified  wavelength  range  into  energy,  the  excess  energy  is  trans-
formed into heat. Consequently, a TEG-PCM may be used since it would
manage the solar panel’s temperature and convert the waste heat into
power. A PCM-TEG-PCM system may also be utilized for the same pur-
pose, which has the extra advantage of generating energy in the absence
of  sunshine  through  TEG  in  addition  to  the  indirect  efficiency
improvement in the PV system.

Table 16 shows various studies on TE-PCM-based research and ob-
serves that a combination of TE-PCM is a feasible solution to many ap-
plications.  Compared  to  standard  TE  systems,  TE-PCM  systems  can
achieve  improved  output  performance,  temperature  control,  and  an
expansion  of  relevant  fields  and  prolong  the  energy harvest  and  con-
version duration.

4.12. TES in the power sector

The  proportion  of  renewable  energy  sources  in  the  global  energy
supply has significantly increased in recent decades, particularly in the
power  sector.  Renewable  energy  accounted  for  nearly  30%  of  total
electricity  demand  in  2016  but  only  17%  of  total  final  energy  con-
sumption  [502].  Concentrated  solar  power  (CSP)  is  one  of  the  most
appealing solar energy technologies for power generation because of its
high  efficiency,  cheap  operating  costs,  and  potential  for  scaling  up.
Because  of  the  intermittent  nature  of  solar  energy,  a  TES  system  is
required for the CSP plant to run more reliably and satisfy power grid
demands [503]. As a result, the research focuses on choosing suitable
TES technologies and developing highly efficient and cost-effective TES
systems. Considering the significant energy savings and excellent energy
efficiency, CSP plants are expected to supply 7% of global electricity by
2030  and  25%  by  2050  [504].  Most  industrial  processes  require  a
continuous energy source 24 h a day and 365 days a year. Solar energy
will not be able to provide this demand indefinitely. While solar thermal
applications  in  industry are  limited,  the  TRL for  other  applications  is
high  [505–507].  Excess  solar  energy  from  the  day/summer  must  be
stored for usage at night or during the winter. As a result, TES is used in
the power sector to provide capacity firming, load shifting, and other
auxiliary services.

There are two types of TES integration concepts in CSP plants: active
and  passive.  The  storage  medium  flows  in  active  storage  systems  to
absorb/release heat via forced convection. In passive storage systems,
the storage media (usually solids) is kept immobile and heated/cooled
by the circulation of another heat transfer fluid; however, active storage
systems  can  be  of  two  types:  direct  and  indirect.  In  an  active  direct
approach, the storage media also serves as the solar field’s heat transfer
fluid. The heat transfer fluid and the storage media are different in active
indirect systems.

With advanced technologies and CSP application, molten-salt TES is
the  predominant  technology  in  the  power  sector.  Pelay,  Luo  [508]
studied 237 CSP plants globally. They found 19 active before 2000, 24
between 2000 and 2010, and 85 after 2010. Additionally, 35 plants were
in progress, and 74 proposed. TES was used in 47% of functioning CSP
plants. Commercial CSP plants primarily used eutectic-based synthetic
◦
thermal oil [508], which operates between 12 and 400
C and begins to
decompose beyond its optimal limit. This oil’s usual temperature range
◦
in CSP facilities is 293–393
C. Due to high vapor pressure at increased
temperatures,  it  needs  a  pressurized  storage  tank,  which  is  not
economical  [509,510].  Conversely,  molten  salts  (nitrates)  are  more
common for TES in high-temperature solar applications for their supe-
rior  working  temperature,  low  vapor  pressure,  more  thermal  cycles,
nonflammability, and higher density [508,511]. Their maximum tem-
◦
perature limit is 600
C
due to oxide formation [513].

◦
C [512], but they become corrosive beyond 565

Parabolic trough collectors, solar power towers (SPT), parabolic dish

collectors, and linear Fresnel reflectors are among the most established
concentrating devices [334]. Out of these, parabolic trough collectors
and SPT is the most used CSP plant. The SPT has a high storage inte-
gration capability at a low cost [514–516]. The installed cost of a CSP
plant-based  project  with  4–8  h  of  TES  capacity  ranges  between  USD
3183  and  USD  8645.  While  the  installed  cost  of  a  TES  plant  with  a
storage time of 8 h or more lies between USD 4077 and USD 5874 [517].
It is possible to augment the complete economics of the TES plant by
increasing the plant operating temperature; however, this is limited due
to  the  functioning  range  of  the  TES  material  temperature,  as  molten
◦
C.
salt-based TES plants have a maximum operating temperature of 565
According  to  the  study,  increasing  the  plant’s  operating  temperature
boosts its overall effectiveness [323]. Therefore, unique thermo-physical
characteristics  such as  high  thermal  conductivity,  high heat  capacity,
and higher thermal cycle stability are required for CSP plants operating
at high temperatures. Table 17 represents the predicted and projected
technological innovation needs for operating temperature, ESD, cost per
kWh, cycle stability, and efficiency of the CSP plants integrated with TES
materials.

The CSP plants integrated with molten salt face several challenges,
including  the  significant  expense  of  the  molten  salt  storage  media,
reliability concerns due to the corrosive nature of the salt storage ma-
terial, and considerable standby energy (backup) required to minimize
the threat of salt freezing, as well as concerns about antifreeze costs and
pumping requirements. Therefore, solid-state concrete-based CSP plants
can be more cost-effective than molten salt-based ones because concrete
is less expensive. These systems operate at almost ambient temperatures,
eliminating the need for a pressure vessel and lowering the initial cost of
these TES material-based CSP plants. According to Ref. [518], the life-
time of these storage materials is reduced when they are maintained at
high  operating  temperatures,  and  there  is  a  risk  of  cracking  after
repeated thermal cycles (compression and expansion). The two plants
based on concrete plants are developing in China [519]. Martins, Vil-
lalobos  [520]  and  Salomoni,  Majorana  [521]  studied  making
concrete-integrated  CSP  plants  work  better  in  high-temperature  envi-
ronments.  The  rocks  can  store  electricity  generated  from  renewable
sources by resistive heating or upgrade with a heat pump. The stored
heat  can  subsequently  power  a  steam  or  gas  turbine.  Compared  to
lithium-ion battery storage, this is the better option [522]. Deign [523]
began work on a project with a capacity of 1.5 MW/30 MWh, using the
rocks as TES materials with resistive heat and stored heat to power the
steam turbine, whereas Collins [524] used the same TES-type material
but upgrading with a heat pump and stored heat to power the gas tur-
bine. The project has a capacity of 5MW/120 MWh and can be used to
store wind energy for up to 24 h.

Pardo  et  al.  [525]  found  that  thermochemical  TES  is  a  potential
technique to store solar thermal energy for the long term. CaCO3 is the
best thermochemical material, according to Prieto et al. [526], because
◦
of its high operating temperature and high ESD of 800–900
C and 4400
MJ/m3,  respectively.  Alovisio  et  al.  [527]  evaluated  the  various  con-
figurations of thermochemical integrated CSP plants based on calcium
looping. Calcium looping was chosen because natural CaO precursors
(limestone)  are  inexpensive  and  have  a  high  ESD  of  3.2  GJ/m3.  The
study revealed that a closed regenerative CO2  Brayton cycle offers the
most excellent plant efficiency at 45%.

The adiabatic compressed air energy storage (CAES) system manages
grid load by holding pressurized air while the required demand is little
and releasing it to generate power when demand rises. These systems are
currently limited due to technological reediness constraints. Presently,
two commercial CAES plants are in operation. One has a capacity of 290
MW in Germany, while the other has a total of 110 MW in the United
States. The disadvantages of these plants include their high initial in-
vestment  costs  and  response  time  being  lesser  than  electrochemical
batteries. However, they can be used for bulk storage and have a long
lifespan. Liquid air energy storage (LAES) is a system like CAES but has
lesser geographical constraints. Based on LAES, a demo project has been

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110928

H.M. Ali et al.

Table 17
Predicted and projected innovation requirements for CSP plants integrated with TES materials [323].

Attributes

Sensible

Latent

Thermochemical

Operating temperature
◦
(

C)

ESD (kWh/m3)

Cost (USD/kWh)

Cyclic stability (Number of
cycles)

Efficiency (%)

2018  <565
2030
2050
2018
2030
2050
2018
2030

600–700
>700
<600
600–750
700–850
500–900

2050

500–1000

70–200
Depends on the materials
selection
30–85

800–1200

25–30
<15
<12
25–90
25–35
<12
Research level
Pilot scale
80–160
Demonstration
<80

<10000
>10000

3000–5000
4000–5000
5000–10000
<100
500–1000

>1000–3000

>90
>92
>95
>90
>92
>95
40–50
Not available due to lower
TRL

installed  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  a  commercial  project  has  been
established in North America [528]. CAES and LAES systems can store a
lot of energy for a low price, but they have a slower response time than
traditional lithium-ion batteries. It is also proposed to use standalone
molten salts in novel forms known as Carnot batteries in conjunction
with  existing  coal  plants.  Surplus  energy  is  converted  into  heat  and
stored before being converted into power by a steam turbine, although
such facilities are only 40% efficient. SolarPACES [529] offered a project
using a redesigned turbine and heat exchanger to increase efficiency to
60%.  Freund  [530]  proposes  a  four-tank  storage  system  with  a  more
excellent operating temperature range and improves the efficiency and
power of TES devices.

Some of the limitations and prospects of TES materials and systems in

the power sector are as follows:

o  The  performance  of  thermochemical  storage-based  plants  must  be
evaluated  according  to  application  cases  such  as  24-h  electricity
production, seasonal storage, and peak load, and large-scale exper-
imentations  must  be  performed  to  test  the  potential  of  thermo-
chemical  storage  power  systems  for  short  and  long-term  energy
storage.

o There is needed to study the technical-economic analysis to deter-
mine  the  viability  of  the  overall  TES  power  system  and  develop
flexible  modular  TES  units  and  their  proper  assembly  and
management.

o There is a need for cost reduction and development in LAES, adia-
batic  CAES  systems  to  use  in  TES  across  the  solar  PV  and  wind
generation to make it a viable alternative to CSP plants integrated
with molten salts.

4.13. TES in DHC systems

The centralized generation and distribution of heating and cooling
are referred to as DHC. These systems, as opposed to individual boilers
or chillers in each building, use a linkage of shielded pipes to distribute
required  heat/cold  from  a  centralized  generation  source  to  multiple
buildings. End-user buildings are primarily residential or commercial,
with  space  and  water  cooling/heating  requirements;  however,  many
district  energy  systems  can  also  fulfil  industrial  energy  demand.  This
energy  production  and  distribution  method  cuts  emissions  and  costs
while allowing for large-scale integration of renewable into urban areas
due to efficiency advantages [531,532].

The  heating/cooling  technologies  employed  as  district  resources
include boiler systems, cogeneration plants and waste furnaces, indus-
trial  plants  WH,  heat  pumps,  geothermal,  and  energy  solar  thermal
plants. As previously stated, district heating (DH)/district cooling (DC)
systems  can  help  to  improve  efficiency  and  thus  help  the  sector’s
decarbonization.  However,  in  DHC  systems,  there  are  two  primary
breaches between thermal energy demand and supply [5]. The timing
gap  between  the  generation  and  use  of  thermal  energy  causes  one.
Physical  factors,  such  as  the  intermittent  nature  and  dynamic

characteristics of energy produced by solar sources, or economic factors,
such as the cost difference in thermal energy during the day, can account
for  the  time  difference.  The  second  chasm  is  the  distance  between
centralized energy generation plants and end-user. When there is a gap
between production and consumption, there is a risk of wasting thermal
energy that is not consumed. The use of TES in DHC could help to bridge
these  time  gaps.  The  fundamental  benefit  of  adopting  TES  in  DH/DC
systems is the ability to decouple heat/cold generation from consump-
tion. When demand exceeds supply, whether, on a short or long-time
scale, the primary purpose of TES is to store the highest renewable en-
ergy production for later heat/cold consumption. TES can store excess
heat in solar thermal DH systems, which can then be released at times of
low  solar  radiation,  such  as  at  night  or  in  the  winter.  On  a  daily,
monthly,  or  even  seasonal  basis,  TES  systems  can  assist  in  balancing
energy demand and supply. They can also minimize peak demand, en-
ergy  use,  pollutants,  and  expenses  while  refining  overall  system  per-
formance [533]. These benefits are expected to propel the TES market
forward. The heating and cooling sectors have a lot of opportunities for
integrating intermittent renewable energy sources like wind and solar
since TES is substantially cheaper than electricity storage. The two basic
types of TES are short-term and long-term storage. Storage is utilized in
the first scenario to supply daily peak requests, which might last any-
where from a few hours to a day. Long-term TES allows energy to be
stored  for  weeks  to  months.  During  the  winter  and  summer  seasons,
when demand is higher, they are usually employed to make heat or cold
storage  available.  Because  the  installed  TES,  both  long-term  and
short-term, are primarily sensible TES [534].

Tanks filled with water are the most commonly used TES in DH for
short-term applications. Tank TES is a well-established and widely used
technology  found  in  small  commercial  and  residential  buildings  and
large-scale or DH systems [535]. Tank and Seasonal TES are used as a
daily thermal buffer or short-term storage. In 1996, a 12,000 m3  rein-
forced concrete hot-water storage was erected in Friedrichshafen, Ger-
many’s first Tank TES system coupled to a DH system, to store heat for
280 homes and one kindergarten [536]. Solar collectors were mounted
in 2700 m2 to heat 23,000 m2 of living space. If solar thermal energy is
insufficient, two gas boilers with 900 and 750 kW capacities have been
constructed as backup heating systems. In the five Nordic nations, there
are  209  DH  systems  with  a  total  heat supply  of  261  PJ/year  and  1.6
million cubic meters of installed water volume [537].

Seasonal  TES  is  often  used  in  DH  systems  since  the  massive  heat
storage required would be prohibitively expensive compared to existing
storage. It is frequently used with solar plants to store heat in the sum-
mer  when  high  solar  irradiation  corresponds  with  low  demand  and
would otherwise be squandered so that it may be used in the winter.
Europe, Korea, Russia, Japan, North America, and China all have DH
systems. There are around 80,000 systems in use around the world, with
600,000 trench km of DH pipes. Approximately 11 EJ of heat is deliv-
ered annually to meet low-temperature heat demand in industrial pro-
cesses, as well as space heating and hot water requirements in residential
and commercial buildings. However, in around 6000 systems in Europe,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110929

H.M. Ali et al.

180,000 km of trench length of DH pipes are used, and slightly more
than 2 EJ of heat is supplied [538]. DH systems based on variable wind
and solar PV have been tested in China, Denmark, Russia, Sweden, and
the United States [323,539–541]. Over 200 solar DH systems exist in
Europe, mainly in Denmark, Germany, Austria, and Sweden [542]. The
three primary underwater thermal energy storage (UTES) technologies
are pit thermal energy storage (PTES), aquifer thermal energy storage
(ATES), and borehole thermal energy storage (BTES). UTES can be used
for  DHC;  however,  its  application  is  constrained  by  geographical and
geological  constraints.  UTES,  particularly  PTES,  is  the  most  common
type  of  TES.  PTES  is  a  well-established  technology  for  large-scale  SH
storage  that  provides  high  energy  density  and  system  performance
[543]. PTES also emphasizes the importance of effective insulation to
stop heat loss. Glass wool, expanded polystyrene, polyurethane, foam
glass, and extruded polystyrene are common thermal insulation mate-
rials  usually  placed  inside  or  outside  the  building  material  [544].  In
1984,  Stuttgart  University  initiated  the  first  large-scale  PTES  project.
During the heating season of 1986 and 1987, a solar fraction of 62% and
a storage efficiency of 82% were attained [545]. When seasonal storage
is added, high deployment rates of solar thermal generating (up to 90%)
are conceivable [546].

Plants  that  generate  both  heat  and  electricity  are  known  as  CHP
plants. TES allows for a more flexible generation link between heat and
power generation. Electricity market prices are typically higher during
the day than at night. With TES, a CHP plant’s part-load operation can be
focused during the day, increasing electricity revenues. After that, the
TES will be charged during the day and discharged at night. In 2014,
geothermal heat was estimated to account for less than 1% of the energy
sources used in DH schemes around the world. San Bernardino, Elko,
Boise, and Clamon Falls are among the cities in the United States that
have implemented such systems [547]. France, Germany, Iceland, and
Italy have the most installed capacity in Europe [548].

◦

The temperature of the supply is usually consistent and low (between
50 and 90
C), dependent on the availability of local geothermal heat
sources).  Due  to  higher  mass  flows  (because  of  the  low-temperature
gap),  heat  storage  installation  becomes  more  difficult.  However,  as
proposed  in  Ref.  [549],  proper  sizing  of  the  TES  coupled  with  the
geothermal source makes the facility more favorable. The availability of
local geothermal heat sources constrains geothermal systems. However,
urban DH schemes could provide geothermally powered heat to up to
25% of Europe’s population [550]. Seasonal heat storage systems based
on BTES have been tried in Denmark and Canada, and many projects in
China’s Tibet region are underway. BTES uses an underground buried
pipe to store extra heat in the soil. Single U pipe, casing pipe, and double
U pipe are the types of pipes buried. Soil has a lower TES capacity and
thermal conductivity than water. As a result, a larger thermal storage
volume  is  required  for  a  given  amount  of  thermal  energy.  In  China
[551],  North  America  [552],  and  northern  Europe,  underground
water-TES  technologies  are  frequently  used  in  conjunction  with  DHC
systems.  Geographical  characteristics  and  site  properties,  such  as  un-
derground water, soil’s thermal conductivity, outdoor temperature, flow
velocity,  etc.,  significantly  impact  energy  performance,  especially  for
underground seasonal TES. The specific heat capacity and ground den-
sity also impact the long run [553]. Around the world, there are a pro-
jected 80000 DH systems. Most systems are employed in colder climates,
with northern China, northern Europe, and Russia having the highest
implementation  rates.  ATES  is  a  system  that  uses  underground  water
from naturally existing aquifers to heat and cool buildings in the winter
and summer. ATES systems use a hot and cold well, and wells can extract
groundwater from an aquifer, which can then be heated or cooled before
reinjection. The storage medium is the aquifer geologic structure, and
the HT fluid is groundwater [554]. Before the year 2000, the majority of
ATES  systems were used to heat and cool separate buildings, such as
offices and hospitals.

Recently, the application has begun to use DH systems. Over 2500
systems are operational in the Netherlands [555], 220 in Sweden, 30 in

Belgium,  and  55  in  Denmark,  and  over  2800  installations  are  opera-
tional worldwide. The total heat and cold generated by all ATES systems
are expected to be around 2.5 TWh per year, equal to the average annual
thermal energy consumption of 150,000 Central European households
[556].  Furthermore,  more  countries  are  becoming  interested  in  ATES
technology. Since the first ATES system was implemented in the United
Kingdom in 2006, nearly a dozen projects have been completed over the
last  decade  [557].  An  ATES  system  requires  suitable  hydrogeological
conditions,  which  have  a  substantial  impact  on  the  system’s  perfor-
mance, as well as relatively large thermal loads, as well as compliance
with regulatory requirements.  Further developments are envisaged as
many  major  United  Kingdom  cities  have  hydrogeological  conditions
appropriate for ATES [558]. In Rostock, Germany’s first ATES central
solar  heating  system  was  installed  in  2000,  providing  domestic  hot
water and DH to 108 flats with a total heated living area of 7000 m2
[559]. The buildings had 980 m2 solar collectors installed on their roofs,
and 30 m underneath, a doublet of wells was sunk.

Cooling loads are similar to DH in that they vary seasonally, and TES
aids in maximizing the generation source’s efficiency. TES allows for a
consistent  cold  generation  while  also  meeting  varying  load  re-
quirements. When electric chillers are used in DC, TES helps to reduce
peak electricity usage on the networks by shifting production to lower
demand hours [560]. North America, the Far East, the Middle East, and
Europe all use DC systems. Cold deliveries in the Middle East are esti-
mated to be 400 PJ, 90 PJ in the United States, 13 PJ in Japan, and 10 PJ
in Europe per year. Europe has over 100 DC systems, mostly in France,
Sweden, and Germany [561]. DC meets more than 20% of the total space
cooling load in the United Arab Emirates [562]. China had an expanding
industry  in  2013,  with  833  projects  reported  nationwide  [563].  For
space cooling, the principal customers are the residential buildings and
the service industry [541]. Ice storage and chilled water storage are the
two main types of TES used in DC. Ice storage requires a smaller storage
tank than chilled water storage and can deliver water at a lower tem-
perature  [564].  DC  systems  can  be  found  across  various  latitudes,
indicating  that  their  implementation  is  mainly  climate-independent
[562].  Short-term  ice  storage  is  commonly  utilized  when  the  power
source and cooling load are variables. Because ice storage takes up just
25% of the space that chilled water tanks occupy, it is perfect for usage
in cities [565]. Ice has often been employed as a cool TES material due to
its high LH of fusion. Ice storage is used in Paris [566], Chicago [567],
Yokohama [568], and Marina Bay [569]. The most popular TES choice
for DC is chilled water tanks, large steel and concrete tanks with volumes
of  up  to  150,000  m3  in  this  application  [570].  Using  an  absorption
chiller, surplus solar energy during periods of high irradiation can be
utilized to cool the water in these systems [558]. Five DC systems began
supplying  cold  air  to  public  buildings  in  Shenzhen’s  Qianhai  area  in
2021, covering  more than 2.75 square  kilometers, but not residential
buildings [571]. A DC system distributes cooling capacity from a central
source  in  the  form  of  chilled  water  or  another  medium  to  several
buildings  via  a  network  of  subterranean  pipes.  Gujarat  International
Finance Tech-City has India’s first merchant DC system, developed by
the state government. The DC system will meet the total requirement of
270,000 TR of air-conditioning with only 180,000 TR of chillers. Each
plant is equipped with a chilled water-based stratified TES tank that can
be  charged  during  off-peak  hours  and  discharged  during  peak  hours,
reducing the electrical demand from 240 MW to only 135 MW [572].
UTES can be utilized for long-term cold storage; however, its usefulness
is limited due to the subsurface environment.

By 2050, urbanization is predicted to account for more than 80% of
Europe’s population [573]. DHC systems are exceptionally well suited
for installation in urban areas. Because demand for heating and cooling
varies throughout the day, season, and year, TES will need to be linked
with these systems for high-performance operation. High-temperature
PCMs and Composite phase-change materials have the potential to be
used  successfully  in  DH  applications.  Compared  to  sensible  technolo-
gies,  the  systems’  increased  storage  density  and  thermal  conductivity

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110930

H.M. Ali et al.

enable  them  to  store  massive  energy  in  a  smaller  volume.  Instead  of
chilled water or ice storage, PCMs based on eutectic salt-water mixtures
with  melting  temperatures  around  7–8
C  could  be  employed  [323].
Because of the greater charging temperature, the charging efficiency is
higher  than  ice  storage,  and  the  tank  volume  is  substantially  smaller
than  a  chilled  water  tank.  Improved  TES  efficiencies  will  continue  to
increase  the  viability of  co-deployed  DHC,  and  the  TES  market is  ex-
pected to be fueled further by the cost-effectiveness of TES.

◦

5. Limitations, challenges and recommendations for PCMs

Even though TES materials have various forms illustrated in previous
sections,  the  TES  systems  governed  by  PCMs,  typically  described  as
LHTES systems, have potential applications on a research and industrial
scale. Hence, they are the major constituent of the TES systems. Despite
the numerous applications of PCMs in the energy and thermal sector,
still, they have some limitations, which are being discussed here.

5.1. Thermal conductivity

Energy  storage  applications  demand  high  thermal  charging  and
discharging rates for the TES system to be efficient. One of the major
drawbacks of using PCMs is their low thermal conductivity which varies
from  0.2  to  0.8  W/m  K  depending  on  the  type  of  PCM.  In  general,
organic PCMs have the lowest thermal conductivity (up to 0.2 W/m K),
followed  by  inorganic  and  metallic  PCMs  [24].  Hence,  PCMs  are  not
efficient media for energy storage and retrieval in their pristine form.
There exist various methods for the thermal conductivity enhancement
of  PCMs,  including  making  its  composites  with  highly  conductive
nanoparticles [574–576], metal matrix [577,578] and PCM encapsula-
tion [579–581]. PCM encapsulation is further categorized as nano (<
1 μm), micro (1 μm (cid:0) 1 mm) and macro encapsulation (1 mm (cid:0)
1 cm)
based on the final capsule diameter [582].

When  it  comes  to  enhancing  thermal  conductivity,  the  biggest
challenge  is finding  a host material that can effectively improve heat
transfer  while  keeping  PCM  materials  cost-effective  and  ensuring
outstanding compatibility under working conditions. For instance, nano
PCM  composites  tend  to  cause  new  challenges,  e.g.,  thermal  and
chemical stability, cost augmentation, compatibility with the system and
complexity. In this respect, Khan et al. revealed the cost enhancement of
nano PCM composites by 5–21 times for the CuO nanoPCMs with con-
centrations  of  1  vol%  and  5  vol%  respectively  [583].  Another
advancement  to  enhance  the  thermal  conductivity  of  PCMs  is  to
encapsulate them within a shell (silica etc.) with high thermal conduc-
tivity. However, this method of thermal conductivity augmentation is
the  most  cost-intensive  and  complex  one.  Furthermore,  supercooling
occurs  for  encapsulated  PCMs  because  of  the  absence  or  shortage  of
nuclei due to very low shell space.

5.2. Latent heat

The key feature of PCMs which enables them to be used for energy
storage  applications  is  the  extensive  value  of  their  latent  heat  which
ranges up to 300 kJ/kg on average. The LHTES system can store thermal
energy without the extensive temperature upsurge. As discussed in the
previous  section,  apart  from  enhancing  thermal  conductivity,  PCM
composites also lead to some other challenges. Advanced energy storage
materials (encapsulated, nano and composite PCMs etc.) generally have
improved thermal conductivity. However, one of the biggest challenges
associated with such advanced energy storage materials is the reduced
latent  heat  hence  the  heat  storage  capacity.  For  instance,  Khan  et  al.
[583] reported the total enthalpy reduction of CuO nano PCM by 8.0%
and 32.1% for the nanoparticles’ concentrations of 1 vol% and 5 vol%
respectively. Yuan et al. [584] revealed that the latent heat of the EG and
GNP-based nano PCMs was decreased from 166 to 140 kJ/kg and 167 to
132  kJ/kg  for  the  concentrations  of  nanoparticles  1  wt%  to  8  wt%

respectively. Insertion of metallic foams also contributes to the enthalpy
reduction of PCMs. Various factors, e.g., material, porosity, and pore size
of the foam, influence the amount of latent heat reduction. Numerous
other researchers, for instance, Huang et al. [585], reported a decline in
latent  heat  by  3–29%  for  the  40  PPI  copper  foam.  Chen  et  al.  [586]
investigated  the  copper  foam-based  PCMs  and  found  that  47.4  J/g
reduced  latent  heat.  Li  et  al.  [587]  experimentally  investigated  the
microencapsulation-based PCMs impregnated within the metallic foam
and noticed that the composite PCMs’ latent heat was reduced by half.

5.3. Supercooling

Some  molten  PCMs  solidify  at  a  temperature  below  their  melting
temperatures  when  cooled.  This  particular  phenomenon  is  termed
supercooling.  It  occurs  due  to  the  slow  rate  of  nucleation  or  slower
nuclei  growth  rate  (sometimes  both)  [588].  Hydrated  salts  often  un-
dergo this phenomenon because of their poor nucleating properties. This
kind of behavior limits the practicality of PCMs in energy storage ap-
plications. In severe cases, it can cause a significant hindrance in energy
recovery  [589].  Supercooling  occurs  only  in  the  solidification  phase.
The  latent  heat  is  not  released  during  the  phase  change  processing.
Rather  PCM  gets  cooled  slowly  until  the  point  of  crystallization  is
commenced. The stored energy will only be released as sensible heat if
crystallization does not begin. It may give rise to a significant challenge
for TES applications. Supercooling reduces the efficiency of the cooling
system  drastically  because  more  heat  rejection  would  be  required  to
achieve the liquid-solid phase transition point [590]. Fig. 31 illustrates
the supercooling phenomena for the eutectic solution.

In general, organic PCMs undergo low supercooling in their pristine
form. However, encapsulated PCMs experience larger supercooling due
to the low number of nuclei within the confined shell [591]. However,
they exist  and  are suitable  for  low-medium temperature  applications.
Because of the inflammable property and low flash point temperature,
organic  PCMs  are  risky  to  implement  in  high-temperature  thermal
storage applications. On the other hand, inorganic PCMs, e.g., hydrated
salts have the desired properties for high thermal storage applications,
including concentrated solar energy harvesting. However, super-cooling
is  the  major  issue  with  such  PCMs.  Although  nanoPCMs  reduce  the
supercooling of PCMs to some extent, still, there is no reliable solution to
handle the supercooling of PCMs. There should be further investigations
to mitigate this eminent issue.

5.4. Corrosion

Metals are the main candidates for containing PCMs for encapsula-
tion, surface area and thermal conductivity enhancement. However, one
of the major challenges associated with PCMs is their compatibility with
the containing materials. Incompatibility of the containing materials for
PCMs may lead to corrosion, making the design of TES imperfect [592].
In general, inorganic PCMs (mostly the salts hydrates) are prone to more
corrosion than organic PCMs and thus investigated more as reported by
Kong et al. [593]. For thermal applications, the corrosion effect of PCMs
has been widely investigated for the cases of fins, metallic foams and
metallic capsules used to encapsulate PCMs. Numerous researchers have
analyzed the corrosion tests for energy storage applications using salts
hydrates as a PCM and metals [132,594–597].

◦

◦

C [598], 32–36

There were several tests conducted for the long-term and short-term
immersion corrosion of the salt hydrates PCMs with the metals (brass,
copper,  aluminum,  steel  and  stainless  steel)  for  the  melting  ranges
24–29
C [596] and 48–58
C [599]. Based on the re-
sults, it was concluded that stainless steel container is more suitable than
others. However, for higher temperatures, copper, brass and aluminum
were considered suitable for avoiding corrosion. Hence, it showed that
only single material could not be suitable for all conditions. Likewise,
Nagano et al. [600] revealed the corrosion effect of MgNO3.6H2O with a
10% blend of MgCl2 for six classes of metals (aluminum, brass, carbon

◦

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110931

H.M. Ali et al.

steel, copper, and stainless steel). Results indicated that aluminum and
stainless steel were appropriate for PCM storage. Vasu et al. [592] and
Marín et al. [601] presented a review on the corrosive effect of com-
mercial and non-commercial TES materials such as organic [602], slat
hydrates  and  the  mixture  of  the  eutectics  and  salts  [603].  Or ́o  et  al.
[594] (Fig. 32) investigated the commercial-grade TES materials E-21
and C-18 to notice their compatibility with aluminum, copper, steel and
stainless steel. They found the unsuitability of using these TES materials
with  aluminum  and  copper.  Gil  et  al.  [137]  illustrated  some  of  the
studies and their recommendations about the corrosive nature of the TES
materials with the metals. Hua et al. [604] recently reviewed the use of
PCMs in LHTES and focused on the compatibility issues between PCMs
and packaging materials. It examined corrosion problems, particularly
in relation to different metals and PCMs, and discussed the corrosion
protection methods. The study suggested the need for further research
on corrosive behavior, including the use of corrosion tests and exploring
additives to address corrosion challenges.

The comprehensive analyses revealed that commercial PCMs are still
to  be  investigated  more  than  non-commercial  ones  to  observe  their
corrosion-oriented  compatibility.  Due  to  the  limited  data  availability
and corrosive nature of the commercial grade, TES materials should be
focused on now. Additionally, no data was found for the solidified hy-
drated salts for the TES system design under practical conditions. There
should be consideration of the humidity and pressure in accordance with
the market compatibility. Such analyses will lead to the optimal design
solution of the TES systems for the market implications [605].

5.5. Leakage

Because PCM undergoes a phase transition when storing/releasing
heat, a container is required to hold the storage medium. Leakage can be
prevented  by  encasing  PCMs  in  a  container  through  micro/nano-
encapsulation [606,607] or immersing them in the matrix of the sup-
porting material [608]. Although the problem can be handled initially,
the  leakage  can  recur  after  a  certain  number  of  cycles,  limiting  its
applicability,  particularly  in  the  construction  and  transportation  in-
dustries. The microencapsulation approach has a number of drawbacks,
including  the  high  cost  of  the  procedure  and  the  daunting  task  of
selecting and developing the appropriate materials for the application.
However, nano-enhanced PCMs are advantageous over the encapsulated
PCMs  in  terms  of  large  surface  area,  low  leakage  and  uniform  flow
making  them  an  eminent  choice  for  TES  applications  [609–611].
Nevertheless, the high cost of nanoparticles is a discouraging point in
such composites. Composite PCMs based on Supporting materials, e.g.,
FM-PCMs and matrixes, reduce the leakage issues of PCMs and impart
mechanical  strength  to  the  PCM  composite.  However,  cementitious
PCMs  are susceptible to leakage and  instability when integrated  with
matrixes [612,613].

The energy conversion system based on PCM composites faces the
difficulty of low energy conversion efficiency at temperatures below and
above  the  phase  transition  range  when  using  supporting  elements  to
avoid leakage. Due to rapid heat exchange with the environment, effi-
ciency  loss  is  particularly  severe  in  porous  supporting  materials,
resulting  in  an  extreme  convective  heat  dissipation  phenomenon.
Furthermore,  the  harmful  influence  of  synthetic  materials  and  the
techniques involved in producing the supporting structures for the shape
stabilization of PCM must be considered. While discussing the various
classes of PCMs, organic PCMs are more prone to leakage than inorganic
PCMs due to their low density. Salts hydrates, which are mostly used as
TES material for solar applications due to their extreme values of latent
heat  and  melting  points,  are  also  challenging  because  of  the  risk  of
thermal instability of their nanocomposites.

system separates into two distinct phases following melting and solidi-
fication. This issue is typically related to inorganic PCMs, impacting the
material’s  thermal  behavior.  As  the  temperature  rises,  most  hydrated
salts decompose, releasing water and a lesser hydrated salt in their place.
Lower hydrated salt is denser than water. Therefore, it tends to settle to
the bottom. As a result, just a small coating of salt will be able to re-
crystallize  upon  freezing.  As  an  irreversible  process,  incongruent
melting will significantly diminish the storage efficiency.

Including  suspension  media  or  thickening  agents,  the  extra  water
principle, chemical modification, and dynamic melting are four strate-
gies  for  preventing  incongruent  melting  [614].  In  order  to  retain  the
lower  hydrated  salt  in  suspension,  suspension  medium  or  thickening
agents are employed. However, thickening agents remove PCM from the
system in some way. When heated to a certain temperature, the PCM’s
volumetric  heat  storage  capacity  and  melting  point  decrease.  Adding
more water to the hydrated salt makes PCM a saturated salt solution at
the melting point, according to the extra water principle. Therefore, the
system has saturated solution and hydrated salt at temperatures below
the melting point. This technique reduces the system’s volumetric heat
storage  capacity again.  As a  result,  the melting range expands  [615].
Recommendations were proposed by Carlsson et al. [616] to prevent the
melting of calcium chloride hexahydrate from being incongruent. The
hydrated salt is mixed with a little amount of an isomorphous salt, and
the two combine to produce a solid solution. A lower hydrated salt is
avoided  since  the  modified  PCM’s  melting  point  has  been  adjusted.
Dynamic melting keeps the solution homogeneous when PCM is in the
liquid state [614].

5.7. Thermal instability

Repetition of storage cycles may lead to the degradation of PCMs.
Any PCM’s thermophysical characteristics should not degrade rapidly
over time. PCM is said to be dependable if it is thermally, chemically,
and physically stable after repeated thermal cycles of operation. A few
researchers, for instance, Rathod and Banerjee [617], published reviews
on the thermal instability of PCMs. Likewise, Ferrer et al. [618] enlisted
PCMs  which  have  undergone  thermal  cycling.  Numerous  researchers
reported the thermal stability of the organic PCMs through differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermo-gravimetric analyses (TGA) [41,
42,619–624]. For instance, Hadjieva et al. [625] analyzed three paraf-
fins for the 900 thermal cycles and reported negligible thermal degra-
dation. Similarly, Sharma et al. [626] evaluated the thermal stability of
◦
the commercial grade paraffin wax (melting temperature 53
C) for 300
melting/freezing cycles and found PCM as thermally stable. On the other
hand,  the  same  authors  reported  the  instability  of  the  stearic  acid
(eutectic PCM) compared to that of paraffin (organic PCM) [627].

In general, inorganic PCMs are prone to more thermal degradation.
Wada et al. [628] determined the thermal stability of sodium acetate
trihydrate for the 500 thermal cycles and reported the decline in melting
temperature  and  latent  heat  of  PCM.  Similar  results  were  reported
regarding  the  thermal  instability  of  the  inorganic  PCMs  [629–634].
Further  investigations  should  be  conducted  on  advanced  inorganic
PCMs for various applications. For instance, Xie et al. [635] developed
and  investigated  the  polyurethane  acrylate-coated  salt  hydrate/diato-
mite with enhanced thermal and chemical stability. Though advanced
TES  materials  like  nano-enhanced  PCMs  (NePCMs)  show  a  slight
improvement  in  thermal  stability,  however,  the  dispersion  of  the
NePCMs is no longer uniform for the massive number of thermal cycling.
Furthermore, the thermal stability of the high melting temperature TES
materials should also be further investigated. The bio-based PCMs can
be a viable option for the solid-solid energy storage. However, there is
not enough studies available in the literature.

5.6. Phase segregation

6. Preliminary ranking and selection of PCM

Phase separation or phase segregation arises when a two-component

Selection  of  energy  storage  materials  is  governed  by  the  ideal

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110932

H.M. Ali et al.

thermophysical  properties  materials  should  possess.  The  thermal  per-
formance of the energy storage system is regulated by several parame-
ters,  including  latent  heat,  melting  temperature,  specific  heat,  and
thermal conductivity of the TES materials. However, no materials with
ideal thermophysical properties pertain to numerous applications. The
primary  concern  of  energy  storage  materials  is  their  thermal  perfor-
mance,  cost,  and  environmental  sustainability  (non-pollutant  and
recyclable).  The  economic  feasibility  of  the  materials  emphasizes  the
direct cost of the material and its density. A typical thermal system re-
quires  a  certain  volume  of  the  material;  the  higher-density  material
would cost more in terms of its higher required mass. It is hard to choose
a  particular  material  without  a  comparative  analysis.  Although  some
database exists for the materials’  selection [636,637], there is still no
quantified method for the thermal performance and cost estimation in
terms of superiority.

6.1. Phase change temperature

◦

During  the  selection  of  the  energy  storage  materials  (PCMs),  it  is
worth noting that PCMs should be selected to undergo complete melting
to use their latent energy completely. The energy harvesting from the
source at the temperature of 80
C requires PCMs with a phase change
temperature reasonably less than that of the source temperature. Simi-
larly, energy storage for the thermal management of electronics requires
PCMs with particular melting ranges for different critical temperatures.
Rehman  et  al.  [638,639]  conducted  a  series  of  experiments  for  the
various  critical  temperature  considering  four  PCMs  with  different
melting ranges. As a result, different PCMs were suitable for different
◦
critical temperatures. Taking the case of a critical temperature of 50
C,
RT-44HC with a melting point of 44
C revealed the best thermal per-
formance  because  of  PCM’s  complete  melting  with  not  much
post-sensible heating. So, the optimal melting point of PCM is chosen to
◦
be 44
C and is given the score 100
and the rest of the PCMs with various melting temperatures are scored
according to eq. (5).

◦
C for the critical temperature of 50

◦

Scoretemp,i =

44 (cid:0)

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒Tm,i (cid:0) 44
44

× 100

Eq. 5 can be generalized as;
⃒
⃒Tm,i (cid:0) Topt
Topt

Topt (cid:0)

⃒
⃒

Scoretemp,i =

× 100

(5)

(6)

6.2. Latent heat and thermal conductivity

The  high  value  of  the  latent  heat  is  preferable  for  energy  storage
materials.  Thus,  from  the  selected  group  of  PCMs,  the  highest  score
(100) is assigned to PCM with the highest value of the latent heat. The
rest of the PCMs are scored as follows;

ScoreΔH,i =

TΔH,i
TΔH,max

× 100

(7)

PCMs  have  slightly  different  thermal  conductivities  in  solid  and
liquid states. In the liquid state, the material’s atoms are comparatively
less ordered, slightly lowering the thermal conductivity. From the design
point of view, the thermal conductivity of the liquid PCMs should be
considered  in  order  to  govern  their  minimum  conductivity.  Eutectic
PCMs  can  be  assigned  the  thermal  conductivity  concerning  the  indi-
vidual conductivity of PCM corresponding to their ratios in the eutectic.
Same  as  previously,  PCM  with  the  highest  thermal  conductivity  is
assigned a score of 100 and the rest of the PCMs in the sample data are
assigned the score as follows:

Scorecond,i =

ki
kmax

× 100

(8)

6.3. Cost and economics

The economic viability of the energy storage materials is determined
by  their  unit  price  in  the  marketplace.  Various  marketplace  sources
should  be  approached  to  obtain  the  best  possible  price  for  the  same
purity and quality of the materials. In the case of eutectics, the cost can
be determined by considering the prices of the corresponding individual
percentages of the constituents. The unit cost is calculated by dividing
the  cost  of  PCM  (USD/kg)  by  the  latent  heat  of  fusion  ΔH, i  (J/g)  as
explained by Eq. (9).

Cu,i =

Ci
ΔHi

(9)

PCMs with the lowest cost per unit of latent heat are assigned a score
of  100,  and  the  scores  for  the  rest  of  the  materials  are  calculated  as
follows:

Scorecost,i = ρr

Cmin
Cu,i

× 100

(10)

where, ρr  is the relative density of the material and is defined by the
PCM’s  density  divided  by  the  density  of  water.  The  density  factor  is
involved  because  the  mass  of  the  material  required  depends  on  the
density of the materials. So, the materials with higher density cost more
in addition to the unit cost.

6.4. Cumulative preliminary ranking

The  thermal  performance  of  the  materials  can  partially  be  deter-

mined by the following:

Scorethermal,i =

(cid:0)

a × Scoretemp,i

)

(cid:0)

+

b × ScoreΔH,i

)

(cid:0)

+

c × Scorecond,i

)

(11)

where  a,  b  and  c  are  the  corresponding  weightings  of  each  category,
adding up to 1. A study suggested that latent heat should be valued as
double that of thermal conductivity [640]. In another study, the influ-
ence of the thermophysical properties of PCMs has been investigated on
the  TES  quality.  The  melting  temperature  was  observed  to  be  more
remarkably  influential  than  thermal  conductivity  for  energy  storage
performance [641]. Rastogi et al. [642] also presented a similar pattern
regarding  the  influence  of  melting  temperature.  Hence,  based  on  the
previous  estimations,  latent  heat  and  melting  temperature  is  valued
equally (40%), and thermal conductivity is half (20%). However, these
values can be altered as per future data indications.

The partial ranking of the material is determined by adding up the

thermal performance score and that of the cost:

(cid:0)

Scoretotal,i =

α × Scorethermal,i

)

(cid:0)

+

β × Scorecost,i

)

(12)

where  α  and  β  are  the  corresponding  weightings,  out  of  which  are
adjustable according to the importance of each performance parameter,
i.,  thermal  and  cost.  According  to  the  Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics
[643], over 70% of people preferred thermal performance over the cost
of  their  home  insulation.  Additionally,  the  financial  score  is  not  as
reliable as the thermal one because of the fluctuations in market prices.
Therefore, it was recommended to assign 70% weighting to the thermal
score and 30% to the cost score.

6.5. Selection of PCM

Efficient  thermal  energy  storage  depends  greatly  on  the  PCM  per-
formance. Therefore, selecting the best PCM for a given application is
not  as  easy  as  it  appears.  Various  criteria  should  be  met,  including
chemical,  technical,  economic,  environmental,  and  safety  concerns,
along with thermal performance. The selection of PCM based on thermal
performance depends on the thermophysical properties of PCM. Due to
the  wide  range  of  available  PCM  materials  of  various  types  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110933

H.M. Ali et al.

properties,  selecting  the  most  suitable  PCM  for  a  given  application  is
often  difficult.  No  ideal  PCM  can  meet  all  desired  features,  such  as
proper melting point, which should be within the operating range of the
storage system, high latent heat and high specific heat for high storage
capacity, and high enough thermal conductivity for appropriate storage
operating. Additionally, other physical criteria, such as low subcooling
effect for the stability of the storage process, should not be neglected.

Selection of PCM in most research studies was based on experience
and sometimes on the material’s physical or data availability. However,
this  approach  is  not  accurate.  Therefore,  an  advanced  and  reliable
approach recently emerged to accurately select the optimum PCM. Se-
lection is done by applying operation research methods referred to as
multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) techniques. This approach helps
making an optimized selection among a set of PCM candidates based on
given attributes, such as desired thermophysical properties of PCM. The
decision maker can also determine other preferences. Selection is based
on two steps, as outlined in Fig. 30. First, the PCM candidates are pre-
screened  and  ranked  to  determine  a  set  of  criteria  weights  according
to  the  attribute  importance.  Then,  the  obtained  criteria  weights  are
implemented and assessed in the second technique using optimization
algorithms to sort out the optimum PCM for a given application.

The  most  popular  methods  of  MCDM  are  the  analytic  hierarchy
process (AHP) for pre-ranking and the technique for order preference by
similarity  to  the  ideal  solution  (TOPSIS)  to  select  the  optimum  PCM.
These two techniques are widely used for being the simplest methods.
Other  techniques  and  methods  are  employed,  including  ENTROPY,
CRITIC  and  Ashby  for  criteria  weights,  VIKOR,  CORPAS,  EDAS,  and
MOORA for selecting PCM. A number of investigators combined more
than one method for each step of the selection process for compromised
selection.  Rathod  and  Kanzaria  [640]  applied  the  MCDM  approach,
particularly  AHP  and  TOPSIS  techniques,  for  selecting  the  optimum
PCM for solar heating applications. Xu et al. [644] also used AHP and
TOPSIS  techniques  to  select  a  PCM  for  a  solar  AC  applications.  Yang
et  al.  [645]  also  employed  the  same  techniques,  while  Rastogi  et  al.
[642] used TOPSIS and ENTROPY to choose the optimum PCM for an
HVAC system with Ashby’s method for the first step of weights assign-
ment.  In  a  study  aiming  to  select  the  most  suitable  PCM  for  thermal
comfort in automotive cars, Socaciu et al. [646] applied the AHP method
to find the criteria weights of the investigated PCMs. Anilkumar et al.
[647] conducted an optimization study to select the optimum PCM for
thermal storage used for solar cooking. The authors used AHP, ENOP-
TRY and CRITIC techniques to determine the criteria weights and the
optimization and selection of PCM were done using TOPSIS, EDAS and
MOORA methods. Yang et al. [648] proposed a new concept called in-
formation  retrieval  consisting  of  post-assessment  of  the  selected  PCM
which  means  that  the  optimum  PCM  should  be  tested  in  the  storage
system and should prove its performance. This post evaluation can help
the decision makers for more reliable selection. MCDM is also applied to

non-quantitative  attributes,  such  as  whether  PCM  is  stable  through
cycling due to supercooling effect. Determination of the criteria weights
of such properties is based on experts’  evaluation, which is then con-
verted into quantitative parameters and implemented in the selection
process for accurate objective assessment.

Multi-criteria  decision-making  methods  can  play  a  key  role  in
advancing  TES  by  enabling  accurate  selection  of  PCM  to  achieve  the
highest storage performance. However, the criteria weights are deter-
mined based on the investigator’s preferences based on experience and
experts’  evaluation. Though MCDM is somehow subjective in the first
ranking stage, it is reliable because the subjectivity is overcome in the
final  step  of  the  selection  methodology,  where  advanced  algorithms
enable objective selection considering the relative distance between the
criteria  weights.  MCDM  approach  should  also  consider  the  enhanced
PCM. To the best knowledge of the authors, Gadhave et al. [649] is the
first authors having applied the MCDM approach for selection of PCM
considering  nanoparticle  effect.  However,  there  are  similar  methods
such as Taguchi and surface response method [650] that attracted re-
searchers. These techniques have been used not for selecting PCM to be
integrated into thermal storage but for obtaining the optimum perfor-
mance through selecting various elements, including fin size, shape, and
distribution,  along  with  nanoparticle  size  and  shape,  as  well  as  the
container  shape.  All  these  optimization  methods  are  promising  for
thermal  storage  development.  It  is  necessary  to  explore  more  the
inserts-enhanced  PCM  with  MCDM  approach  as  the  inserts  act differ-
ently on the storage material’s thermophysical properties. For instance,
porous  metallic  supports  and  nanoparticles  positively  affect  thermal
conductivity  but  reduce  the  storage  capacity.  MCDM  techniques  can
easily and accurately handle the trade-off.

7. Conclusion and prospects

Numerous  scientists  have  worked  on  TES  materials  and  their
respective  technologies.  This  review  article  presents  insights  into  the
fundamentals, recent advancements toward the advanced thermal en-
ergy storage materials and their applications in various sectors. Ther-
mophysical  properties  of  numerous  types  of  TES  materials,  typically
low,  medium and high-temperature  PCMs, nano-enhanced, shape  sta-
bilized,  hybrid,  encapsulated  and  cascade  PCMs,  are  studied  and
compared.  The  following  conclusions  can  be  drawn  out  based  on  the
review analysis:

• Nano-enhanced  and  low-porosity  metallic  foams  and  shape  stabi-
lized PCMs improve thermal conductivity in PCMs, but reduce latent
heat  (4–32%)  and  slightly  decrease  the  melting  point  (1–3
C).
Supercooling is reduced for the aforementioned composites and the
encapsulated PCMs.

◦

Fig. 30. Illustration of the supercooling effect (a) little super-cooling and nucleation (b) extensive supercooling and without nucleation [615].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110934

H.M. Ali et al.

Fig.  31. Illustration  of  the  corrosion  effect  of  19%  NH4Cl  + H2O  + 3%  NaCl  on  metals  (a)  copper  (b)  aluminum  (c  &  d)  copper  sulphate  crystals  on  copper
strips [594].

• In choosing PCMs for thermal storage, factors like melting temper-
ature,  sensible/latent  heat,  and  thermal  conductivity  should  be
considered based on specific application needs, while also factoring
in  costs,  although  with  lesser  emphasis  due  to  market  volatility.
Furthermore,  multi-criteria  decision-making  methods,  including
optimization  tools,  are  useful  in  PCM  selection  and  development.
These should encompass environmental, safety, and economic con-
siderations for a more sustainable thermal storage solution.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the

Fig. 32. Selection methodology of MCDM and main used techniques.

publication of this paper.

• Cascaded  PCMs  and  MXene  boost  system  efficiency,  with  MXene
enhancing thermal conductivity by up to 16% and achieving 94.5%
thermal  efficiency.  Both  technologies,  however,  require  further
optimization and research. MXene additionally faces cost and scal-
ability challenges.

• Inorganic  PCMs  (molten  salts)  are  the  best  candidates  for  solar
thermal energy storage due to their enormous heat storage capacity
values.  However,  corrosion,  phase  segregation  and  supercooling
behavior of hydrated salts (TES materials) limit its practicality.
• Molten-salt TES is currently the most widely used technology in the
power sector due to technological advances and its application with
CSP  facilities.  However,  corrosion,  phase  segregation  and  super-
cooling  behavior  of hydrated salts (TES  materials) limit its  practi-
cality. The cost of liquid and adiabatic compressed air energy storage
systems must be reduced to compete with concentrated solar power
plants that use molten salts, and the development should be done for
TES across solar PV and wind generation.

• Comparatively, the commercial viability of water tank TES systems
for industrial applications is higher than that of other TES technol-
ogies. Heat recovery, heat conversion, and reintegration are all waste
heat  processes  that  are  seeing  an  uptick  in  the  study  from  the  in-
dustrial  sector,  and  salt  hydration  is  a  key  component  of  these
processes.

• Water tanks are the most typical TES in district heating for short-
term applications. The two primary TES used in district cooling are
ice storage and chilled water storage. Ice storage can deliver water at
a  lower  temperature  than  chilled  water  storage  and  requires  a
smaller storage tank.

• The  advancement  of  ultra-low-energy,  near-zero-energy,  and  plus-
energy  buildings  largely  depends  on  TES  technologies.  For  effec-
tive heating/cooling systems to be widely adopted, it is necessary to
integrate low-carbon energy measures based on TES materials into
buildings in a way that is efficient, trustworthy, and sustainable.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101109.

References

[1] Energy Commision. Energy D-Gf. EU energy in figures : statistical pocketbook

2018. Publications Office; 2018.

[2] I.E.A.. World energy outlook. Paris: IEA; 2021. p. 21.
[3] Twidell J, Weir T. Renewable energy resources. third ed. Routledge; 2015.

https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315766416.

[4] Xie J, Xia Y, Liang L, Zhang W, Shi M. Pricing strategy for renewable energy

source electricity in the competitive hybrid electricity market. Ind Manag Data
Syst 2018;118:1071–93.

[5] Alva G, Lin Y, Fang G. An overview of thermal energy storage systems. Energy

2018;144:341–78.

[6] Østergaard PA, Duic N, Noorollahi Y, Mikulcic H, Kalogirou S. Sustainable

development using renewable energy technology. Elsevier; 2020. p. 2430–7.

[7] Shyam B, Kanakasabapathy P. Large scale electrical energy storage systems in

India-current status and future prospects. J Energy Storage 2018;18:112–20.
[8] Sajawal M, Rehman T-u, Ali HM, Sajjad U, Raza A, Bhatti MS. Experimental

thermal performance analysis of finned tube-phase change material based double
pass solar air heater. Case Stud Therm Eng 2019;15:100543.

[9] Bouadila S, Fteïti M, Oueslati MM, Guizani A, Farhat A. Enhancement of latent
heat storage in a rectangular cavity: solar water heater case study. Energy
Convers Manag 2014;78:904–12.

[10] Lin SC, Al-Kayiem HH, Aris M. Experimental investigation on the performance
enhancement of integrated PCM-flat plate solar collector. J Appl Sci 2012;12:
2390–6.

[11] Xie B, Baudin N, Soto J, Fan Y, Luo L. Thermocline packed bed thermal energy
storage system: a review. Renewable Energy Production and Distribution 2022:
325–85.

[12] Huang X, Chen X, Li A, Atinafu D, Gao H, Dong W, et al. Shape-stabilized phase

change materials based on porous supports for thermal energy storage
applications. Chem Eng J 2019;356:641–61.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110935

H.M. Ali et al.

[13] Kenisarin MM, Kenisarina KM. Form-stable phase change materials for thermal

energy storage. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2012;16:1999–2040.

[14] Zhang H, Baeyens J, Degr`eve J, C ́aceres G, Segal R, Piti ́e F. Latent heat storage
with tubular-encapsulated phase change materials (PCMs). Energy 2014;76:
66–72.

[15] Li Q, Li C, Du Z, Jiang F, Ding Y. A review of performance investigation and

enhancement of shell and tube thermal energy storage device containing molten
salt based phase change materials for medium and high temperature applications.
Appl Energy 2019;255:113806.

[16] Sarbu I, Dorca A. Review on heat transfer analysis in thermal energy storage using
latent heat storage systems and phase change materials. Int J Energy Res 2019;43:
29–64.

[17] Wu S, Yan T, Kuai Z, Pan W. Thermal conductivity enhancement on phase change

materials for thermal energy storage: a review. Energy Storage Mater 2020;25:
251–95.

[18] Fan L, Khodadadi JM. Thermal conductivity enhancement of phase change

materials for thermal energy storage: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2011;
15:24–46.

[19] Liu L, Su D, Tang Y, Fang G. Thermal conductivity enhancement of phase change
materials for thermal energy storage: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;
62:305–17.

[20] Qureshi ZA, Ali HM, Khushnood S. Recent advances on thermal conductivity

enhancement of phase change materials for energy storage system: a review. Int J
Heat Mass Tran 2018;127:838–56.

[21] Jiang Z, Ouyang T, Yang Y, Chen L, Fan X, Chen Y, et al. Thermal conductivity
enhancement of phase change materials with form-stable carbon bonded carbon
fiber network. Mater Des 2018;143:177–84.

[22] Zhang L, Zhou K, Wei Q, Ma L, Ye W, Li H, et al. Thermal conductivity

enhancement of phase change materials with 3D porous diamond foam for
thermal energy storage. Appl Energy 2019;233:208–19.

[23] Lin Y, Jia Y, Alva G, Fang G. Review on thermal conductivity enhancement,

thermal properties and applications of phase change materials in thermal energy
storage. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;82:2730–42.

[24] Ibrahim NI, Al-Sulaiman FA, Rahman S, Yilbas BS, Sahin AZ. Heat transfer

enhancement of phase change materials for thermal energy storage applications:
a critical review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2017;74:26–50.

[25] Rehman TU-, Ali HM, Janjua MM, Sajjad U, Yan W-M. A critical review on heat
transfer augmentation of phase change materials embedded with porous
materials/foams. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2019;135:649–73.

[26] Zhang H, Huys K, Baeyens J, Degr`eve J, Kong W, Lv Y. Thermochemical energy
storage for power generation on demand. Energy Technol 2016;4:341–52.
[27] Li S, Liu J, Tan T, Nie J, Zhang H. Optimization of LiNO3–Mg (OH) 2 composites
as thermo-chemical energy storage materials. J Environ Manag 2020;262:
110258.

[28] Chen X, Zhang Z, Qi C, Ling X, Peng H. State of the art on the high-temperature
thermochemical energy storage systems. Energy Convers Manag 2018;177:
792–815.

[29] Prasad JS, Muthukumar P, Desai F, Basu DN, Rahman MM. A critical review of
high-temperature reversible thermochemical energy storage systems. Appl
Energy 2019;254:113733.

[30] Thakur AK, Sathyamurthy R, Velraj R, Saidur R, Pandey A, Ma Z, et al. A state-of-
the art review on advancing battery thermal management systems for fast-
charging. Appl Therm Eng 2023;226:120303.

[31] Iqbal K, Khan A, Sun D, Ashraf M, Rehman A, Safdar F, et al. Phase change

materials, their synthesis and application in textiles—a review. J Text Inst 2019;
110:625–38.

[32] Sarier N, Onder E. Organic phase change materials and their textile applications:

an overview. Thermochim Acta 2012;540:7–60.

[33] Al-Yasiri Q, Szab ́o M. Incorporation of phase change materials into building
envelope for thermal comfort and energy saving: a comprehensive analysis.
J Build Eng 2021;36:102122.

[34] da Cunha SRL, de Aguiar JLB. Phase change materials and energy efficiency of

buildings: a review of knowledge. J Energy Storage 2020;27:101083.

[35] Faraj K, Khaled M, Faraj J, Hachem F, Castelain C. Phase change material thermal

energy storage systems for cooling applications in buildings: a review. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2020;119:109579.

[36] Xiong Q, Alshehri HM, Monfaredi R, Tayebi T, Majdoub F, Hajjar A, et al.

Application of phase change material in improving trombe wall efficiency: an up-
to-date and comprehensive overview. Energy Build 2022;258:111824.

[37] Sharif MA, Al-Abidi A, Mat S, Sopian K, Ruslan MH, Sulaiman M, et al. Review of

the application of phase change material for heating and domestic hot water
systems. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;42:557–68.

[38] Xu B, Li P, Chan C. Application of phase change materials for thermal energy
storage in concentrated solar thermal power plants: a review to recent
developments. Appl Energy 2015;160:286–307.

[39] Wen R, Zhu X, Yang C, Sun Z, Zhang L, Xu Y, et al. A novel composite phase
change material from lauric acid, nano-Cu and attapulgite: preparation,
characterization and thermal conductivity enhancement. J Energy Storage 2022;
46:103921.

[40] Chinnasamy V, Cho H. Investigation on thermal properties enhancement of lauryl
alcohol with multi-walled carbon nanotubes as phase change material for thermal
energy storage. Case Stud Therm Eng 2022;31:101826.

[41] Saravanakumar P, Arunkumar S, Mansingh BB, Kumar PM, Subbiah R,

Eswarlal VK. Investigating the effect of thermal cycling on thermal characteristics
of the nano-silica based phase changing material (PCM). Mater Today Proc 2022;
50:1502–7.

[42] Fikri MA, Pandey A, Samykano M, Kadirgama K, George M, Saidur R, et al.
Thermal conductivity, reliability, and stability assessment of phase change
material (PCM) doped with functionalized multi-wall carbon nanotubes
(FMWCNTs). J Energy Storage 2022;50:104676.

[43] Li M-J, Li M-J, Xue X-D, Li D. Optimization and design criterion of the shell-and-
tube thermal energy storage with cascaded PCMs under the constraint of outlet
threshold temperature. Renew Energy 2022;181:1371–85.

[44] Panchal JM, Modi KV, Patel VJ. Development in multiple-phase change materials
cascaded low-grade thermal energy storage applications: a review. Cleaner
Engineering and Technology 2022:100465.

[45] Kalbande VP, Fating G, Mohan M, Rambhad K, Sinha AK. Experimental and

theoretical study for suitability of hybrid nano enhanced phase change material
for thermal energy storage applications. J Energy Storage 2022;51:104431.

[46] Wang M, Zhang C, Wang J, Wang Y, Yu F. Carbon hybrid aerogel-based phase
change material with reinforced energy storage and electro-thermal conversion
performance for battery thermal management. J Energy Storage 2022;52:104905.
[47] Soo XYD, Png ZM, Chua MH, Yeo JCC, Ong PJ, Wang S, et al. A highly flexible

form-stable silicone-octadecane PCM composite for heat harvesting. Materials
Today Advances 2022;14:100227.

[48] Yu C, Youn JR, Song YS. Enhancement in thermo-electric energy harvesting
efficiency by embedding PDMS in form-stable PCM composites. Polym Adv
Technol 2022;33:700–9.

[49] Zhang Y, Jia Z, Hai AM, Zhang S, Tang B. Shape-stabilization micromechanisms
of form-stable phase change materials-A review. Compos Appl Sci Manuf 2022:
107047.

[50] Khanna S, Paneliya S, Marathey P, Shah K, Prajapati P, Chaudhari R, et al.

Investigation of thermophysical properties of synthesized N-Hexacosane-
Encapsulated titania phase change material for enhanced thermal storage
application. Recent Advances in Mechanical Infrastructure: Spring 2022:107–18.
[51] Zhang H, Xu C, Fang G. Encapsulation of inorganic phase change thermal storage
materials and its effect on thermophysical properties: a review. Sol Energy Mater
Sol Cell 2022;241:111747.

[52] Gu X, Peng L, Liu P, Bian L, Wei B. Enhanced thermal properties and lab-scale

thermal performance of polyethylene glycol/modified halloysite nanotube form-
stable phase change material cement panel. Construct Build Mater 2022;323:
126550.

[53] Sarbu I, Sebarchievici C. Solar heating and cooling systems : fundamentals,

experiments and applications. 1st Ed. Elsevier; 2016.

[54] Sharma A, Tyagi VV, Chen CR, Buddhi D. Review on thermal energy storage with

phase change materials and applications. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2009;13:
318–45.

[55] Costa SC, Kenisarin M. A review of metallic materials for latent heat thermal

energy storage: thermophysical properties, applications, and challenges. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2022;154:111812.

[56] Talebizadehsardari P, Mahdi JM, Mohammed HI, Moghimi M, Eisapour AH,

Ghalambaz M. Consecutive charging and discharging of a PCM-based plate heat
exchanger with zigzag configuration. Appl Therm Eng 2021;193:116970.

[57] Talebizadeh Sardari P, Mohammed HI, Mahdi JM, Ghalambaz M, Gillott M,

Walker GS, et al. Localized heating element distribution in composite metal foam-
phase change material: fourier’s law and creeping flow effects. Int J Energy Res
2021;45:13380–96.

[58] Zhang H, Ren L, Gao Y, Jin B. A comprehensive study of energy conservation in

electric-hydraulic injection-molding equipment. Energies 2017;10:1768.
[59] Chiu JN, Martin V. Multistage latent heat cold thermal energy storage design

analysis. Appl Energy 2013;112:1438–45.

[60] Yuan Z, Horibe A, Liang K, Yamada Y, Isobe K, Xue Y. Experimental evaluation of
latent heat use of a microencapsulated phase change material slurry in spraying.
Int J Heat Mass Tran 2023;201:123573.

[61] Zheng J, Deng Y, Liu Y, Wu F, Wang W, Wang H, et al. Paraffin/polyvinyl

alcohol/MXene flexible phase change composite films for thermal management
applications. Chem Eng J 2023;453:139727.

[62] Dinesh R, Hussain SI, Roseline AA, Kalaiselvam S. Experimental investigation on
heat transfer behavior of the novel ternary eutectic PCM embedded with MWCNT
for thermal energy storage systems. J Therm Anal Calorim 2021;145:2935–49.
[63] Hussain SI, Dinesh R, Roseline AA, Dhivya S, Kalaiselvam S. Enhanced thermal
performance and study the influence of sub cooling on activated carbon dispersed
eutectic PCM for cold storage applications. Energy Build 2017;143:17–24.
[64] Dash L, Mahanwar PA. A review on organic phase change materials and their

applications. Int J Eng Appl Sci Technol 2021;5:268–84.

[65] Da Cunha JP, Eames P. Thermal energy storage for low and medium temperature
applications using phase change materials–a review. Appl Energy 2016;177:
227–38.

[66] Sun S, Kazemi-Razi SM, Kaigutha LG, Marzband M, Nafisi H, Al-Sumaiti AS. Day-
ahead offering strategy in the market for concentrating solar power considering
thermoelectric decoupling by a compressed air energy storage. Appl Energy 2022;
305:117804.

[67] Kennedy KM, Ruggles TH, Rinaldi K, Dowling JA, Duan L, Caldeira K, et al. The
role of concentrated solar power with thermal energy storage in least-cost highly
reliable electricity systems fully powered by variable renewable energy. Advances
in Applied Energy 2022;6:100091.

[68] Yue QL, He CX, Sun J, Xu JB, Zhao TS. A passive thermal management system

with thermally enhanced water adsorbents for lithium-ion batteries powering
electric vehicles. Appl Therm Eng 2022;207:118156.

[69] Pelin D, Brandis A, Kovaˇcevi ́c M, Halak F. Design and testing of a multimode
capable passive battery management system. Energies 2022;15(12):4335.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110936

H.M. Ali et al.

[70] Nikitin A, Deymi-Dashtebayaz M, Baranov IV, Sami S, Nikitina V, Abadi MK, et al.

[97] Li Y-C, Zhang L, Feng B. Optimization of thermal performance of high

Energy, exergy, economic and environmental (4E) analysis using a renewable
multi-generation system in a near-zero energy building with hot water and
hydrogen storage systems. J Energy Storage 2023;62:106794.

temperature sensible heat thermal energy storage system for direct steam
generation: a simulation work. Appl Therm Eng 2022;217:119225.

[98] Muhammad Y, Saini P, Knobloch K, Frandsen HL, Engelbrecht K. Rock bed

[71] Nunna AC, Zong Y, Georges L, You S. Demand response with active phase change
material based thermal energy storage in buildings. Energy Rep 2023;9:227–35.

[72] Andriyanto, Edho P, Irfan Nul H, Jodi Aria P, Amrizal Agus S, et al. Thermal

thermal energy storage coupled with solar thermal collectors in an industrial
application: simulation, experimental and parametric analysis. J Energy Storage
2023;67:107349.

energy storage characteristics of paraffin in solar water heating systems with flat
plate collectors. Journal of Advanced Research in Fluid Mechanics and Thermal
Sciences 2022;95:113–9.

[99] Tosatto A, Dahash A, Ochs F. Simulation-based performance evaluation of large-
scale thermal energy storage coupled with heat pump in district heating systems.
J Energy Storage 2023;61:106721.

[73] Ikutegbe CA, Al-Shannaq R, Farid MM. Microencapsulation of low melting phase

[100] Xu G, Hu L, Luo Y, Tian Z, Deng J, Yuan G, et al. Numerical modeling and

change materials for cold storage applications. Appl Energy 2022;321:119347.

[74] Hassan A, Abbas S, Yousuf S, Abbas F, Amin NM, Ali S, et al. An experimental and
numerical study on the impact of various parameters in improving the heat
transfer performance characteristics of a water based photovoltaic thermal
system. Renew Energy 2023;202:499–512.

[75] S ̧ irin C, Selimefendigil F,

 ̈
Oztop HF. Performance analysis and identification of an

indirect photovoltaic thermal dryer with aluminum oxide nano-embedded
thermal energy storage modification. Sustainability 2023;15:2422.

[76] Rafique A, Ferreira I, Abbas G, Baptista AC. Recent advances and challenges

toward application of fibers and textiles in integrated photovoltaic energy storage
devices. Nano-Micro Lett 2023;15:40.

[77] Zhang Y, Li T, Zhang S, Jiang L, Xia J, Xie J, et al. Room-temperature, energy
storage textile with multicore-sheath structure obtained via in-situ coaxial
electrospinning. Chem Eng J 2022;436:135226.

[78] Arshad A, Jabbal M, Yan Y. Preparation and characteristics evaluation of mono
and hybrid nano-enhanced phase change materials (NePCMs) for thermal
management of microelectronics. Energy Convers Manag 2020;205:112444.

[79] Shahsavar A, Shaham A, Talebizadehsardari P. Wavy channels triple-tube LHS

unit with sinusoidal variable wavelength in charging/discharging mechanism. Int
Commun Heat Mass Tran 2019;107:93–105.

[80] Mahani RB, Mohammed HI, Mahdi JM, Alamshahi F, Ghalambaz M,

Talebizadehsardari P, et al. Phase change process in a zigzag plate latent heat
storage system during melting and solidification. Molecules 2020;25:4643.

parametric analysis of thermal performance for the large-scale seasonal thermal
energy storage. Energy Build 2022;275:112459.

[101] Gao T, Lu W. Machine learning toward advanced energy storage devices and

systems. iScience 2021;24:101936.

[102] Mselle BD, Zsembinszki G, V ́erez D, Borri E, Cabeza LF. A detailed energy analysis
of a novel evaporator with latent thermal energy storage ability. Appl Therm Eng
2022;201:117844.

[103] Ma J, Ma T, Cheng J, Zhang J. Polymer encapsulation strategy toward 3D
printable, sustainable, and reliable form-stable phase change materials for
advanced thermal energy storage. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2022;14:4251–64.

[104] Mohapatra D, Nandanavanam J. Salt in matrix for thermochemical energy

storage-a review. Mater Today Proc 2023;72:27–33.

[105] Selimefendigil F, S ̧ irin C. Experimental investigation of a parabolic greenhouse

dryer improved with copper oxide nano-enhanced latent heat thermal energy
storage unit. Int J Energy Res 2022;46:3647–62.

[106] Zhang N, Yuan Y, Cao X, Du Y, Zhang Z, Gui Y. Latent heat thermal energy storage
systems with solid–liquid phase change materials: a review. Adv Eng Mater 2018;
20:1700753.

[107] Marín PE, Milian Y, Ushak S, Cabeza LF, Gr ́ageda M, Shire G. Lithium compounds
for thermochemical energy storage: a state-of-the-art review and future trends.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;149:111381.

[108] Sarbu I, Sebarchievici C. A comprehensive review of thermal energy storage.

Sustainability 2018;10:191.

[81] Shahsavar A, Khosravi J, Mohammed HI, Talebizadehsardari P. Performance

[109] Zhang H, Baeyens J, Caceres G, Degreve J, Lv Y. Thermal energy storage: recent

evaluation of melting/solidification mechanism in a variable wave-length wavy
channel double-tube latent heat storage system. J Energy Storage 2020;27:
101063.

[82] Shahsavar A, Goodarzi A, Mohammed HI, Shirneshan A, Talebizadehsardari P.

Thermal performance evaluation of non-uniform fin array in a finned double-pipe
latent heat storage system. Energy 2020;193:116800.

[83] Ghalambaz M, Mohammed HI, Mahdi JM, Eisapour AH, Younis O, Ghosh A, et al.

Intensifying the charging response of a phase-change material with twisted fin
arrays in a shell-and-tube storage system. Energies 2021;14:1619.
[84] Mahdi JM, Mohammed HI, Hashim ET, Talebizadehsardari P, Nsofor EC.

Solidification enhancement with multiple PCMs, cascaded metal foam and
nanoparticles in the shell-and-tube energy storage system. Appl Energy 2020;257:
113993.

[85] Liu X, Mohammed HI, Ashkezari AZ, Shahsavar A, Hussein AK, Rostami S. An
experimental investigation on the rheological behavior of nanofluids made by
suspending multi-walled carbon nanotubes in liquid paraffin. J Mol Liq 2020;300:
112269.

[86] Jamekhorshid A, Sadrameli S, Farid M. A review of microencapsulation methods

of phase change materials (PCMs) as a thermal energy storage (TES) medium.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;31:531–42.

[87] Sarı A, Karaipekli A. Thermal conductivity and latent heat thermal energy storage
characteristics of paraffin/expanded graphite composite as phase change
material. Appl Therm Eng 2007;27:1271–7.

[88] Mohammed HI, Talebizadehsardari P, Mahdi JM, Arshad A, Sciacovelli A,

Giddings D. Improved melting of latent heat storage via porous medium and
uniform Joule heat generation. J Energy Storage 2020;31:101747.

[89] Xu H, Qu Z, Tao W. Analytical solution of forced convective heat transfer in tubes
partially filled with metallic foam using the two-equation model. Int J Heat Mass
Tran 2011;54:3846–55.

[90] Xu H. Thermal transport in microchannels partially filled with micro-porous

developments and practical aspects. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2016;53:1–40.
[110] Zhang H, Wang N, Pu Z, Shen Y, Li Y. A novel zinc ion supercapacitor with
ultrahigh capacity and ultralong cycling lives enhanced by redox electrolyte.
J Energy Storage 2023;60:106597.

[111] Lidor A, Aschwanden Y, H ̈aseli J, Reckinger P, Haueter P, Steinfeld A. High-
temperature heat recovery from a solar reactor for the thermochemical redox
splitting of H2O and CO2. Appl Energy 2023;329:120211.

[112] Lee J, Lin K-YA, Jung S, Kwon EE. Hybrid renewable energy systems involving

thermochemical conversion process for waste-to-energy strategy. Chem Eng J
2023;452:139218.

[113] Ayaz H, Chinnasamy V, Yong J, Cho H. Review of technologies and recent

advances in low-temperature sorption thermal storage systems. Energies 2021;14:
6052.

[114] Hua W, Yan H, Zhang X, Xu X, Zhang L, Shi Y. Review of salt hydrates-based

thermochemical adsorption thermal storage technologies. J Energy Storage 2022;
56:106158.

[115] Khosa AA, Xu T, Xia B, Yan J, Zhao C. Technological challenges and industrial
applications of CaCO3/CaO based thermal energy storage system–A review. Sol
Energy 2019;193:618–36.

[116] Durakovi ́c B. Introduction, PCM-based building envelope systems - innovative

energy solutions for passive design. 2020. p. 1–15.

[117] Findik F, Ermis ̧  K. Thermal energy storage. Sustain Eng Innovat 2020;2:66–88.
[118] Wang K, Qin Z, Tong W, Ji C. Thermal energy storage for solar energy utilization:
fundamentals and applications. Resour Chall Appl 2020. https://doi.org/
10.5772/intechopen.91804.

[119] Zhao Y, Song J, Liu M, Zhao Y, Olympios A, Sapin P, Markides CN. Thermo-

economic assessments of pumped-thermal electricity storage systems employing
sensible heat storage materials. Renew Energy 2022;186:431–56.

[120] Hasnain SM. Review on sustainable thermal energy storage technologies, Part II:

cool thermal storage. Energy Convers Manag 1998;39:1139–53.

media involving flow inertia, flow/thermal slips, thermal non-equilibrium and
thermal asymmetry. Int Commun Heat Mass Tran 2020;110:104404.

[121] Hasnain SM. Review on sustainable thermal energy storage technologies, Part I:
heat storage materials and techniques. Energy Convers Manag 1998;39:1127–38.

[91] Li Z, Shahsavar A, Al-Rashed AA, Talebizadehsardari P. Effect of porous medium
and nanoparticles presences in a counter-current triple-tube composite porous/
nano-PCM system. Appl Therm Eng 2020;167:114777.

[92] Mohammed HI. Discharge improvement of a phase change material-air-based

thermal energy storage unit for space heating applications using metal foams in
the air sides. Heat Tran 2022;51:3830–52.

[122] Tamme R, Bauer T, Buschle J, Laing D, Müller-Steinhagen H, Steinmann W-D.
C for applications in the industrial process heat

Latent heat storage above 120
sector and solar power generation. Int J Energy Res 2008;32:264–71.

◦

[123] V ́erez D, Borri E, Zsembinszki G, Cabeza LF. Thermal energy storage co-benefits in
building applications transferred from a renewable energy perspective. J Energy
Storage 2023;58:106344.

[93] Koçak B, Fernandez AI, Paksoy H. Review on sensible thermal energy storage for

[124] Laing D, Bahl C, Bauer T, Lehmann D, Steinmann W-D. Thermal energy storage

industrial solar applications and sustainability aspects. Sol Energy 2020;209:
135–69.

[94] Almendros-Ib ́a ̃nez JA, Fern ́andez-Torrijos M, Díaz-Heras M, Belmonte J,

Sobrino C. A review of solar thermal energy storage in beds of particles: packed
and fluidized beds. Sol Energy 2019;192:193–237.

for direct steam generation. Sol Energy 2011;85:627–33.

[125] Fernandez AI, Martínez M, Segarra M, Martorell I, Cabeza LF. Selection of

materials with potential in sensible thermal energy storage. Sol Energy Mater Sol
Cell 2010;94:1723–9.

[126] Datas A. Ultra-high temperature thermal energy storage, transfer and conversion.

[95] Shafieian A, Khiadani M, Nosrati A. A review of latest developments, progress,

Woodhead Publishing; 2020.

and applications of heat pipe solar collectors. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;95:
273–304.

[96] Tao Y, He Y-L. A review of phase change material and performance enhancement
method for latent heat storage system. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;93:
245–59.

[127] Kousksou T, Bruel P, Jamil A, El Rhafiki T, Zeraouli Y. Energy storage:
applications and challenges. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2014;120:59–80.
[128] Cabeza LF, Castell A, Barreneche Cd, De Gracia A, Fern ́andez A. Materials used as
PCM in thermal energy storage in buildings: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2011;15:1675–95.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110937

H.M. Ali et al.

[129] Peng S, Fuchs A, Wirtz R. Polymeric phase change composites for thermal energy

[160] Li YQ, He YL, Song HJ, Xu C, Wang WW. Numerical analysis and parameters

storage. J Appl Polym Sci 2004;93:1240–51.

[130] Huang L, Noeres P, Petermann M, Doetsch C. Experimental study on heat capacity
of paraffin/water phase change emulsion. Energy Convers Manag 2010;51:
1264–9.

[131] Or ́o E, De Gracia A, Castell A, Farid MM, Cabeza LF. Review on phase change

materials (PCMs) for cold thermal energy storage applications. Appl Energy 2012;
99:513–33.

[132] Guillot S, Faik A, Rakhmatullin A, Lambert J, Veron E, Echegut P, et al. Corrosion
effects between molten salts and thermal storage material for concentrated solar
power plants. Appl Energy 2012;94:174–81.

[133] Guan G, Fushimi C, Tsutsumi A, Ishizuka M, Matsuda S, Hatano H, et al. High-
density circulating fluidized bed gasifier for advanced IGCC/IGFC—advantages
and challenges. Particuology 2010;8:602–6.

[134] Bi XT, Liu X. High density and high solids flux CFB risers for steam gasification of

solids fuels. Fuel Process Technol 2010;91:915–20.

[135] Laing D, Bauer T, Breidenbach N, Hachmann B, Johnson M. Development of high

temperature phase-change-material storages. Appl Energy 2013;109:497–504.

[136] Nomura T, Okinaka N, Akiyama T. Waste heat transportation system, using phase
change material (PCM) from steelworks to chemical plant. Resour Conserv Recycl
2010;54:1000–6.

[137] Gil A, Medrano M, Martorell I, L ́azaro A, Dolado P, Zalba B, et al. State of the art
on high temperature thermal energy storage for power generation. Part
1—concepts, materials and modellization. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2010;14:
31–55.

[138] Wei G, Wang G, Xu C, Ju X, Xing L, Du X, et al. Selection principles and

thermophysical properties of high temperature phase change materials for
thermal energy storage: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;81:1771–86.

[139] Khare S, Dell’Amico M, Knight C, McGarry S. Selection of materials for high

temperature latent heat energy storage. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2012;107:20–7.

[140] Kemink R, Sparrow E. Heat transfer coefficients for melting about a vertical

cylinder with or without subcooling and for open or closed containment. Int J
Heat Mass Tran 1981;24:1699–710.

[141] Baldini L, Fumey B. Seasonal energy flexibility through integration of liquid

sorption storage in buildings. Energies 2020;13:2944.

[142] Tan P, Lindberg P, Eichler K, L ̈overyd P, Johansson P, Kalagasidis AS. Effect of
phase separation and supercooling on the storage capacity in a commercial latent
heat thermal energy storage: experimental cycling of a salt hydrate PCM. J Energy
Storage 2020;29:101266.

[143] Villasmil W, Fischer LJ, Worlitschek J. A review and evaluation of thermal

insulation materials and methods for thermal energy storage systems. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2019;103:71–84.

[144] Rosen M, Tang R, Dincer I. Effect of stratification on energy and exergy capacities

in thermal storage systems. Int J Energy Res 2004;28:177–93.

[145] Trisaksri V, Wongwises S. Critical review of heat transfer characteristics of

nanofluids. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2007;11:512–23.

[146] Tan F, Tso C. Cooling of mobile electronic devices using phase change materials.

Appl Therm Eng 2004;24:159–69.

[147] Babapoor A, Karimi G, Sabbaghi S. Thermal characteristic of nanocomposite

phase change materials during solidification process. J Energy Storage 2016;7:
74–81.

[148] Colla L, Fedele L, Mancin S, Danza L, Manca O. Nano-PCMs for enhanced energy
storage and passive cooling applications. Appl Therm Eng 2017;110:584–9.

[149] Praveen B, Suresh S. Experimental study on heat transfer performance of
neopentyl glycol/CuO composite solid-solid PCM in TES based heat sink.
Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 2018;21:1086–94.

[150] Krishna J, Kishore PS, Solomon AB. Heat pipe with nano enhanced-PCM for
electronic cooling application. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2017;81:84–92.

[151] Qian T, Li J, Min X, Guan W, Deng Y, Ning L. Enhanced thermal conductivity of
PEG/diatomite shape-stabilized phase change materials with Ag nanoparticles for
thermal energy storage. J Mater Chem 2015;3:8526–36.

[152] Leong KY, Abdul Rahman MR, Gurunathan BA. Nano-enhanced phase change
materials: a review of thermo-physical properties, applications and challenges.
J Energy Storage 2019;21:18–31.

[153] Maldonado JM, de Gracia A, Cabeza LF. Systematic review on the use of heat
pipes in latent heat thermal energy storage tanks. J Energy Storage 2020;32:
101733.

[154] Ma Z, Lin W, Sohel MI. Nano-enhanced phase change materials for improved
building performance. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;58:1256–68.

[155] Dsilva Winfred Rufuss D, Suganthi L, Iniyan S, Davies PA. Effects of nanoparticle-
enhanced phase change material (NPCM) on solar still productivity. J Clean Prod
2018;192:9–29.

[156] Bahiraei F, Fartaj A, Nazri G-A. Experimental and numerical investigation on the
performance of carbon-based nanoenhanced phase change materials for thermal
management applications. Energy Convers Manag 2017;153:115–28.

[157] Gong Z-X, Mujumdar AS. Thermodynamic optimization of the thermal process in
energy storage using multiple phase change materials. Appl Therm Eng 1997;17:
1067–83.

[158] Watanabe T, Kanzawa A. Second law optimization of a latent heat storage system

with PCMs having different melting points. Heat Recovery Syst CHP 1995;15:
641–53.

[159] Wu M, Xu C, He Y. Cyclic behaviors of the molten-salt packed-bed thermal storage

system filled with cascaded phase change material capsules. Appl Therm Eng
2016;93:1061–73.

optimization of shell-and-tube heat storage unit using three phase change
materials. Renew Energy 2013;59:92–9.

[161] Cheng X, Zhai X. Thermal performance analysis and optimization of a cascaded
packed bed cool thermal energy storage unit using multiple phase change
materials. Appl Energy 2018;215:566–76.

[162] Yuan F, Li M-J, Ma Z, Jin B, Liu Z. Experimental study on thermal performance of
high-temperature molten salt cascaded latent heat thermal energy storage system.
Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;118:997–1011.

[163] Li WQ, Qu ZG, He YL, Tao WQ. Experimental and numerical studies on melting
phase change heat transfer in open-cell metallic foams filled with paraffin. Appl
Therm Eng 2012;37:1–9.

[164] Fang G, Tang F, Cao L. Preparation, thermal properties and applications of shape-
stabilized thermal energy storage materials. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;40:
237–59.

[165] Feng D, Feng Y, Qiu L, Li P, Zang Y, Zou H, et al. Review on nanoporous

composite phase change materials: fabrication, characterization, enhancement
and molecular simulation. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;109:578–605.
[166] Gao H, Wang J, Chen X, Wang G, Huang X, Li A, et al. Nanoconfinement effects on

thermal properties of nanoporous shape-stabilized composite PCMs: a review.
Nano Energy 2018;53:769–97.

[167] Yang C, Fischer L, Maranda S, Worlitschek J. Rigid polyurethane foams

incorporated with phase change materials: a state-of-the-art review and future
research pathways. Energy Build 2015;87:25–36.

[168] Liu H, Wang X, Wu D. Fabrication of graphene/TiO2/paraffin composite phase

change materials for enhancement of solar energy efficiency in photocatalysis and
latent heat storage. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 2017;5:4906–15.
[169] Fernandes D, Piti ́e F, C ́aceres G, Baeyens J. Thermal energy storage:“How

previous findings determine current research priorities”. Energy 2012;39:246–57.
[170] Umair MM, Zhang Y, Iqbal K, Zhang S, Tang B. Novel strategies and supporting
materials applied to shape-stabilize organic phase change materials for thermal
energy storage–A review. Appl Energy 2019;235:846–73.

[171] Zhao CY, Lu W, Tian Y. Heat transfer enhancement for thermal energy storage

using metal foams embedded within phase change materials (PCMs). Sol Energy
2010;84:1402–12.

[172] Chen Z, Gao D, Shi J. Experimental and numerical study on melting of phase
change materials in metal foams at pore scale. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2014;72:
646–55.

[173] Martinelli M, Bentivoglio F, Caron-Soupart A, Couturier R, Fourmigue J-F,

Marty P. Experimental study of a phase change thermal energy storage with
copper foam. Appl Therm Eng 2016;101:247–61.

[174] Sharifi N, Bergman T, Allen M, Faghri A. Melting and solidification enhancement
using a combined heat pipe, foil approach. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2014;78:930–41.

[175] Caliano M, Bianco N, Graditi G, Mongibello L. Analysis of a phase change

material-based unit and of an aluminum foam/phase change material composite-
based unit for cold thermal energy storage by numerical simulation. Appl Energy
2019;256:113921.

[176] Zhang P, Xiao X, Meng ZN, Li M. Heat transfer characteristics of a molten-salt
thermal energy storage unit with and without heat transfer enhancement. Appl
Energy 2015;137:758–72.

[177] Zhou D, Zhao CY. Experimental investigations on heat transfer in phase change
materials (PCMs) embedded in porous materials. Appl Therm Eng 2011;31:970–7.
[178] Fleming E, Wen S, Shi L, da Silva AK. Experimental and theoretical analysis of an

aluminum foam enhanced phase change thermal storage unit. Int J Heat Mass
Tran 2015;82:273–81.

[179] Mallow A, Abdelaziz O, Graham S. Thermal charging performance of enhanced

phase change material composites for thermal battery design. Int J Therm Sci
2018;127:19–28.

[180] Fukai J, Hamada Y, Morozumi Y, Miyatake O. Improvement of thermal

characteristics of latent heat thermal energy storage units using carbon-fiber
brushes: experiments and modeling. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2003;46:4513–25.
[181] Venkateshwar K, Ebadi S, Simha H, Mahmud S. Influence of pore density and

porosity on the melting process of bio-based nano-phase change materials inside
open-cell metal foam. J Therm Sci Eng Appl 2019:11.

[182] Caraballo A, Gal ́an-Casado S, Caballero

 ́
A, Serena S. Molten salts for sensible

thermal energy storage: a review and an energy performance analysis. Energies
2021;14:1197.

[183] Chen H, Cong TN, Yang W, Tan C, Li Y, Ding Y. Progress in electrical energy

storage system: a critical review. Prog Nat Sci 2009;19:291–312.

[184] Wang J-w, Zhou H-x, Zhang C-z, Liu W-n, Zhao B-y. Influence of MgCl2 content

on corrosion behavior of GH1140 in molten NaCl-MgCl2 as thermal storage
medium. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2018;179:194–201.

[185] Mohan G, Venkataraman MB, Coventry J. Sensible energy storage options for

concentrating solar power plants operating above 600
Rev 2019;107:319–37.

◦

C. Renew Sustain Energy

[186] Mehos M, Turchi C, Vidal J, Wagner M, Ma Z, Ho C, et al. Concentrating solar

power Gen3 demonstration roadmap. Golden, CO (United States): National
Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL); 2017.

[187] Devaradjane R, Shin D. Nanoparticle dispersions on ternary nitrate salts for heat
transfer fluid applications in solar thermal power. J Heat Tran 2016;138.
[188] Williams DF, Toth LM, Clarno KT. Assessment of candidate molten salt coolants
for the advanced high temperature reactor (AHTR): United States. Department of
Energy; 2006.

[189] Williams D. Assessment of candidate molten salt coolants for the NGNP/NHI heat-

transfer loop. Oak Ridge, TN (United States): Oak Ridge National Lab.(ORNL);
2006.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110938

H.M. Ali et al.

[190] Olivares RI, Chen C, Wright S. The thermal stability of molten

lithium–sodium–potassium carbonate and the influence of additives on the
melting point. J Sol Energy Eng 2012:134.

[191] Dabiri S, Mehrpooya M, Nezhad EG. Latent and sensible heat analysis of PCM
incorporated in a brick for cold and hot climatic conditions, utilizing
computational fluid dynamics. Energy 2018;159:160–71.

[192] Ait Hammou Z, Lacroix M. A hybrid thermal energy storage system for managing
simultaneously solar and electric energy. Energy Convers Manag 2006;47:
273–88.

[193] Ma Z, Li M-J, Zhang KM, Yuan F. Novel designs of hybrid thermal energy storage
system and operation strategies for concentrated solar power plant. Energy 2021;
216:119281.

[194] Alptekin E, Ezan MA. Performance investigations on a sensible heat thermal

[219] Sajjad U, Hamid K, Sultan M, Abbas N, Ali HM, Imran M, et al. Personal thermal
management-A review on strategies, progress, and prospects. Int Commun Heat
Mass Tran 2022;130:105739.

[220] Rehman T-u, Ali HM. Experimental study on the thermal behavior of RT-35HC

paraffin within copper and Iron-Nickel open cell foams: energy storage for
thermal management of electronics. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2020;146:118852.

[221] Rehman T-u, Ali HM. Thermal performance analysis of metallic foam-based heat
sinks embedded with RT-54HC paraffin: an experimental investigation for
electronic cooling. J Therm Anal Calorim 2020;140:979–90.

[222] Rehman T-u, Ambreen T, Niyas H, Kanti P, Ali HM, Park C-W. Experimental

investigation on the performance of RT-44HC-nickel foam-based heat sinks for
thermal management of electronic gadgets. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2022;188:
122591.

energy storage tank with a solar collector under variable climatic conditions. Appl
Therm Eng 2020;164:114423.

[223] Li Gpp J, Cheng P. Three dimensional analysis of heat transfer in a micro heat sink

with single phase flow. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2004;47:55–67.

[195] Wu S, Li T, Tong Z, Chao J, Zhai T, Xu J, et al. High-performance thermally

[224] Mahmoud At S, Toh C, Raya A-D, Soo SL. Experimental investigation of inserts

conductive phase change composites by large-size oriented graphite sheets for
scalable thermal energy harvesting. Adv Mater 2019;31:1905099.

configurations and PCM type on the thermal performance of PCM based heat
sinks. sinks. Appl Energy 2013;112:232–44.

[196] Shamsi H, Boroushaki M, Geraei H. Performance evaluation and optimization of

[225] Baby Cb R. Thermal optimization of PCM based pin fin heat sinks. Appl Therm

encapsulated cascade PCM thermal storage. J Energy Storage 2017;11:64–75.

Eng 2013;54:144–53.

[197] Naguib M, Kurtoglu M, Presser V, Lu J, Niu J, Heon M, et al. Two-dimensional
nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti3AlC2. Adv Mater 2011;23:4248–53.

[198] Liu Y, Yu J, Guo D, Li Z, Su Y. Ti3C2Tx MXene/graphene nanocomposites:

[226] Akhilesh An R, Balaji C. Method to improve geometry for heat transfer

enhancement in PCM composite heat sinks. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2005;48:114–21.
[227] Wei YJY. Stacked microchannel heat sinks for liquid cooling of microelectronic

synthesis and application in electrochemical energy storage. J Alloys Compd
2020;815:152403.

[199] Saha A, Shpigel N, Leifer N, Taragin S, Sharabani T, Aviv H, et al. Enhancing the
energy storage capabilities of Ti3C2Tx MXene electrodes by atomic surface
reduction. Adv Funct Mater 2021;31:2106294.

[200] Iqbal A, Sambyal P, Koo CM. 2D MXenes for electromagnetic shielding: a review.

Adv Funct Mater 2020;30:2000883.

[201] Mirkhani SA, Shayesteh Zeraati A, Aliabadian E, Naguib M, Sundararaj U. High

dielectric constant and low dielectric loss via poly (vinyl alcohol)/Ti3C2T x
MXene nanocomposites. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019;11:18599–608.
[202] Lu X, Huang H, Zhang X, Lin P, Huang J, Sheng X, et al. Novel light-driven and

electro-driven polyethylene glycol/two-dimensional MXene form-stable phase
change material with enhanced thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity
for thermal energy storage. Compos B Eng 2019;177:107372.

[203] Fan X, Liu L, Jin X, Wang W, Zhang S, Tang B. MXene Ti3C2Tx for phase change
composite with superior photothermal storage capability. J Mater Chem 2019;7:
14319–27.

[204] Aslfattahi N, Saidur R, Arifutzzaman A, Sadri R, Bimbo N, Sabri MFM, et al.

Experimental investigation of energy storage properties and thermal conductivity
of a novel organic phase change material/MXene as A new class of
nanocomposites. J Energy Storage 2020;27:101115.

[205] Lin P, Xie J, He Y, Lu X, Li W, Fang J, et al. MXene aerogel-based phase change

materials toward solar energy conversion. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2020;206:
110229.

[206] Du X, Qiu J, Deng S, Du Z, Cheng X, Wang H. Ti3C2Tx@PDA-Integrated

polyurethane phase change composites with superior solar-thermal conversion
efficiency and improved thermal conductivity. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng 2020;
8:5799–806.

[207] Mazhar S, Qarni AA, Ul Haq Y, Ul Haq Z, Murtaza I. Promising PVC/MXene based
flexible thin film nanocomposites with excellent dielectric, thermal and
mechanical properties. Ceram Int 2020;46:12593–605.

[208] Kang R, Zhang Z, Guo L, Cui J, Chen Y, Hou X, et al. Enhanced thermal

conductivity of epoxy composites filled with 2D transition metal carbides
(MXenes) with ultralow loading. Sci Rep 2019;9:9135.

[209] Jin X, Wang J, Dai L, Liu X, Li L, Yang Y, et al. Flame-retardant poly(vinyl
alcohol)/MXene multilayered films with outstanding electromagnetic
interference shielding and thermal conductive performances. Chem Eng J 2020;
380:122475.

[210] Krishna Y, Saidur R, Aslfattahi N, Faizal M, Ng K. Enhancing the thermal

properties of organic phase change material (palmitic acid) by doping MXene
nanoflakes. AIP Conference Proceedings: AIP Publishing LLC; 2020, 020013.

[211] Luo Y, Xie Y, Jiang H, Chen Y, Zhang L, Sheng X, et al. Flame-retardant and form-
stable phase change composites based on MXene with high thermostability and
thermal conductivity for thermal energy storage. Chem Eng J 2021;420:130466.
[212] Bouadila S, Baddadi S, Rehman T-u, Ayed R. Experimental investigation on the

thermal appraisal of heat pipe-evacuated tube collector-based water heating
system integrated with PCM. Renew Energy 2022;199:382–94.

components. Electron Package 2004:89–101.

[228] Kim YJJY, Fedorov AG. An absorption miniature heat pump system forelectronics

cooling. Thermal Applications 2008:77–83.

[229] Zhou X, Yu Q, Zhang S, Zhang C, Feng J. Porous silica matrices infiltrated with

PCM for thermal protection purposes. Ceram Int 2013;5:5247–53.

[230] Mondal S. Thermo-regulating textiles with phase-change materials. Functional
Textiles for Improved Performance. Protection and Health 2011:163–83.

[231] Hassabo AG, Mohamed AL. Enhancement the thermo-regulating property of
cellulosic fabric using encapsulated paraffins in modified pectin. Carbohydr
Polym 2017;165:421–8.

[232] S ́anchez P, S ́anchez-Fernandez M Victoria, Romero Amaya, Rodríguez Juan F,

S ́anchez-Silva Luz. Development of thermo-regulating textiles using paraffin wax
microcapsules. Thermochim Acta 2010;498:16–21.

[233] Leungtongkum T, Flick D, Hoang HM, Steven D, Delahaye A, Laguerre O.

Insulated box and refrigerated equipment with PCM for food preservation: state of
the art. J Food Eng 2022:317.

[234] Tong S, Nie B, Li Z, Li C, Zou B, Jiang L. A phase change material (PCM) based
passively cooled container for integrated road-rail cold chain transportation – an
experimental study. Appl Therm Eng 2021:195.

[235] Elliott MA, Halbert GW. Maintaining a frozen shipping environment for Phase I

clinical trial distribution. Int J Pharm 2008;346:89–92.

[236] Du J, Nie B, Zhang Y, Du Z, li Wang, Ding Y. Cooling performance of a thermal
energy storage-based portable box for cold chain applications. J Energy Storage
2020;28.

[237] Qu Y, Zhou D, Xue F, Cui L. Multi-factor analysis on thermal comfort and energy
saving potential for PCM-integrated buildings in summer. Energy Build 2021:241.
[238] Khan RJ, Bhuiyan MZH, Ahmed DH. Investigation of heat transfer of a building

wall in the presence of phase change material (PCM. Energy and Built
Environment 2020;1:199–206.

[239] Meng D, Zhao K, Wang A, Wang B. Preparation and properties of paraffin/PMMA

shape-stabilized phase change material for building thermal energy storage.
J Wuhan Univ Technol -Materials Sci Ed 2020;35.

[240] Patil JR, Mahanwar PA, Sundaramoorthy E, Mundhe GS. A review of the thermal

storage of phase change material, morphology, synthesis methods,
characterization, and applications of microencapsulated phase change material.
J Polym Eng 2023;43:354–75.

[241] Yadav M, Pasarkar N, Naikwadi A, Mahanwar P. A review on microencapsulation,

thermal energy storage applications, thermal conductivity and modification of
polymeric phase change material for thermal energy storage applications. Polym
Bull 2022:1–31.

[242] Albdour SA, Haddad Z, Sharaf OZ, Alazzam A, Abu-Nada E. Micro/nano-

encapsulated phase-change materials (ePCMs) for solar photothermal absorption
and storage: fundamentals, recent advances, and future directions. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2022;93:101037.

[243] Yang A-S, Cai T, Su L, Li Y, He F, Zhang Q-P, et al. Review on organic phase
change materials for sustainable energy storage. Sustainable Energy & Fuels;
2022.

[213] Baba YF, Al Mers A, Ajdad H, Bouatem A, Faik A, Idrissi BB. No-vacuum mono-

[244] Wang S, Lei K, Wang Z, Wang H, Zou D. Metal-based phase change material

tube compound parabolic collector receiver for linear Fresnel concentrator:
numerical and experimental approach for dynamic behavior assessment. Energy
Convers Manag 2022;268:115986.

[214] Souayfane Ff F, Biwole P-H. Phase change materials (PCM) for cooling

applications in buildings. Energy Build 2016:396–431.

[215] Kuznik Dd F, Johannes K, Roux J-J. A review on phase change materials

integrated in building walls. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2011:379–91.

[216] Gin Mmf B. The use of PCM panels to improve storage condition of frozen food.

J Food Eng 2010:372–6.

[217] Or ́o Lm E, Farid MM, Cabeza LF. Improving thermal performance of freezers using

phase change materials. Int J Refrig 2012;35:984–91.

[218] Mondal S. Phase change materials for smart textiles. Appl Therm Eng 2008;28:

1536. 50.

(PCM) microcapsules/nanocapsules: fabrication, thermophysical characterization
and application. Chem Eng J 2022:135559.

[245] Romdhane SB, Amamou A, Khalifa RB, Said NM, Younsi Z, Jemni A. A review on
thermal energy storage using phase change materials in passive building
applications. J Build Eng 2020;32:101563.

[246] Rathore PKS, Shukla SK. Potential of macroencapsulated PCM for thermal energy
storage in buildings: a comprehensive review. Construct Build Mater 2019;225:
723–44.

[247] Or ́o E, Gil A, Mir ́o L, Peir ́o G,

 ́
Alvarez S, Cabeza LF. Thermal energy storage

implementation using phase change materials for solar cooling and refrigeration
applications. Energy Proc 2012;30:947–56.

[248] Chen D, Jiang J, Kim GH, Yang C, Pesaran A. Comparison of different cooling
methods for lithium ion battery cells. Appl Therm Eng 2016;94:846–54.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110939

H.M. Ali et al.

[249] Yoo DW, Joshi YK. Energy efficient thermal management of electronic

[281] Meng E, Yu H, Zhou B. Study of the thermal behavior of the composite phase

components using solid-liquid phase change materials. IEEE Trans Device Mater
Reliab 2004;4:641–9.

change material (PCM) room in summer and winter. Appl Therm Eng 2017;126:
212–25.

[250] Moore D, Raghupathy A, Maltz W. Application of phase change materials in
handheld computing devices. In: Annual IEEE semiconductor thermal
measurement and management symposium; 2016. p. 213–7.

[282] Kong X, Lu S, Huang J, Cai Z, Wei S. Experimental research on the use of phase

change materials in perforated brick rooms for cooling storage. Energy Build
2013;62:597–604.

[251] Mongia R, Bhattacharya A, Pokharna H. Skin cooling and other challenges in

[283] TermoDeck. Thermal energy storage for energy efficient building. n.d. [Available

future mobile form factor computing devices. Microelectron J 2008;39(7):
992–1000.

[252] Browne MC, Norton B, McCormack SJ. Phase change materials for photovoltaic

thermal management. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;47:762–82.

[253] Hawlader Mna UM, Khin MM. Microencapsulated PCM thermal-energy storage

system. Appl Energy 2003;74:195–202.

[254] Amaral C, Vicente R, Marques PAAP, Barros-Timmons A. Phase change materials
and carbon nanostructures for thermal energy storage: a literature review. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2017;79:1212–28.

[255] Hosseini M. Energy Build. Experimental and numerical evaluation of

longitudinally finned latent heat thermal storage systems. 2015. p. 263–75.

[256] Moreno P, Sol ́e C, Castell A, Cabeza LF. The use of phase change materials in

from: http://www.termodeck.com/.

[284] Barton P, Beggs C, Sleigh P. A theoretical study of the thermal performance of the
TermoDeck hollow core slab system. Appl Therm Eng 2002;22:1485–99.
[285] Andersson L, Engstr ̈om A, Lindstr ̈om G. Energy-Efficient Passive House using
thermal mass to achieve high thermal comfort. The REHVA European HVAC
Journal 2012;49:44–9.

[286] PCMProducts. PCM products limited. n.d. [Available from: http://www.pcmprod

ucts.net/.

[287] ThermaCool. Phase change technology. n.d. [Available from: http://www.the

rma.cool/.

[288] Emcoklima. Emcoklima. n.d. [cited 2022 March 29]. Available from: http://

www.emco-klima.com/index.html.

domestic heat pump and air-conditioning systems for short term storage: a
review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2014;39:1–13.

[289] Alam M, Jamil H, Sanjayan J, Wilson J. Energy saving potential of phase change
materials in major Australian cities. Energy Build Aug 1, 2014;78:192–201.

[257] Waqas A, Ud Din Z. Phase change material (PCM) storage for free cooling of

buildings—a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;18:607–25.

[258] Akeiber H, Nejat P, Majid MZA, Wahid MA, Jomehzadeh F, Zeynali Famileh I.

[290] Hasan MI al e. Experimental investigation of phase change materials for

insulation of residential buildings. Sustain Cities Soc 2018;36:42–58.
[291] Ahangari M, Maerefat M. An innovative PCM system for thermal comfort

A review on phase change material (PCM) for sustainable passive cooling in
building envelopes. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;60:1470–97.

improvement and energy demand reduction in building under different climate
conditions. Sustain Cities Soc 2018;44:120–9.

[259] Javadi FS, Metselaar HSC, Ganesan P. Performance improvement of solar thermal

systems integrated with phase change materials (PCM), a review. Sol Energy
2020;206:330–52.

[292] Izquierdo-Barrientos Ma al e. A numerical study of external building walls
containing phase change materials (PCM). Appl Therm Eng 2012;47:73–85.
[293] Alawadhi EM. Thermal analysis of a building brick containing phase change

[260] Wheatley G, Rubel RI. Design improvement of a laboratory prototype for

material. Energy Build 2008;40:351–7.

efficiency evaluation of solar thermal water heating system using phase change
material (PCMs. Results in Engineering 2021:12.

[294] Chen C, al e. A new kind of phase change material (PCM) for energy-storing

wallboard. Energy Build 2008;40:882–90.

[261] Waqas A, Kumar S. Phase change material (PCM)-based solar air heating system

[295] Solg E, ie al. Cooling load reduction in office buildings of hot-arid climate,

for residential space heating in winter. Int J Green Energy 2013;10:402–26.

[262] Sheikholeslami ANKM. Nanoparticle enhanced PCM applications for

intensification of thermal performance in building: a review. J Mol Liq 2019;274:
516–33.

[263] Wang X, Li W, Luo Z, Wang K, Shah SP. A critical review on phase change
materials (PCM) for sustainable and energy efficient building: design,
characteristic, performance and application. Energy Build 2022:260.
[264] Islam MN, Ahmed DH. Delaying the temperature fluctuations through PCM

integrated building walls—room conditions, PCM placement, and temperature of
the heat sources. Energy Storage 2021;3(5):e245.

[265] Zhao JRZ, Li Y. Thermal performance of mini-channel liquid cooled cylinder
based battery thermal management for cylindrical lithium-ion power battery.
Energy Conversion Management; 2015. p. 157–65.

[266] N’Tsoukpoe KE, Kuznik F. A reality check on long-term thermochemical heat

storage for household applications. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021:139.
[267] Rathgeber C, L ̈avemann E, Hauer A. Economic top–down evaluation of the costs
of energy storages—a simple economic truth in two equations. J Energy Storage
2015;2:43–6.

[268] Bland A, Khzouz M, Statheros T, Gkanas EI. PCMs for residential building

applications: a short review focused on disadvantages and proposals for future
development. Buildings 2017;7.

[269] Khadiran T, Hussein MZ, Zainal Z, Rusli R. Advanced energy storage materials for
building applications and their thermal performance characterization: a review.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;57:916–28.

[270] Chen BAO, Horgnies M, Morin V, Boumaaza M, Huet B, Gengembre E. Study of

carbonation durability of several ettringite-enriched pastes. WIT Trans Eng Sci
2019;124:25–33.

[271] Espagnet AR. Techno-economic assessment of thermal energy storage integration
into low temperature district heating networks. KTH School of Industrial
Engineering and Management; 2016.

[272] Policy IEA. Transition to sustainable buildings: strategies and opportunities to
2050. Organization for Economic. International Energy Agency; 2013.
[273] Secretariat IEA. Energy technology perspectives 2015: mobilising innovation to

accelerate climate action. International Energy Agency; 2015.

[274] Kalaiselvam S, Parameshwaran R. Thermal energy storage technologies for
sustainability: systems design, assessment and applications. Elsevier; 2014.
[275] i Burgos AC, Sweatman P. Claves para transformar el sector de la edificaci ́on en
Espa ̃na, sobre la base de la rehabilitaci ́on y la eficiencia energ ́etica: los informes
GTR (1a  parte). Ecosostenible 2014:11–25.

[276] LaFrance M. Technology Roadmap: energy efficient building envelopes. Paris:

IEA; 2013.

[277] Horizon D. Work programme 2016–2017 in the area of societal challenge 3

“secure. Clean and Efficient Energy; 2020.

[278] Vega M, Llantoy N, Chafer M, Ushak S, Cabeza LF. Life cycle assessment of the
inclusion of phase change materials in lightweight buildings. J Energy Storage
2022;56:105903.

combining phase change materials and night purge ventilation. Renew Energy
2016;85:725–31.

[296] Zhou Ga, et al. Energy performance of a hybrid space-cooling system in an office
building using SSPCM thermal storage and night ventilation. Sol Energy 2011;85:
477–85.

[297] Nagano K al e. Study of a floor supply air conditioning system using granular

phase change material to augment building mass thermal storage—heat response
in small scale experiments. Energy Build 2006;38:436–46.

[298] Durakovi ́c B, Meˇsetovi ́c S. Thermal performances of glazed energy storage

systems with various storage materials: an experimental study. Sustain Cities Soc
2019;45:422–30.

[299] Durakovic B, Torlak M. Experimental and numerical study of a PCM window
model as a thermal energy storage unit. Int J Low Carbon Technol 2017;12:
272–80.

[300] Durakovic B, Torlak M. Simulation and experimental validation of phase change
material and water used as heat storage medium in window applications. J Mater
Environ Sci 2017;8:1837–46.

[301] Kapsalis V, Karamanis D. Solar thermal energy storage and heat pumps with

phase change materials. Appl Therm Eng 2016;99:1212–24.

[302] Mahon H, O’Connor D, Friedrich D, Hughes B. A review of thermal energy storage

technologies for seasonal loops. Energy 2022;239.

[303] Zayed ME, Zhao J, Elsheikh AH, Hammad FA, Ma L, Du Y. Applications of

cascaded phase change materials in solar water collector storage tanks: a review.
Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2019;199:24–49.

[304] Mahfuz MH, Anisur MR, Kibria MA, Saidur R, Metselaar IHSC. Performance
investigation of thermal energy storage system with Phase Change Material
(PCM) for solar water heating application. Int Commun Heat Mass Tran 2014;57:
132–9.

[305] Agyenim F, Hewitt N, Eames P, Smyth M. A review of materials, heat transfer and
phase change problem formulation for latent heat thermal energy storage systems
(LHTESS. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2010;14:615–28.
[306] Shirinbakhsh M, Mirkhani N, Sajadi B. A comprehensive study on the effect of hot

water demand and PCM integration on the performance of SDHW system. Sol
Energy 2018;159:405–14.

[307] Yanbing K, Yi J, Yinping Z. Modeling and experimental study on an innovative

passive cooling system. Energy Build 2003;35:417–25.

[308] Takeda S, Nagano K, Mochida T, Shimakura K. Development of a ventilation
system utilizing thermal energy storage for granules containing phase change
material. Sol Energy 2004;77:329–38.

[309] Belmonte JF, Izquierdo-Barrientos MA, Eguía P, Molina AE, Almendros-

Ib ́a ̃nez JA. PCM in the heat rejection loops of absorption chillers. A feasibility
study for the residential sector in Spain. Energy Build 2014;80:331–51.
[310] Sodhi GS, Muthukumar P. Compound charging and discharging enhancement in
multi-PCM system using non-uniform fin distribution. Renew Energy 2021;171:
299–314.

[311] Duan J, Xiong Y, Yang D. Study on the effect of multiple spiral fins for improved

[279] Radhi SS, Al-Khafaji ZS, Falah MW. Sustainable heating system by infrared

phase change process. Appl Therm Eng 2020:169.

radiators. Heritage and Sustainable Development 2022;4:42–52.
[280] Kim Y, Norford LK. Optimal use of thermal energy storage resources in
commercial buildings through price-based demand response considering
distribution network operation. Appl Energy 2017;193:308–24.

[312] Mehta DS, Vaghela B, Rathod MK, Banerjee J. Thermal performance

augmentation in latent heat storage unit using spiral fin: an experimental
analysis. J Energy Storage 2020:31.

[313] Modi N, Wang X, Negnevitsky M, Cao F. Melting characteristics of a

longitudinally finned-tube horizontal latent heat thermal energy storage system.
Sol Energy 2021;230:333–44.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110940

H.M. Ali et al.

[314] Stritih U. Heat transfer enhancement in latent heat thermal storage system for

[350] Li Xc Y, Xu Y, Zhuo Y, Lu G. Sustainable thermal-based desalination with low-cost

buildings. Energy Build 2003;35:1097–104.

[315] Regin AF, Solanki SC, Saini JS. Heat transfer characteristics of thermal energy

storage system using PCM capsules: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2008;12:
2438–58.

[316] Mu ̃noz-S ́anchez B, Iparraguirre-Torres I, Madina-Arrese V, Izagirre-Etxeberria U,
Unzurrunzaga-Iturbe A, García-Romero A. Encapsulated high temperature PCM as
active filler material in a thermocline-based thermal storage system. Energy Proc
2015;69:937–46.

[317] Kundapur A. A treatise on solar cookers 2018. Udupi: International Alternate

Energy Trust; 2018, 576102.

[318] Sharma ACC, Murty VVS, Shukla A. Solar cooker with latent heat storage systems:

a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2009;13:1599–605.

[319] Zhao JGY, Feng F, Tong Q, Qv W, Wang H. Microstructure and thermal properties

of a paraffin/expanded graphite phase-change composite for thermal storage.
Renew Energy 2011;36:1339–42.

[320] Fukai JKM, Kodama Y, Miyatake O. Thermal conductivity enhancement of energy

storage media using carbon fibers. Energy Convers Manag 2000;41:1543–56.

[321] Wu SWH, Xiao S, Zhu D. Numerical simulation on thermal energy storage

behavior of Cu/paraffin nanofluids PCMs. Procedia Eng 2012;31:240–4.

[322] IEA. Key World Energy Statistics 2020. Paris: IEA; 2020.
[323] IRENA. Innovation outlook: thermal energy storage. International Renewable

energy resources and low-carbon footprints. Desalination 2021:520.
[351] Woo YC, Kim S-H, Shon HK, Tijing LD. Introduction: membrane desalination

today, past, and future. In: Current Trends and Future Developments on (Bio-)
Membranes. Membr Desalin Syst Next. Gener; 2019. xxv–xlvi.

[352] Gude VG. Energy storage for desalination processes powered by renewable energy

and waste heat sources. Appl Energy 2015;137:877–98.

[353] Alarc ́on-Padilla Jb-G D-C, García-Rodríguezz L, Gernjak W, Malato-Rodríguez S.
First experimental results of a new hybrid solar/gas multi-effect distillation
system: the AQUASOL project. Desalination 2008;220:619–25.

[354] Mehrpooya Bg M, Mousavi SA, Mousavi A. Integrated power generation cycle
(Kalina cycle) with auxiliary heater and PCM energy storage. Energy Convers
Manag 2018;177:453–67.

[355] Banat Nj F, Rommel M, Koschikowski J, Wieghaus M. Performance evaluation of
the ‘large SMADES’ autonomous desalination solar-driven membrane distillation
plant in Aqaba, Jordan. Desalination 2007;217:17–28.

[356] Siefan Er A, Elashwah N, Banat F, Almarzooqi F, Van Der Merwe R. Desalination
via solar membrane distillation and conventional membrane distillation: life cycle
assessment case study in Jordan, vol. 522. Elsevier; 2022, 115383.

[357] Al-Othman Mt A, El Haj Assad M, Alkayyali T, Eisa A. Novel multi-stage flash

(MSF) desalination plant driven by parabolic trough collectors and a solar pond: a
simulation study in UAE. Desalination 2018;443:237–44.

Energy Agency Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; 2020.

[358] Szacsvay Ph-N T, Posnansky M. Technical and economic aspects of small-scale

[324] Vass Pl T, Gouy A, Mandova H. Tracking industry 2021 – analysis - IEA. 2021.
[325] White MT, Sayma AI. A new method to identify the optimal temperature of latent-
heat thermal-energy storage systems for power generation from waste heat. Int J
Heat Mass Tran 2020;149:119111.

[326] Oyelaran OA, Twada YY, Sanusi OM. Energy audit of an industry: a case study of

fabrication company. Aceh Int J Sci Technol 2016;5:45–53.

[327] Philibert C. Renewable energy for industry, vol. 65. Paris: International Energy

Agency; 2017.

[328] Pelella F, Zsembinszki G, Viscito L, Mauro AW, Cabeza LF. Thermo-economic
optimization of a multi-source (air/sun/ground) residential heat pump with a
water/PCM thermal storage. Appl Energy 2023;331:120398.

[329] White MT, Sayma AI. A new method to identify the optimal temperature of latent-
heat thermal-energy storage systems for power generation from waste heat. Int J
Heat Mass Tran 2020;149:119111.

[330] Tyagi PK, Kumar R, Said Z. Recent advances on the role of nanomaterials for

improving the performance of photovoltaic thermal systems: trends, challenges
and prospective. Nano Energy 2021:106834.

[331] Mir ́o L, Gasia J, Cabeza LF. Thermal energy storage (TES) for industrial waste

heat (IWH) recovery: a review. Appl Energy 2016;179:284–301.

[332] Arce P, Medrano M, Gil A, Or ́o E, Cabeza LF. Overview of thermal energy storage
(TES) potential energy savings and climate change mitigation in Spain and
Europe. Appl Energy 2011;88:2764–74.

[333] Laboratory NRE. Concentrating solar power projects in Spain [cited 2022 March].
[334] Flamant G, Grange B, Wheeldon J, Siros F, Valentin B, Bataille F, et al.

Opportunities and challenges in using particle circulation loops for concentrated
solar power applications. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2023;94:101056.

[335] Weiss W,. Spork-dur M., Solar heat worldwide: Global market development and

trends in 2018. Solar Heat Worldwide Rep 2019.

solar-pond-powered seawater desalination systems. Desalination 1999;122:
185–93.

[359] Patil MS, Seo J-H, Lee M-Y. A novel dielectric fluid immersion cooling technology
for Li-ion battery thermal management. Energy Convers Manag 2021;229:
113715.

[360] Birbarah P, Gebrael T, Foulkes T, Stillwell A, Moore A, Pilawa-Podgurski R, et al.
Water immersion cooling of high power density electronics. Int J Heat Mass Tran
2020;147:118918.

[361] Ali HM, Ashraf MJ, Giovannelli A, Irfan M, Irshad TB, Hamid HM, et al. Thermal

management of electronics: an experimental analysis of triangular, rectangular
and circular pin-fin heat sinks for various PCMs. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;123:
272–84.

[362] Joseph M, Sajith V. Graphene enhanced paraffin nanocomposite based hybrid
cooling system for thermal management of electronics. Appl Therm Eng 2019;
163:114342.

[363] Farzanehnia A, Khatibi M, Sardarabadi M, Passandideh-Fard M. Experimental
investigation of multiwall carbon nanotube/paraffin based heat sink for
electronic device thermal management. Energy Convers Manag 2019;179:
314–25.

[364] Ali HM, Arshad A. Experimental investigation of n-eicosane based circular pin-fin
heat sinks for passive cooling of electronic devices. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2017;
112:649–61.

[365] Park S, Jung D. Battery cell arrangement and heat transfer fluid effects on the
parasitic power consumption and the cell temperature distribution in a hybrid
electric vehicle. J Power Sources 2013;227:191–8.

[366] Jang DS, Yun S, Hong SH, Cho W, Kim Y. Performance characteristics of a novel
heat pipe-assisted liquid cooling system for the thermal management of lithium-
ion batteries. Energy Convers Manag 2022;251:115001.

[336] Richter M, Habermann E-M, Siebecke E, Linder M. A systematic screening of salt
hydrates as materials for a thermochemical heat transformer. Thermochim Acta
2018;659:136–50.

[367] Huo Y, Rao Z, Liu X, Zhao J. Investigation of power battery thermal management
by using mini-channel cold plate. Energy Convers Manag 2015;89:387–95.
[368] Smith J, Hinterberger M, Schneider C, Koehler J. Energy savings and increased

[337] ITRI. Calcium-looping CO2 capture technology. Taiwan: Industrial Technology

Research Insitute (ITRI); 2014.

electric vehicle range through improved battery thermal management. Appl
Therm Eng 2016;101:647–56.

[338] Mauthner F, Hubmann M, Brunner C, Fink C. Manufacture of malt and beer with

[369] Guo J, Jiang F. A novel electric vehicle thermal management system based on

low temperature solar process heat. Energy Proc 2014;48:1188–93.

[339] Qiu Y, Li M, Hassanien RHE, Wang Y, Luo X, Yu Q. Performance and operation
mode analysis of a heat recovery and thermal storage solar-assisted heat pump
drying system. Sol Energy 2016;137:225–35.

[340] Atalay H, Çoban MT, Kıncay O. Modeling of the drying process of apple slices:

application with a solar dryer and the thermal energy storage system. Energy
2017;134:382–91.

[341] Buscemi A, Panno D, Ciulla G, Beccali M, Brano VL. Concrete thermal energy

storage for linear Fresnel collectors: exploiting the South Mediterranean’s solar
potential for agri-food processes. Energy Convers Manag 2018;166:719–34.
[342] Merlin Js K, Delaunay D, Traonvouez L. Industrial waste heat recovery using an
enhanced conductivity latent heat thermal energy storage. Appl Energy 2016;183:
491–503.

[343] Braxmeier S. Phase change material for thermotherapy of Buruli ulcer: modelling

as an aid to implementation. J Med Eng Technol 2009;33:559–66.

[344] Kant As K, Sharma A, Kumar A, Jain A. Thermal energy storage based solar drying

systems: a review. Innovat Food Sci Emerg Technol 2016;34:86–99.

[345] Cheralathan M, Velraj R, Renganarayanan S. Performance analysis on industrial
refrigeration system integrated with encapsulated PCM-based cool thermal
energy storage system. Int J Energy Res 2007;31(14):1398–413.

[346] Nie Ap B, Zou B, Liu J, Zhang T, Li Y. Review on phase change materials for cold
thermal energy storage applications. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2020:134.
[347] Jones Mq E, van Vliet MTH, Smakhtin V, mu Kang S. The state of desalination and
brine production: a global outlook. Sci Total Environ 2019;657:1343–56.

cooling and heating of batteries by refrigerant. Energy Convers Manag 2021;237:
114145.

[370] Li Y, Bai M, Zhou Z, Lv J, Hu C, Gao L, et al. Experimental study of liquid

immersion cooling for different cylindrical lithium-ion batteries under rapid
charging conditions. Therm Sci Eng Prog 2023;37:101569.

[371] Hsu Y-T, Li J-X, Lu M-C. Enhanced immersion cooling using two-tier micro-and

nano-structures. Appl Therm Eng 2018;131:864–73.

[372] An Z, Jia L, Li X, Ding Y. Experimental investigation on lithium-ion battery

thermal management based on flow boiling in mini-channel. Appl Therm Eng
2017;117:534–43.

[373] Karimi G, Dehghan A. Thermal analysis of high-power lithium-ion battery packs

using flow network approach. Int J Energy Res 2014;38:1793–811.
[374] Mondal B, Lopez CF, Mukherjee PP. Exploring the efficacy of nanofluids for

lithium-ion battery thermal management. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2017;112:779–94.
[375] Kang X, Wang Y, Huang Q, Cui Y, Wang C, Wen C, et al. Phase-change immersion
cooling high power light emitting diodes and heat transfer improvement.
Microelectron Reliab 2017;79:257–64.

[376] Patel JR, Rathod MK. Recent developments in the passive and hybrid thermal

management techniques of lithium-ion batteries. J Power Sources 2020;480:
228820.

[377] Shao L, Raghavan A, Kim G-H, Emurian L, Rosen J, Papaefthymiou MC, et al.
Figure-of-merit for phase-change materials used in thermal management. Int J
Heat Mass Tran 2016;101:764–71.

[378] Shamberger PJ. Cooling capacity figure of merit for phase change materials.

[348] Bundschuh Mk J, Ghaffour N, Tomaszewska B. State-of-the-art of renewable

J Heat Tran 2016;138.

energy sources used in water desalination: present and future prospects.
Desalination 2021:508.

[349] Nassrullah Sfa H, Hashaikeh R, Hilal N. Energy for desalination: a state-of-the-art

review. Desalination 2020:491.

[379] Bonner RW, Desai T, Gao F, Tang X, Palacios T, Shin S, et al. Die level thermal

storage for improved cooling of pulsed devices. In: 2011 27th annual IEEE
semiconductor thermal measurement and management symposium. IEEE; 2011.
p. 193–7.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110941

H.M. Ali et al.

[380] Baby R, Balaji C. Thermal management of electronics using phase change material
based pin fin heat sinks. J Phys: Conference Series: IOP Publishing 2012:012134.

[381] Arshad A, Ali HM, Khushnood S, Jabbal M. Experimental investigation of PCM
based round pin-fin heat sinks for thermal management of electronics: effect of
pin-fin diameter. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;117:861–72.

[382] Yan J, Li K, Chen H, Wang Q, Sun J. Experimental study on the application of
phase change material in the dynamic cycling of battery pack system. Energy
Convers Manag 2016;128:12–9.

[383] Li W, Wang F, Cheng W, Chen X, Zhao Q. Study of using enhanced heat-transfer
flexible phase change material film in thermal management of compact electronic
device. Energy Convers Manag 2020;210:112680.

[384] Kinkelin C, Lips S, Soupremanien U, Remondi`ere V, Dijon J, Le Poche H, et al.
Theoretical and experimental study of a thermal damper based on a CNT/PCM
composite structure for transient electronic cooling. Energy Convers Manag 2017;
142:257–71.

[385] Shao W, Wu R, Ran L, Jiang H, Coombs T, Yardley K, et al. Enhanced over-current
capability and extended SOA of power modules utilizing phase change material.
In: 2019 IEEE energy conversion congress and exposition (ECCE): ieee; 2019.
p. 5315–20.

[386] Jilte RD, Kumar R, Ahmadi MH, Chen L. Battery thermal management system
employing phase change material with cell-to-cell air cooling. Appl Therm Eng
2019;161:114199.

[410] Chung H, Cho G. Thermal properties and physiological responses of vapor-

permeable water-repellent fabrics treated with microcapsule-containing PCMs.
Textil Res J 2004;74:571–5.

[411] Kim J, Cho G. Thermal storage/release, durability, and temperature sensing
properties of thermostatic fabrics treated with octadecane-containing
microcapsules. Textil Res J 2002;72:1093–8.

[412] Yamagishi Y, Takeuchi H, Pyatenko AT, Kayukawa N. Characteristics of

microencapsulated PCM slurry as a heat-transfer fluid. AIChE J 1999;45:696–707.

[413] Zhang X-x, Tao X-m, Yick K-l, Wang X-c. Structure and thermal stability of

microencapsulated phase-change materials. Colloid Polym Sci 2004;282:330–6.
[414] Cho J-S, Kwon A, Cho C-G. Microencapsulation of octadecane as a phase-change
material by interfacial polymerization in an emulsion system. Colloid Polym Sci
2002;280:260–6.

[415] Chen C, Wang L, Huang Y. Electrospinning of thermo-regulating ultrafine fibers

based on polyethylene glycol/cellulose acetate composite. Polymer 2007;48:
5202–7.

[416] Jt McCann, Marquez M, Xia Y. Melt coaxial electrospinning: a versatile method
for the encapsulation of solid materials and fabrication of phase change
nanofibers. Nano Lett 2006;6:2868–72.

[417] Rezaei B, Ghani M, Askari M, Shoushtari AM, Malek RMA. Fabrication of thermal
intelligent core/shell nanofibers by the solution coaxial electrospinning process.
Adv Polym Technol 2016;35.

[387] Greco A, Jiang X, Cao D. An investigation of lithium-ion battery thermal

[418] Wang N, Chen H, Lin L, Zhao Y, Cao X, Song Y, et al. Multicomponent phase

management using paraffin/porous-graphite-matrix composite. J Power Sources
2015;278:50–68.

change microfibers prepared by temperature control multifluidic electrospinning.
Macromol Rapid Commun 2010;31:1622–7.

[388] Samimi F, Babapoor A, Azizi M, Karimi G. Thermal management analysis of a Li-

ion battery cell using phase change material loaded with carbon fibers. Energy
2016;96:355–71.

[419] Sirohi S, Singh D, Nain R, Parida D, Agrawal AK, Jassal M. Electrospun composite
nanofibres of PVA loaded with nanoencapsulated n-octadecane. RSC Adv 2015;5:
34377–82.

[389] Malik M, Dincer I, Rosen M, Fowler M. Experimental investigation of a new

[420] Zhao L, Luo J, Li Y, Wang H, Song G, Tang G. Emulsion-electrospinning n-

passive thermal management system for a Li-ion battery pack using phase change
composite material. Electrochim Acta 2017;257:345–55.

[390] Pan M, Lai W. Cutting copper fiber/paraffin composite phase change material
discharging experimental study based on heat dissipation capability of Li-ion
battery. Renew Energy 2017;114:408–22.

octadecane/silk composite fiber as environmental-friendly form-stable phase
change materials. J Appl Polym Sci 2017;134:45538.

[421] P ́erez-Masi ́a R, L ́opez-Rubio A, Lagar ́on JM. Development of zein-based heat-

management structures for smart food packaging. Food Hydrocolloids 2013;30:
182–91.

[391] Situ W, Zhang G, Li X, Yang X, Wei C, Rao M, et al. A thermal management system
for rectangular LiFePO4 battery module using novel double copper mesh-
enhanced phase change material plates. Energy 2017;141:613–23.

[422] Chen C, Wang L, Huang Y. Role of Mn of PEG in the morphology and properties of
electrospun PEG/CA composite fibers for thermal energy storage. AIChE J 2009;
55:820–7.

[392] Alipanah M, Li X. Numerical studies of lithium-ion battery thermal management

[423] Cai Y, Ke H, Lin L, Fei X, Wei Q, Song L, et al. Preparation, morphology and

systems using phase change materials and metal foams. Int J Heat Mass Tran
2016;102:1159–68.

[393] Li J, Huang J, Cao M. Properties enhancement of phase-change materials via silica
and Al honeycomb panels for the thermal management of LiFeO4 batteries. Appl
Therm Eng 2018;131:660–8.

[394] Weng J, Ouyang D, Yang X, Chen M, Zhang G, Wang J. Optimization of the

internal fin in a phase-change-material module for battery thermal management.
Appl Therm Eng 2020;167:114698.

thermal properties of electrospun fatty acid eutectics/polyethylene terephthalate
form-stable phase change ultrafine composite fibers for thermal energy storage.
Energy Convers Manag 2012;64:245–55.

[424] Ke H, Cai Y, Wei Q, Xiao Y, Dong J, Hu Y, et al. Electrospun ultrafine composite
fibers of binary fatty acid eutectics and polyethylene terephthalate as innovative
form-stable phase change materials for storage and retrieval of thermal energy.
Int J Energy Res 2013;37:657–64.

[425] Ke H, Li D, Zhang H, Wang X, Cai Y, Huang F, et al. Electrospun form-stable phase

[395] Heyhat MM, Mousavi S, Siavashi M. Battery thermal management with thermal
energy storage composites of PCM, metal foam, fin and nanoparticle. J Energy
Storage 2020;28:101235.

change composite nanofibers consisting of capric acid-based binary fatty acid
eutectics and polyethylene terephthalate. Fibers Polym 2013;14:89.
[426] Cai Y, Gao C, Zhang T, Zhang Z, Wei Q, Du J, et al. Influences of expanded

[396] Feng R, Huang P, Tang Z, He Y, Bai Z. Experimental and numerical study on the
cooling performance of heat pipe assisted composite phase change material-based
battery thermal management system. Energy Convers Manag 2022;272:116359.

[397] Lee S, Han U, Lee H. Development of a hybrid battery thermal management
system coupled with phase change material under fast charging conditions.
Energy Convers Manag 2022;268:116015.

[398] Parsons K. Human thermal environments: the effects of hot, moderate, and cold

graphite on structural morphology and thermal performance of composite phase
change materials consisting of fatty acid eutectics and electrospun PA6
nanofibrous mats. Renew Energy 2013;57:163–70.

[427] Ke H, Pang Z, Peng B, Wang J, Cai Y, Huang F, et al. Thermal energy storage and

retrieval properties of form-stable phase change nanofibrous mats based on
ternary fatty acid eutectics/polyacrylonitrile composite by magnetron sputtering
of silver. J Therm Anal Calorim 2016;123:1293–307.

environments on human health, comfort and performance. CRC press; 2007.

[428] Do CV, Nguyen TTT, Park JS. Phase-change core/shell structured nanofibers

[399] Zhang H, Xie X, Hong S, Lv H. Impact of metabolism and the clothing thermal
resistance on inpatient thermal comfort. Energy and Built Environment 2021;2:
223–32.

[400] Woodcock AH. Moisture transfer in textile systems, Part I. Textil Res J 1962;32:

628–33.

based on eicosane/poly (vinylidene fluoride) for thermal storage applications.
Kor J Chem Eng 2013;30:1403–9.

[429] Sun S-X, Xie R, Wang X-X, Wen G-Q, Liu Z, Wang W, et al. Fabrication of

nanofibers with phase-change core and hydrophobic shell, via coaxial
electrospinning using nontoxic solvent. J Mater Sci 2015;50:5729–38.

[401] Djongyang N, Tchinda R, Njomo D. Thermal comfort: a review paper. Renew

[430] Kuru A, Aksoy SA. Cellulose–PEG grafts from cotton waste in thermo-regulating

Sustain Energy Rev 2010;14:2626–40.

textiles. Textil Res J 2014;84:337–46.

[402] Jocic D. Smart coatings for comfort in clothing. Active coatings for smart textiles.

[431] Evans D, Florschuetz L. Cost studies on terrestrial photovoltaic power systems

Elsevier; 2016. p. 331–54.

with sunlight concentration. Sol Energy 1977;19:255–62.

[403] Zhu F, Feng Q. Recent advances in textile materials for personal radiative thermal

[432] Solanki S, Dubey S, Tiwari A. Indoor simulation and testing of photovoltaic

management in indoor and outdoor environments. Int J Therm Sci 2021;165:
106899.

thermal (PV/T) air collectors. Appl Energy 2009;86:2421–8.

[433] Chow T, He W, Ji J. Hybrid photovoltaic-thermosyphon water heating system for

[404] Hale D, Hoover M, O’neill M. Phase change materials handbook, NASA contractor

residential application. Sol Energy 2006;80:298–306.

report NASA CR-61365. Alabama: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; 1971.
p. 25–7.

[405] Cox R. Synopsis of the new thermal regulating fiber Outlast. Chem Fibers Int

1998;48:475–9.

[406] Pushaw RJ. Coated skived foam and fabric article containing energy absorbing

phase change material. Google Patents; 1997.

[407] Mulligan J, Colvin D, Bryant Y. Microencapsulated phase-change material

suspensions for heat transfer in spacecraft thermal systems. J Spacecraft Rockets
1996;33:278–84.

[408] Brown RC, Rasberry JD, Overmann SP. Microencapsulated phase-change

materials as heat transfer media in gas-fluidized beds. Powder Technol 1998;98:
217–22.

[409] Choi K, Cho G, Kim P, Cho C. Thermal storage/release and mechanical properties
of phase change materials on polyester fabrics. Textil Res J 2004;74:292–6.

[434] Yazdanifard F, Ebrahimnia-Bajestan E, Ameri M. Investigating the performance of

a water-based photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) collector in laminar and turbulent
flow regime. Renew Energy 2016;99:295–306.

[435] Fudholi A, Sopian K, Yazdi MH, Ruslan MH, Ibrahim A, Kazem HA. Performance
analysis of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collectors. Energy Convers Manag
2014;78:641–51.

[436] Vaishak S, Bhale PV. Performance analysis of a heat pump-based photovoltaic/
thermal (PV/T) system. Clean Technol Environ Policy 2021;23:1121–33.
[437] Gang P, Huide F, Tao Z, Jie J. A numerical and experimental study on a heat pipe

PV/T system. Sol Energy 2011;85:911–21.

[438] Xuxin Z, Huide F, Jie J, Hongyuan S, Rui M, Qixing W. Comparative study on
performances of a heat-pipe PV/T system and a heat-pipe solar water heating
system. Int J Green Energy 2016;13:229–40.

[439] Huang MJ. The application of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to predict the

thermal performance of phase change materials for the control of photovoltaic
cell temperatures in buildings. University of Ulster; 2002.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110942

H.M. Ali et al.

[440] Stritih U. Increasing the efficiency of PV panel with the use of PCM. Renew

[471] University of Birmingham. UK and China scientists develop world-first cold

Energy 2016;97:671–9.

[441] Rajvikram M, Leoponraj S, Ramkumar S, Akshaya H, Dheeraj A. Experimental
investigation on the abasement of operating temperature in solar photovoltaic
panel using PCM and aluminium. Sol Energy 2019;188:327–38.

[442] Hasan A, Sarwar J, Alnoman H, Abdelbaqi eS. Yearly energy performance of a

photovoltaic-phase change material (PV-PCM) system in hot climate. Sol Energy
2017;146:417–29.

[443] Preet S, Bhushan B, Mahajan T. Experimental investigation of water based

photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) system with and without phase change material
(PCM). Sol Energy 2017;155:1104–20.

[444] Yang L, Villalobos U, Akhmetov B, Gil A, Khor JO, Palacios A, et al.

A comprehensive review on sub-zero temperature cold thermal energy storage
materials, technologies, and applications: state of the art and recent
developments. Appl Energy 2021;288:116555.

[445] Pingali P. Westernization of Asian diets and the transformation of food systems:

implications for research and policy. Food Pol 2007;32:281–98.

[446] Jedermann R, Nicometo M, Uysal I, Lang W. Reducing food losses by intelligent

food logistics. The Royal Society Publishing; 2014, 20130302.

[447] El-Sebaii A, Shalaby S. Solar drying of agricultural products: a review. Renew

Sustain Energy Rev 2012;16:37–43.

[448] James S, James C. The food cold-chain and climate change. Food Res Int 2010;43:

1944–56.

[449] Lu L, Zheng W, Lv Z, Tang Y. Development and application of time–temperature
indicators used on food during the cold chain logistics. Packag Technol Sci 2013;
26:80–90.

[450] Rokka M, Eerola S, Smolander M, Alakomi H-L, Ahvenainen R. Monitoring of the
quality of modified atmosphere packaged broiler chicken cuts stored in different
temperature conditions: B. Biogenic amines as quality-indicating metabolites.
Food Control 2004;15:601–7.

[451] Zhao Y, Zhang X, Xu X, Zhang S. Research progress of phase change cold storage
materials used in cold chain transportation and their different cold storage
packaging structures. J Mol Liq 2020;319:114360.

[452] Ndraha N, Hsiao H-I, Vlajic J, Yang M-F, Lin H-TV. Time-temperature abuse in the
food cold chain: review of issues, challenges, and recommendations. Food Control
2018;89:12–21.

[453] Liu M, Saman W, Bruno F. Development of a novel refrigeration system for

refrigerated trucks incorporating phase change material. Appl Energy 2012;92:
336–42.

[454] Res ̧ito ̆glu  ̇IA, Altinis ̧ik K, Keskin A. The pollutant emissions from diesel-engine

vehicles and exhaust aftertreatment systems. Clean Technol Environ Policy 2015;
17:15–27.

[455] Hackney J, De Neufville R. Life cycle model of alternative fuel vehicles: emissions,

energy, and cost trade-offs. Transport Res Pol Pract 2001;35:243–66.
[456] Lohrasbi S, Sheikholeslami M, Ganji DD. Discharging process expedition of

NEPCM in fin-assisted latent heat thermal energy storage system. J Mol Liq 2016;
221:833–41.

[457] Liu D, Xin-Feng L, Bo L, Si-quan Z, Yan X. Progress in thermochemical energy

storage for concentrated solar power: a review. Int J Energy Res 2018;42:
4546–61.

[458] Sharma R, Ganesan P, Tyagi V, Metselaar H, Sandaran S. Developments in organic

solid–liquid phase change materials and their applications in thermal energy
storage. Energy Convers Manag 2015;95:193–228.

[459] Liu Z, Zhao D, Wang Q, Chi Y, Zhang L. Performance study on air-cooled

household refrigerator with cold storage phase change materials. Int J Refrig
2017;79:130–42.

[460] Beck M, Müller K, Arlt W. Storing surplus solar energy in low temperature thermal

storage for refrigeration applications. Energy Build 2016;122:192–8.

[461] Nie B, She X, Navarro H, Smith DP, Sciacovelli A, Ding Y. Charging properties of a
compact energy storage device for transport air conditioning applications. Energy
Proc 2017;142:3531–6.

[462] Sohrabi C, Alsafi Z, O’neill N, Khan M, Kerwan A, Al-Jabir A, et al. World Health
Organization declares global emergency: a review of the 2019 novel coronavirus
(COVID-19). Int J Surg 2020;76:71–6.

[463] Smith D, Sparks L. Temperature controlled supply chains. Food supply chain

management 2004;1:179–98.

[464] Glouannec P, Michel B, Delamarre G, Grohens Y. Experimental and numerical

study of heat transfer across insulation wall of a refrigerated integral panel van.
Appl Therm Eng 2014;73:196–204.

[465] Fioretti R, Principi P, Copertaro B. A refrigerated container envelope with a PCM

(Phase Change Material) layer: experimental and theoretical investigation in a
representative town in Central Italy. Energy Convers Manag 2016;122:131–41.

[466] Ahmed M, Meade O, Medina MA. Reducing heat transfer across the insulated

walls of refrigerated truck trailers by the application of phase change materials.
Energy Convers Manag 2010;51:383–92.

[467] Michel B, Glouannec P, Fuentes A, Chauvelon P. Experimental and numerical

study of insulation walls containing a composite layer of PU-PCM and dedicated
to refrigerated vehicle. Appl Therm Eng 2017;116:382–91.

[468] Wu T, Xie N, Niu J, Luo J, Gao X, Zhang Z. Preparation of a low-temperature

nanofluid phase change material: MgCl2–H2O eutectic salt solution system with
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). Int J Refrig 2020;113:136–44.

[469] Copertaro B, Principi P, Fioretti R. Thermal performance analysis of PCM in

refrigerated container envelopes in the Italian context–Numerical modeling and
validation. Appl Therm Eng 2016;102:873–81.

[470] Mousazade A, Rafee R, Valipour MS. Thermal performance of cold panels with
phase change materials in a refrigerated truck. Int J Refrig 2020;120:119–26.

storage road/rail container. ; 2018.

[472] Or ́o E, Cabeza LF, Farid MM. Experimental and numerical analysis of a chilly bin

incorporating phase change material. Appl Therm Eng 2013;58:61–7.

[473] Leducq D, Ndoye F, Alvarez G. Phase change material for the thermal protection
of ice cream during storage and transportation. Int J Refrig 2015;52:133–9.
[474] Liu A, Xie H, Wu Z, Wang Y. Advances and outlook of TE-PCM system: a review.

Carbon Neutrality 2022;1:20.

[475] Or ́o E, De Gracia A, Cabeza LF. Active phase change material package for thermal

protection of ice cream containers. Int J Refrig 2013;36:102–9.

[476] Hoang H-M, Leducq D, P ́erez-Masia R, Lagaron J, Gogou E, Taoukis P, et al. Heat
transfer study of submicro-encapsulated PCM plate for food packaging
application. Int J Refrig 2015;52:151–60.

[477] Lu W, Tassou S. Characterization and experimental investigation of phase change

materials for chilled food refrigerated cabinet applications. Appl Energy 2013;
112:1376–82.

[478] Chalco-Sandoval W, Fabra MJ, Lopez-Rubio A, Lagaron JM. Optimization of

solvents for the encapsulation of a phase change material in polymeric matrices
by electro-hydrodynamic processing of interest in temperature buffering food
applications. Eur Polym J 2015;72:23–33.

[479] Chalco-Sandoval W, Fabra MJ, L ́opez-Rubio A, Lagaron JM. Use of phase change
materials to develop electrospun coatings of interest in food packaging
applications. J Food Eng 2017;192:122–8.

[480] Johnston JH, Grindrod JE, Dodds M, Schimitschek K. Composite nano-structured
calcium silicate phase change materials for thermal buffering in food packaging.
Curr Appl Phys 2008;8:508–11.

[481] Devahastin S, Pitaksuriyarat S. Use of latent heat storage to conserve energy

during drying and its effect on drying kinetics of a food product. Appl Therm Eng
2006;26:1705–13.

[482] Lu Y, Zhang W, Yuan P, Xue M, Qu Z, Tao W. Experimental study of heat transfer
intensification by using a novel combined shelf in food refrigerated display
cabinets (Experimental study of a novel cabinets). Appl Therm Eng 2010;30:
85–91.

[483] Ferrer G, Sol ́e A, Barreneche C, Martorell I, Cabeza LF. Corrosion of metal
containers for use in PCM energy storage. Renew Energy 2015;76:465–9.
[484] Luo X, Guo Q, Tao Z, Liang Y, Liu Z. Modified phase change materials used for
thermal management of a novel solar thermoelectric generator. Energy Convers
Manag 2020;208:112459.

[485] Karthick K, Suresh S, Joy GC, Dhanuskodi R. Experimental investigation of solar

reversible power generation in Thermoelectric Generator (TEG) using thermal
energy storage. Energy for Sustainable Development 2019;48:107–14.

[486] Atouei SA, Rezania A, Ranjbar A, Rosendahl LA. Protection and thermal

management of thermoelectric generator system using phase change materials: an
experimental investigation. Energy 2018;156:311–8.

[487] Selvam C, Manikandan S, Krishna NV, Lamba R, Kaushik S, Mahian O. Enhanced
thermal performance of a thermoelectric generator with phase change materials.
Int Commun Heat Mass Tran 2020;114:104561.

[488] Huang K, Yan Y, Wang G, Li B. Improving transient performance of thermoelectric
generator by integrating phase change material. Energy 2021;219:119648.
[489] Wang Y, Peng Y, Guo K, Zheng X, Darkwa J, Zhong H. Experimental investigation
on performance improvement of thermoelectric generator based on phase change
materials and heat transfer enhancement. Energy 2021;229:120676.

[490] Karthick K, Suresh S, Singh H, Joy GC, Dhanuskodi R. Theoretical and

experimental evaluation of thermal interface materials and other influencing
parameters for thermoelectric generator system. Renew Energy 2019;134:25–43.

[491] Jaworski M, Bednarczyk M, Czachor M. Experimental investigation of

thermoelectric generator (TEG) with PCM module. Appl Therm Eng 2016;96:
527–33.

[492] Elefsiniotis A, Becker T, Schmid U. Thermoelectric energy harvesting using phase
change materials (PCMs) in high temperature environments in aircraft. J Electron
Mater 2014;43:1809–14.

[493] Altstedde MK, Rinderknecht F, Friedrich H. Integrating phase-change materials

into automotive thermoelectric generators. J Electron Mater 2014;43:2134.
[494] Atouei SA, Ranjbar AA, Rezania A. Experimental investigation of two-stage

thermoelectric generator system integrated with phase change materials. Appl
Energy 2017;208:332–43.

[495] Li W, Zhang T, Li B, Cui F, Liu L. Experimental investigation on combined thermal
energy storage and thermoelectric system by using foam/PCM composite. Energy
Convers Manag 2021;243:114429.

[496] Lee G, Kim CS, Kim S, Kim YJ, Choi H, Cho BJ. Flexible heatsink based on a phase-
change material for a wearable thermoelectric generator. Energy 2019;179:12–8.

[497] Maduabuchi CC, Mgbemene CA. Numerical study of a phase change material
integrated solar thermoelectric generator. J Electron Mater 2020;49:5917–36.

[498] Yu C, Yang SH, Pak SY, Youn JR, Song YS. Graphene embedded form stable phase

change materials for drawing the thermo-electric energy harvesting. Energy
Convers Manag 2018;169:88–96.

[499] Carneiro JF, de Almeida FG. Model and simulation of the energy retrieved by

thermoelectric generators in an underwater glider. Energy Convers Manag 2018;
163:38–49.

[500] Rajaee F, Rad MAV, Kasaeian A, Mahian O, Yan W-M. Experimental analysis of a

photovoltaic/thermoelectric generator using cobalt oxide nanofluid and phase
change material heat sink. Energy Convers Manag 2020;212:112780.

[501] Yuan T, Shang J, Fang H, Liu H, Bao C. A new design of extensible solar-driven
thermoelectric array with highly thermo/electro-conductive PCMs as solar
receivers, thermal/electric bridges, and voltage fluctuation suppressors
simultaneously. Energy Convers Manag 2022;252:115079.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110943

H.M. Ali et al.

[502] Van Nuffel L, Dedecca JG, Smit T, Rademaekers K. Sector coupling: how can it be
enhanced in the EU to foster grid stability and decarbonise? Belgium: European
Parliament Brussels; 2018.

[503] Kuravi S, Trahan J, Goswami DY, Rahman MM, Stefanakos EK. Thermal energy

storage technologies and systems for concentrating solar power plants. Prog
Energy Combust Sci 2013;39:285–319.

[504] Izquierdo S, Montanes C, Dopazo C, Fueyo N. Analysis of CSP plants for the

[536] Bauer D, Marx R, Nußbicker-Lux J, Ochs F, Heidemann W, Müller-Steinhagen H.
German central solar heating plants with seasonal heat storage. Sol Energy 2010;
84:612–23.

[537] Werner S. District heating and cooling in Sweden. Energy 2017;126:419–29.
[538] Gadd H, Werner S. Thermal energy storage systems for district heating and

cooling. In: Advances in thermal energy storage systems. Elsevier; 2021.
p. 625–38.

definition of energy policies: the influence on electricity cost of solar multiples,
capacity factors and energy storage. Energy Pol 2010;38:6215–21.

[539] United Nations. Environment Programme Annual Report. 2015.
[540] Xiong W, Wang Y, Mathiesen BV, Zhang X. Case study of the constraints and

[505] Farjana SH, Huda N, Mahmud MP, Saidur R. Solar process heat in industrial
systems–A global review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;82:2270–86.

potential contributions regarding wind curtailment in Northeast China. Energy
2016;110:55–64.

[506] Huang J, Li R, He P, Dai Y. Status and prospect of solar heat for industrial

[541] Werner S. International review of district heating and cooling. Energy 2017;137:

processes in China. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;90:475–89.

617–31.

[507] Kylili A, Fokaides PA, Ioannides A, Kalogirou S. Environmental assessment of

solar thermal systems for the industrial sector. J Clean Prod 2018;176:99–109.

[542] Heating SD. Plant Database. Solar District Heating; 2018 [Available from:.
[543] Dominkovi ́c DF,

 ́
Cosi ́c B, Medi ́c ZB, Dui ́c N. A hybrid optimization model of

[508] Khan MI, Asfand F, Al-Ghamdi SG. Progress in research and technological

advancements of thermal energy storage systems for concentrated solar power.
J Energy Storage 2022;55:105860.

[509] Vignarooban K, Xu X, Arvay A, Hsu K, Kannan AM. Heat transfer fluids for

concentrating solar power systems – a review. Appl Energy 2015;146:383–96.
[510] Ding W, Shi H, Jianu A, Xiu Y, Bonk A, Weisenburger A, et al. Molten chloride
salts for next generation concentrated solar power plants: mitigation strategies
against corrosion of structural materials. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 2019;193:
298–313.

[511] Bonk A, Sau S, Uranga N, Hernaiz M, Bauer T. Advanced heat transfer fluids for

biomass trigeneration system combined with pit thermal energy storage. Energy
Convers Manag 2015;104:90–9.

[544] Dahash A, Ochs F, Janetti MB, Streicher W. Advances in seasonal thermal energy
storage for solar district heating applications: a critical review on large-scale hot-
water tank and pit thermal energy storage systems. Appl Energy 2019;239:
296–315.

[545] Hahne E. The ITW solar heating system: an oldtimer fully in action. Sol Energy

2000;69:469–93.

[546] Han Y, Wang R, Dai Y. Thermal stratification within the water tank. Renew

Sustain Energy Rev 2009;13:1014–26.

direct molten salt line-focusing CSP plants. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;67:
69–87.

[547] Kreith F, Krumdieck S. Principles of sustainable energy systems. CRC press; 2013.
[548] Sanner B. EGEC deep geothermal market report. Journal of Sustainable Energy

[512] Mohammad MB, Brooks G, Akbar Rhamdhani M. High temperature properties of

2012;3.

molten nitrate salt for solar thermal energy storage application. In: Wang S,
Free ML, Alam S, Zhang M, Taylor PR, editors. Applications of process
engineering principles in materials processing, energy and environmental
technologies. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2017. p. 531–9.
[513] Ho CK. A review of high-temperature particle receivers for concentrating solar

power. Appl Therm Eng 2016;109:958–69.

[549] Kyriakis SA, Younger PL. Towards the increased utilisation of geothermal energy
in a district heating network through the use of a heat storage. Appl Therm Eng
2016;94:99–110.

[550] Connolly D, Mathiesen BV, Østergaard PA, M ̈oller B, Nielsen S, Lund H, et al. Heat

roadmap Europe 2050: first pre-study for the EU27. Aalborg University; 2012.

[551] Nordell B. Large-scale thermal energy storage. WinterCities’ 2000. Luleå, Sweden:

[514] Pitz-Paal R, Dersch J, Milow B, Tellez F, Ferriere A, Langnickel U, et al.

Energy and Environment; 2000. p. 14.

Development steps for parabolic trough solar power technologies with maximum
impact on cost reduction. 2007.

[515] Ortega JI, Burgaleta JI, T ́ellez FM. Central receiver system solar power plant using

molten salt as heat transfer fluid. J Sol Energy Eng 2008:130.

[516] Prieto C, Cabeza LF. Thermal energy storage with phase change materials in solar

power plants. Economic analysis. J Energy Storage 2021;43:103184.

[552] International Energy Agency I. Energy storage technology roadmap. Technical

Annex Paris, France; 2014.

[553] Xu L, Torrens JI, Guo F, Yang X, Hensen JL. Application of large underground

seasonal thermal energy storage in district heating system: a model-based energy
performance assessment of a pilot system in Chifeng, China. Appl Therm Eng
2018;137:319–28.

[517] Taylor M, Ralon P, Anuta H, Al-Zoghoul S. Renewable power generation costs in

[554] Xu J, Wang R, Li Y. A review of available technologies for seasonal thermal

2019; international renewable energy agency: masdar city. Abu Dhabi: Google
Scholar; 2020.

energy storage. Sol Energy 2014;103:610–38.

[555] Jaxa-Rozen M, Bloemendal M, Rostampour V. Smart grids for aquifer thermal

[518] Alva G, Liu L, Huang X, Fang G. Thermal energy storage materials and systems for
solar energy applications. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2017;68:693–706.

energy storage (ATES): a case study for the Amsterdam Zuidas district. EGU
General Assembly Conference Abstracts. 2017, 16747.

[519] Kost C. CSP technology in the market. Fraunhofer ISE; 2017.
[520] Martins M, Villalobos U, Delclos T, Armstrong P, Bergan PG, Calvet N. New

concentrating solar power facility for testing high temperature concrete thermal
energy storage. Energy Proc 2015;75:2144–9.

[521] Salomoni VA, Majorana CE, Giannuzzi GM, Miliozzi A, Di Maggio R, Girardi F,

et al. Thermal storage of sensible heat using concrete modules in solar power
plants. Sol Energy 2014;103:303–15.

[522] Siemens G. Electric thermal energy storage (ETES), siemens wind power. Siemens

Wind Power; 2017.

[556] Fleuchaus P, Godschalk B, Stober I, Blum P. Worldwide application of aquifer
thermal energy storage–A review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;94:861–76.
[557] Law R, Nicholson D. ATES in fractured chalk: site investigation techniques to
model system sustainability. In: Proceedings effstock 11th international
conference on thermal energy storage for energy efficiency and sustainability
stockholm. Sweden: International Energy Agency (IEA); 2009.

[558] Gathering BE. Thermal energy storage (TES) technologies. London, UK:
Department for Business. Energy and Industrial Strategy; 2016.

[559] Schmidt T, Müller-Steinhagen H. The central solar heating plant with aquifer

[523] Deign J. Siemens Gamesa starts building hot rock plant for long-duration grid

thermal energy store in Rostock-results after four years of operation. 2004.

storage. Greentech Media; 2017.

[560] Di Cecca Fb A, Poeuf P. Energy storage: the Parisian district cooling system.

[524] Collins L. Wind and solar can become dispatchable within three years 2018. https
://www.rechargenews.com/transition/wind-and-solar-can-become-dispatch
able-within-three-years/2-1-293044.

[525] Pardo P, Deydier A, Anxionnaz-Minvielle Z, Roug ́e S, Cabassud M, Cognet P.

A review on high temperature thermochemical heat energy storage. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2014;32:591–610.

[526] Prieto C, Cooper P, Fern ́andez AI, Cabeza LF. Review of technology:

thermochemical energy storage for concentrated solar power plants. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2016;60:909–29.

Energy Learning; 2010.

[561] Gadd H, Werner S. Thermal energy storage systems for district heating and

cooling, Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Systems, Methods and Applications,
Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy. Elsevier; 2015. p. 467–78 [Available
from: https://doi.org/10.1533/9781782420965.4.467.

[562] IRENA. Renewable energy in district heating and cooling: a sector roadmap for
REmap. International Renewable Energy Agency Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates; 2017.

[563] Paksoy H. Thermal energy storage today. Paris, France: IEA Energy Storage

[527] Alovisio A, Chacartegui R, Ortiz C, Valverde J, Verda V. Optimizing the CSP-

Technology Roadmap Stakeholder Engagement Workshop; 2013.

calcium looping integration for thermochemical energy storage. Energy Convers
Manag 2017;136:85–98.

[528] Sampson J. Highview Power and SNC-Lavalin announce collaboration to deploy

liquid air energy storage. gasworld; 2018.

[529] SolarPACES. VC-funded thermal “battery” is based on CSP molten salt energy

storage. 2019.

[530] Freund S. Webinar on Carnot Batteries: DLR. https://atainsights.com/wp-conte
nt/uploads/2019/04/190404-_Michael-Geyer-Sebastian-Freund-Webinar-Carnot
-Batteries-distr; 2019.

[531] Huang J, Fan J, Furbo S. Feasibility study on solar district heating in China.

Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;108:53–64.

[532] Fahl ́en E, Ahlgren E. Assessment of integration of different biomass gasification

alternatives in a district-heating system. Energy 2009;34:2184–95.

[564] District cooling in the people’s Republic of China – status and development

potential. Asian Development Bank; 2017.

[565] FE. Chilled Water Storage/Ice Storage. [Available from:.
[566] Schmid W. Ice storage unit enhances performance of district cooling grid at Paris.
Central refrigeration plant climates’ Les Halles’; Eisspeicher verbessert Leistung
von Fernkaeltenetz in Paris. Kaeltezentrale klimatisiert’Les Halles’. Euroheat and
Power 2007;36.

[567] Editorial DE. District cooling, Chicago-style: world’s largest interconnected
system continues to grow. District Energy 2012;98(2):12–7. 2012.

[568] MM21DHC. Supply system – central plant. Minato Mirai 21 District Heating and

Cooling Co.; 2013.

[569] District cooling Singapore 2011 Marina Project. http://wenku.baidu.com/.
[570] Somarriba MJ. Chilled Water Thermal Energy Storage Tank Overview. DNTANKS;

[533] Liu C, Cheng M-S, Zhao B-C, Dai Z-M. A wind power plant with thermal energy

storage for improving the utilization of wind energy. Energies 2017;10:2126.

2018 [Online]. Available: https://www.districtenergy.org [Accessed: 01-Oct-
2018].

[534] Guelpa E, Verda V. Thermal energy storage in district heating and cooling

[571] https://www.scmp.com/news/people-culture/environment/article/3144980/

systems: a review. Appl Energy 2019;252:113474.

[535] Ltd. DEE. Evidence gathering: thermal energy storage (TES) technologies.

Department for Business Energy & Industrial Strategy; 2016.

shenzhen-china-builds-giant-air-conditioner-cooling [Accessed on 2 August
2022].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110944

H.M. Ali et al.

[572] Kumar S, Garnaik S, Shankar G, Kumar M, Chandra M, Shukla A, et al. National

district cooling potential study for India. 2021.

[573] United Nations. World urbanization prospects: the 2014 revision, highlights.

department of economic and social affairs. Population Division, United Nations;
2014. p. 32.

hexahydrate mixture to a single vertical tube for a latent heat storage system.
Appl Therm Eng 2004;24:209–20.

[601] Marín PE, Ushak S, de Gracia A, Grageda M, Cabeza LF. Assessing corrosive

behaviour of commercial phase change materials in the 21–25
range. J Energy Storage 2020;32:101711.

◦

C temperature

[574] Zhao C, Tao Y, Yu Y. Thermal conductivity enhancement of phase change

[602] Veerakumar C, Sreekumar A. Thermo-physical investigation and experimental

material with charged nanoparticle: a molecular dynamics simulation. Energy
2022;242:123033.

[575] Agrawal R, Singh KDP, Sharma RK. Experimental investigations on the phase

discharge characteristics of lauryl alcohol as a potential phase change material for
thermal management in buildings. Renew Energy 2020;148:492–503.
[603] Kahwaji S, Johnson MB, Kheirabadi AC, Groulx D, White MA. Fatty acids and

change and thermal properties of nano enhanced binary eutectic phase change
material of palmitic acid-stearic acid/CuO nanoparticles for thermal energy
storage. Int J Energy Res 2022;46:6562–76.

[576] Zeighampour F, Khoddami A, Hadadzadeh H, Ghane M. Thermal conductivity
enhancement of shape-stabilized phase change nanocomposites via synergistic
effects of electrospun carbon nanofiber and reduced graphite oxide nanoparticles.
J Energy Storage 2022;51:104521.

[577] Li W, Guo S, Tan L, Liu L, Ao W. Heat transfer enhancement of nano-encapsulated
phase change material (NEPCM) using metal foam for thermal energy storage. Int
J Heat Mass Tran 2021;166:120737.

[578] Wang M, Li P, Yu F. Hierarchical porous carbon foam-based phase change

composite with enhanced loading capacity and thermal conductivity for efficient
thermal energy storage. Renew Energy 2021;172:599–605.

[579] Lin X, Chen X, Weng L, Hu D, Qiu C, Liu P, et al. In-situ copper ion reduction and

micro encapsulation of wood-based composite PCM with effective anisotropic
thermal conductivity and energy storage. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2022;242:
111762.

related phase change materials for reliable thermal energy storage at moderate
temperatures. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2017;167:109–20.

[604] Hua W, Xu X, Zhang X, Yan H, Zhang J. Progress in corrosion and anti-corrosion
measures of phase change materials in thermal storage and management systems.
J Energy Storage 2022;56:105883.

[605] Sol ́e A, Mir ́o L, Barreneche C, Martorell I, Cabeza LF. Corrosion of metals and salt
hydrates used for thermochemical energy storage. Renew Energy 2015;75:
519–23.

[606] Qiu X, Song G, Chu X, Li X, Tang G. Preparation, thermal properties and thermal
reliabilities of microencapsulated n-octadecane with acrylic-based polymer shells
for thermal energy storage. Thermochim Acta 2013;551:136–44.

[607] Zhang L, Yang W, Jiang Z, He F, Zhang K, Fan J, et al. Graphene oxide-modified
microencapsulated phase change materials with high encapsulation capacity and
enhanced leakage-prevention performance. Appl Energy 2017;197:354–63.
[608] Tao Z, Yang M, Wu L, Yan J, Yang F, Lin J, et al. Phase change material based on

polypyrrole/Fe3O4-functionalized hollow kapok fiber aerogel matrix for solar/
magnetic-thermal energy conversion and storage. Chem Eng J 2021;423:130180.

[580] Hao G, Yu C, Chen Y, Liu X, Chen Y. Controlled microfluidic encapsulation of
phase change material for thermo-regulation. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2022;190:
122738.

[609] Fang Y, Kuang S, Gao X, Zhang Z. Preparation and characterization of novel
nanoencapsulated phase change materials. Energy Convers Manag 2008;49:
3704–7.

[581] Gao D-c, Sun Y, Fong AM, Gu X. Mineral-based form-stable phase change

[610] Weiss J, Takhistov P, McClements DJ. Functional materials in food

materials for thermal energy storage: a review on encapsulation techniques,
performance enhancements and practical applications. Energy Storage Mater
2022; 46: 100-128.

[582] Nazir H, Batool M, Osorio FJB, Isaza-Ruiz M, Xu X, Vignarooban K, et al. Recent
developments in phase change materials for energy storage applications: a
review. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2019;129:491–523.

[583] Khan Z, Khan ZA, Sewell P. Heat transfer evaluation of metal oxides based nano-
PCMs for latent heat storage system application. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2019;144:
118619.

[584] Yuan Y, Zhang N, Li T, Cao X, Long W. Thermal performance enhancement of

palmitic-stearic acid by adding graphene nanoplatelets and expanded graphite for
thermal energy storage: a comparative study. Energy 2016;97:488–97.
[585] Huang X, Lin Y, Alva G, Fang G. Thermal properties and thermal conductivity

enhancement of composite phase change materials using myristyl alcohol/metal
foam for solar thermal storage. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2017;170:68–76.
[586] Chen P, Gao X, Wang Y, Xu T, Fang Y, Zhang Z. Metal foam embedded in SEBS/

paraffin/HDPE form-stable PCMs for thermal energy storage. Sol Energy Mater
Sol Cell 2016;149:60–5.

[587] Li W, Wan H, Lou H, Fu Y, Qin F, He G. Enhanced thermal management with
microencapsulated phase change material particles infiltrated in cellular metal
foam. Energy 2017;127:671–9.

[588] Dincer I, Rosen MA. Thermal energy storage systems and applications. John Wiley

& Sons; 2021.

[589] Lane GA. Phase change materials for energy storage nucleation to prevent

supercooling. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 1992;27:135–60.

[590] Wang F, Maidment G, Missenden J, Tozer R. A review of research concerning the
use of PCMs in air conditioning and refrigeration engineering. Advances in
building technology 2002:1273–80.

[591] Farid MM, Khudhair AM, Razack SAK, Al-Hallaj S. A review on phase change

energy storage: materials and applications. Energy Convers Manag 2004;45:
1597–615.

[592] Vasu A, Hagos FY, Noor M, Mamat R, Azmi W, Abdullah AA, et al. Corrosion
effect of phase change materials in solar thermal energy storage application.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2017;76:19–33.

[593] Kong LB, Li T, Hng HH, Boey F, Zhang T, Li S, et al. Waste thermal energy

harvesting (III): storage with phase change materials. Waste Energy Harvesting:
Mechanical and Thermal Energies 2014:481–592.

[594] Or ́o E, Mir ́o L, Barreneche C, Martorell I, Farid MM, Cabeza LF. Corrosion of metal

and polymer containers for use in PCM cold storage. Appl Energy 2013;109:
449–53.

nanotechnology. J Food Sci 2006;71:R107–16.

[611] Cho K, Choi M. Experimental study on the application of paraffin slurry to high

density electronic package cooling. Heat Mass Tran 2000;36:29–36.

[612] Li X, Sanjayan JG, Wilson JL. Fabrication and stability of form-stable diatomite/
paraffin phase change material composites. Energy Build 2014;76:284–94.

[613] Li X, Chen H, Liu L, Lu Z, Sanjayan JG, Duan WH. Development of granular

expanded perlite/paraffin phase change material composites and prevention of
leakage. Sol Energy 2016;137:179–88.

[614] Tay N, Bruno F, Belusko M. Experimental investigation of dynamic melting in a

tube-in-tank PCM system. Appl Energy 2013;104:137–48.

[615] Cabeza LF. Heat and cold storage with PCM: an up to date introduction into basics

and applications. Heat and mass transfer. Springer; 2008.

[616] Carlsson B. Phase change behaviour of some latent heat storage media based on

calcium chloride hexahydrate. Sol Energy 2009;83:485–500.

[617] Rathod MK, Banerjee J. Thermal stability of phase change materials used in latent

heat energy storage systems: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2013;18:
246–58.

[618] Ferrer G, Sol ́e A, Barreneche C, Martorell I, Cabeza LF. Review on the

methodology used in thermal stability characterization of phase change materials.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;50:665–85.

[619] Wang K, Yan T, Zhao Y, Li G, Pan W. Preparation and thermal properties of
palmitic acid@ ZnO/Expanded graphite composite phase change material for
heat storage. Energy 2022;242:122972.

[620] Wen R, Liu Y, Yang C, Zhu X, Huang Z, Zhang X, et al. Enhanced thermal
properties of stearic acid/carbonized maize straw composite phase change
material for thermal energy storage in buildings. J Energy Storage 2021;36:
102420.

[621] Yousefi A, Tang W, Khavarian M, Fang C. Development of novel form-stable phase

change material (PCM) composite using recycled expanded glass for thermal
energy storage in cementitious composite. Renew Energy 2021;175:14–28.
[622] Wen R, Zhang X, Huang Z, Fang M, Liu Y, Wu X, et al. Preparation and thermal
properties of fatty acid/diatomite form-stable composite phase change material
for thermal energy storage. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cell 2018;178:273–9.
[623] Su W, Gao L, Wang L, Zhi H. Calibration of differential scanning calorimeter

(DSC) for thermal properties analysis of phase change material. J Therm Anal
Calorim 2021;143:2995–3002.

[624] Raj CR, Suresh S, Vasudevan S, Chandrasekar M, Singh VK, Bhavsar R. Thermal
performance of nano-enriched form-stable PCM implanted in a pin finned wall-
less heat sink for thermal management application. Energy Convers Manag 2020;
226:113466.

[595] Porisini FC. Salt hydrates used for latent heat storage: corrosion of metals and

[625] Hadjieva M, Kanev S, Argirov J. Thermophysical properties of some paraffins

reliability of thermal performance. Sol Energy 1988;41:193–7.

[596] Cabeza LF, Illa J, Roca J, Badia F, Mehling H, Hiebler S, et al. Immersion

corrosion tests on metal-salt hydrate pairs used for latent heat storage in the 32 to
36 C temperature range. Mater Corros 2001;52:140–6.

[597] Farrell AJ, Norton B, Kennedy DM. Corrosive effects of salt hydrate phase change
materials used with aluminium and copper. J Mater Process Technol 2006;175:
198–205.

[598] Cabeza L, Roca J, Noguees M, Mehling H, Hiebler S. Long term immersion

◦
corrosion tests on metal-PCM pairs used for latent heat storage in the 24 to 29
temperature range. Mater Corros 2005;56:33–9.

C

[599] Cabeza L, Roca J, Nogu ́es M, Mehling H, Hiebler S. Immersion corrosion tests on

metal-salt hydrate pairs used for latent heat storage in the 48 to 58
temperature range. Mater Corros 2002;53:902–7.

◦

C

applicable to thermal energy storage. Solar energy materials and solar cells, vol.
27. Netherlands); 1992.

[626] Sharma S, Buddhi D, Sawhney R. Accelerated thermal cycle test of latent heat-

storage materials. Sol Energy 1999;66:483–90.

[627] Sharma A, Sharma S, Buddhi D. Accelerated thermal cycle test of acetamide,

stearic acid and paraffin wax for solar thermal latent heat storage applications.
Energy Convers Manag 2002;43:1923–30.

[628] Wada T, Matsuo Y, Yamamoto R. Heat storage capacity of sodium acetate

trihydrate during thermal cycling, vol. 33. Sol Energy;(United Kingdom); 1984.
[629] Zhong Y, Zhao B, Lin J, Zhang F, Wang H, Zhu Z, et al. Encapsulation of high-

temperature inorganic phase change materials using graphite as heat transfer
enhancer. Renew Energy 2019;133:240–7.

[630] Tyagi V, Chopra K, Sharma R, Pandey A, Tyagi S, Ahmad MS, et al.

[600] Nagano K, Ogawa K, Mochida T, Hayashi K, Ogoshi H. Performance of heat

A comprehensive review on phase change materials for heat storage applications:

charge/discharge of magnesium nitrate hexahydrate and magnesium chloride

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110945

H.M. Ali et al.

development, characterization, thermal and chemical stability. Sol Energy Mater
Sol Cell 2022;234:111392.

[631] Lin Y, Alva G, Fang G. Review on thermal performances and applications of

thermal energy storage systems with inorganic phase change materials. Energy
2018;165:685–708.

[632] Yu K, Liu Y, Yang Y. Review on form-stable inorganic hydrated salt phase change
materials: preparation, characterization and effect on the thermophysical
properties. Appl Energy 2021;292:116845.

[633] Peng S, Huang J, Wang T, Zhu P. Effect of fumed silica additive on supercooling,
thermal reliability and thermal stability of Na2HPO4⋅ 12H2O as inorganic PCM.
Thermochim Acta 2019;675:1–8.

[634] Zhang W, Zhang Y, Ling Z, Fang X, Zhang Z. Microinfiltration of Mg (NO3) 2⋅

6H2O into g-C3N4 and macroencapsulation with commercial sealants: a two-step
method to enhance the thermal stability of inorganic composite phase change
materials. Appl Energy 2019;253:113540.

[635] Xie N, Niu J, Zhong Y, Gao X, Zhang Z, Fang Y. Development of polyurethane
acrylate coated salt hydrate/diatomite form-stable phase change material with
enhanced thermal stability for building energy storage. Construct Build Mater
2020;259:119714.

[636] Barreneche C, Navarro H, Serrano S, Cabeza LF, Fern ́andez AI. New database on

phase change materials for thermal energy storage in buildings to help PCM
selection. Energy Proc 2014;57:2408–15.

[637] Barreneche C, Navarro ME, Cabeza LF, Fern ́andez AI. New database to select

phase change materials: chemical nature, properties, and applications. J Energy
Storage 2015;3:18–24.

management solutions for devices used in various engineering applications and to harvest
solar energy. Over the span of several years, he supervised numerous undergraduate and
postgraduate students and his work produced more than 280 papers featured in various
reputed  international  journals  with  citations  over  19000  and  H-index  of  76  (Google
Scholar). He is also an author and Editor of several books and book chapters in the field of
thermal engineering and renewable energy published by reputed publishers like Elsevier,
Springer, IGI Global etc. He has participated at several international and national con-
ferences as an invited speaker and delivered various keynote talks.

Tauseef-ur Rehman, He graduated as a mechanical engineer from the University of En-
gineering and Technology (UET) Lahore, Pakistan (2014), after finding his passion and
discovering his inclination toward thermal systems and heat transfer, he pursued a mas-
ter’s degree at UET Taxila, Pakistan (2016–2018). He opted for Ph.D. studies at the School
of  Mechanical  Engineering,  Kyungpook  National  University,  South  Korea.  His  research
domain is focused on thermal energy management and storage for the cooling of electronic
devices. His list of publications includes about 20 journal articles in prestigious journals
like the International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, International Communications in
Heat and Mass Transfer, Renewable Energy and Energy Conversion and Management with
a number of citations more than 800. Furthermore, he contributed to 3 book chapters as a
leading  author.  He  is  offering  his  voluntary  services  as  a  peer-reviewer  for  numerous
journals,  including  the  Journal  of  Energy  Storage,  International  Journal  of  Hydrogen
Energy,  Experimental  Thermal  and  Fluid  Science,  Journal  of  building  engineering  and
Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments.

[638] Ali HM. Experimental investigation on paraffin wax integrated with copper foam

Prof. Müslüm ARICI

based heat sinks for electronic components thermal cooling. Int Commun Heat
Mass Tran 2018;98:155–62.

[639] Ali HM, Saieed A, Pao W, Ali M. Copper foam/PCMs based heat sinks: an

experimental study for electronic cooling systems. Int J Heat Mass Tran 2018;127:
381–93.

[640] Rathod MK, Kanzaria HV. A methodological concept for phase change material

selection based on multiple criteria decision analysis with and without fuzzy
environment. Mater Des 2011;32:3578–85.

[641] Tao Y, Carey V. Effects of PCM thermophysical properties on thermal storage

performance of a shell-and-tube latent heat storage unit. Appl Energy 2016;179:
203–10.

[642] Rastogi M, Chauhan A, Vaish R, Kishan A. Selection and performance assessment
of Phase Change Materials for heating, ventilation and air-conditioning
applications. Energy Convers Manag 2015;89:260–9.

[643] Tang W, Wang Z, Mohseni E, Wang S. A practical ranking system for evaluation of
industry viable phase change materials for use in concrete. Construct Build Mater
2018;177:272–86.

[644] Xu H, Sze JY, Romagnoli A, Py X. Selection of phase change material for thermal
energy storage in solar air conditioning systems. Energy Proc 2017;105:4281–8.
[645] Yang K, Liu B, Du N, Liu J, He Y, Li Y, et al. Effects of thermophysical properties

on optimal selection of phase change material for a triple tube heat exchanger
unit at different time scales. J Energy Storage 2023;61:106822.

[646] Socaciu L, Giurgiu O, Banyai D, Simion M. PCM selection using AHP method to
maintain thermal comfort of the vehicle occupants. Energy Proc 2016;85:489–97.
[647] Anilkumar B, Maniyeri R, Anish S. Optimum selection of phase change material

for solar box cooker integrated with thermal energy storage unit using multi-
criteria decision-making technique. J Energy Storage 2021;40:102807.
[648] Yang K, Zhu N, Chang C, Wang D, Yang S, Ma S. A methodological concept for
phase change material selection based on multi-criteria decision making (MCDM):
a case study. Energy 2018;165:1085–96.

[649] Gadhave P, Prabhune C, Pathan F. Selection of phase change material for

domestic water heating using multi criteria decision approach. Aust J Mech Eng
2023;21:295–315.

[650] Teggar M, Laouer A, Arıcı M, Ismail KA. Heat transfer enhancement of ice storage
systems: a systematic review of the literature. J Therm Anal Calorim 2022;147:
11611–32.

Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Ali

Dr. Hafiz Muhammad Ali is currently working as an associate professor of Mechanical
Engineering and an affiliate of Interdisciplinary Research Center for Renewable Energy
and Power Systems (IRC-REPS) at King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi
Arabia. He received his doctoral degree in mechanical engineering from School of Engi-
neering and Materials Science, Queen Mary, University of London, United Kingdom. He
was  a  postdoc  at  Water  and  Energy  Laboratory  of  University  of  California  at  Merced,
United  States.  He  is  the  recipient  of  Highly  Cited  Researcher  Award  in  the  Field  of
Engineering  2021 by Web of Science  Clarivate, this  is a highly competitive  award and
shows the impact of the recipient research work as being top 1% cited papers in the world.
He is in the top 2% researchers list of Stanford University in 2020, 2021 and 2022. He is the
recipient of the “Best Young Research Scholar Award” for 2017 in the Engineering cate-
gory, conferred by Higher Education Commission of Pakistan at the 7th HEC Outstanding
Research Award Ceremony. He also had the honor of receiving HEC’s Best Research Paper
Award (2013/2014) and Research Productivity Award by Pakistan Council of Science and
Technology (2016-17). Being a renowned scientist in the field of thermal engineering, he is
an active editorial member at several esteemed and high ranked international journals,
notably Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry (Springer), Heat Transfer (Wiley)
and  Applied  Nanoscience  (Springer).  His  fields  of  research  are  thermal  sciences,  heat
transfer and renewable energy with focus on electronics cooling of photovoltaic and de-
vices,  condensation,  nanofluids,  heat  transfer  devices,  and  thermal  management.  Main
focus of his work is to develop efficient thermal systems to provide solutions to renewable
and  conventional  energy  harvesting  systems  and  also  to  develop  better  thermal

Müslüm Arıcı is a faculty member in Thermodynamics and Heat Technique Division of
Mechanical Engineering Department of Kocaeli University, Turkey. He completed Diploma
Course at von Karman Institute, Belgium in 2007. He received PhD degree from Kocaeli
University in 2010. He is co-author of about 150 papers in refereed SCI-indexed journal
papers. He has been invited as an invited speaker to several international conferences. He
has  serving  as  associate  editor  in  Energy  Sources,  Part  A:  Recovery,  Utilization,  and
Environmental Effects, Taylor & Francis (IF = 2.902), Journal of Thermal Engineering, and
Sigma Journal of Engineering and Natural Sciences. He has also been serving as a guest
editor  several  prestigious  journals  such  as  Journal  of  Cleaner  Production,  Energy  and
Buildings,  Sustainable  Energy  Technologies  and  Assessments,  Energy  for  Sustainable
Development. His fields of interest are numerical heat transfer, computational fluid dy-
namics, nanofluids, solar energy, thermal energy storage, energy efficient buildings, and
thermal management by phase change materials.

Dr. Zafar Said

Dr.  Zafar  Said  is  working  as  Associate  Professor  at  the  Department  of  Sustainable
Renewable  Energy  Engineering,  University  of  Sharjah.  He  is  also  working  as  Adjunct
Faculty at the U.S.-Pakistan Center for Advanced Studies in Energy (USPCAS-E) National
University of Science and Technology (NUST), Pakistan. He also serves as the coordinator
of the Functional nanomaterials’ synthesis lab. Dr. Zafar completed his Ph.D. at the Uni-
versity  of  Malaya,  Malaysia.  He  has  graduated  with  a  B.S.  in  Mechanical  Engineering
(Hons.)  from  University  Tenaga  Nasional,  Malaysia.  He  worked  as  a  postdoctoral
researcher in the iSmart group in the Department of Engineering Systems and Manage-
ment, Masdar Institute, U.A.E. He also worked with industrial collaborative projects which
were confidential with Masdar Institute. He works in the field of Renewable Energy, En-
ergy  and  Exergy  Analysis,  Solar  Energy  (Solar  Collectors,  Energy  Efficiency,  Efficiency
Improvement),  Heat  Transfer  (Heat  Transfer,  Cooling,  and  Heating),  and  Nanofluids
(Thermophysical properties, optical properties, Application of nanofluids). He has pub-
lished over  200+ papers as per Scopus, including one in Progress in Energy and Com-
bustion (IF: 35.339), One in Physics Reports (IF: 30.105), One in Nano Energy (IF: 19.069),
6 in Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews (IF: 16.799), 2 books, 20 book chapters,
26 conference papers), with about 8088+ citations and an H-index of 54. He also edited
and authored a book titled “Hybrid Nanofluids and applications” with Elsevier as the First
Edition. He is currently working on two more books, one with Elsevier and the other with
Springer. I am also ranked in World’s Top 2% Scientists 2021 and 2020 by Elsevier BV and
Stanford University) in the field of Energy. He is also ranked in the top 100 scientists in the
United  Arab  Emirates,  as  per adscientificindex:(https://lnkd.in/eJ2QTB2e).  He  secured
more than 2 million AED in research grants. He was honoured with several prestigious
awards,
for  Distinguished  Researchers
(2017–2018),  Faculty  Annual  Incentive  Research  Award  for  2018–2019,  and  Faculty
Annual Incentive Research Award for University and Community Service 2020–2021. Dr.
Zafar serves as the Editorial Board Member for several ISI Journals. He is also serving as a
guest editor for several special issues in Q1 journals with Elsevier, Frontiers, MDPI, etc.
Moreover, he is a reviewer in more than 40 Journals.

including  Sharjah  Islamic  Bank  Award

Dr. Benjamin Durakovic

Benjamin Durakovic is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Engineering and Nat-
ural Sciences, International University of Sarajevo. His research interests include energy
storage  using  phase  change  materials  for  passive  building design,  building  energy  effi-
ciency,  design  of  experiments,  and  data  analysis.  He  has  authored  a  book  and  many
research papers on the aforementioned topics and published in a variety of leading jour-
nals in the field. He teaches courses at both undergraduate and graduate levels, and has
participated in more than 20 R&D innovation projects with Bosnian and US companies. Dr
Durakovic is actively involved as a reviewer and editor/co-editor for leading journals/
books in the field.

Dr. Hayder Mohammad

Hayder is the head of the Physics department/college of the education / University of
Garmian. He has achieved a Ph.D. in Mechanical engineering / University of Nottingham,

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110946

H.M. Ali et al.

UK, MSc. In a Mechanical engineering / University of Baghdad, Iraq, and BSc in a Nuclear
engineering  / University  of Baghdad.  He  has  published  many research  in high-ranking
Journals. He works as an editorial board journal of new energy developments. Also, he
has recognized as a member of the Elsevier Reviews platform by the International Journal
of Heat and mass transfer. His research interests are in Fluid mechanics, Multiphase flow,
Heat transfer (convection & conduction), Thermodynamic, Phase change, Nanoparticles &
Nanofluid, Turbulent and laminar flows, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), Numerical
modeling,  Refrigeration  systems,  Boiling  (flow  &  pool)  processes,  Multiphase  boiling,
Condensation process, Evaporation process, and Heat exchangers

his B. E. (Mechanical) and M.E. (Thermal Sciences) from M S University of Baroda and Ph.
D. from SVNIT Surat. His area of interest is thermal energy storage using phase change
material (PCM), thermal management by PCM, passive cooling in buildings, energy and
exergy analysis of thermal systems, heat exchangers design, and its augmentation. He has
more than 70 journal/conference publications of the nation and international repute and 4
design patents in the field of his research. He was awarded Outstanding Scientist in Me-
chanical Engineering by the 4th Venus International Research Awards. He also featured in
the  list  of  top  2%  scientists  in  the  world  in  the  field  of  Energy  published  by  Stanford
university in 2020.

Dr. Rajan Kumar

Ozge Buyukdagli,

Dr.  Rajan  Kumar  is  an  Assistant  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Mechanical  Engi-
neering, Dr B R Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar, Punjab, India. His
research interest includes microfluidics and nanofluidics, computational fluid dynamics,
battery thermal management, optimization in thermal devices and energy management,
and nano-enhanced phase change material in PV/T system. He has supervised many un-
dergraduate and graduate students over the years, and his work, in the form of over 35
papers,  has  been  published  in  prestigious  international  journals.  Additionally,  he  has
written several book chapters that have been published by esteemed publishing houses. He
has edited a book entitled “Nanotechnology Applications in Green Energy Systems’ pub-
lished by Nova publisher. Currently, he is also working on a project in the field of solar
thermal energy awarded by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India.

Dr. Manish K. Rathod

Dr.  Manish K.  Rathod  is currently  an  assistant professor  at  the  Department  of Me-
chanical Engineering, National Institute of Technology (SVNIT), Surat, India. He obtained

Dr. Ozge Buyukdagli is currently working in International University of Sarajevo as an
Assistant Professor in Software Engineering program. She received her PhD in Industrial
Engineering field. She has worked as a researcher in many industry/scientific research
projects. Her research areas are performance analysis and optimal control of stochastic
systems, system modelling and quantitative analysis. She has been teaching wide range of
courses from operations research, probability and statistics to sustainable development.

Dr. Mohamed Teggar

Dr. Mohamed Teggar is a researcher and faculty member in mechanical engineering
since 2007 at the University Amar Telidji of Laghouat, Algeria. He graduated from The
University  of  Laghouat,  Algeria  and  obtained  a  PhD  in  physics  from  the  University  of
Skikda, Algeria in 2013. His research interests include thermal engineering, phase change
materials, and thermal energy storage. He published 28 papers, 30 conference papers, and
conducted 6 research projects.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience100(2024)10110947
