Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Classical and reactive molecular dynamics: Principles and applications in
combustion and energy systems

Qian Mao a, b, Muye Feng c, Xi Zhuo Jiang d, Yihua Ren e, Kai H. Luo f,*, Adri C.T. van Duin g
a School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China
b Center for Combustion Energy, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
c School of Mechanical and Power Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 211816, China
d School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Northeastern University, Shenyang, 110819, China
e School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
f Department of Mechanical Engineering, University College London, Torrington Place, London, WC1E 7JE, UK
g Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16802, USA

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Molecular dynamics
Reactive molecular dynamics
Fuel
Combustion
Nanoparticle
Nanodroplet
Fluid mechanics
Energy conversion

Molecular  dynamics  (MD)  has  evolved  into  a  ubiquitous,  versatile  and  powerful  computational  method  for
fundamental research in science branches such as biology, chemistry, biomedicine and physics over the past 60
years. Powered by rapidly advanced supercomputing technologies in recent decades, MD has entered the engi-
neering domain as a first-principle predictive method for material properties, physicochemical processes, and
even as a design tool. Such developments have far-reaching consequences, and are covered for the first time in
the present paper, with a focus on MD for combustion and energy systems encompassing topics like gas/liquid/
solid fuel oxidation, pyrolysis, catalytic combustion, heterogeneous combustion, electrochemistry, nanoparticle
synthesis, heat transfer, phase change, and fluid mechanics. First, the theoretical framework of the MD meth-
odology is described systemically, covering both classical and reactive MD. The emphasis is on the development
of  the  reactive  force  field  (ReaxFF)  MD,  which  enables  chemical  reactions  to  be  simulated  within  the  MD
framework,  utilizing  quantum  chemistry  calculations  and/or  experimental  data  for  the  force  field  training.
Second, details of the numerical methods, boundary conditions, post-processing and computational costs of MD
simulations are provided. This is followed by a critical review of selected applications of classical and reactive
MD methods in combustion and energy systems. It is demonstrated that the ReaxFF MD has been successfully
deployed  to  gain  fundamental  insights  into  pyrolysis  and/or  oxidation  of  gas/liquid/solid  fuels,  revealing
detailed energy changes and chemical pathways. Moreover, the complex physico-chemical dynamic processes in
catalytic  reactions,  soot  formation,  and  flame  synthesis  of  nanoparticles  are  made  plainly  visible  from  an
atomistic perspective. Flow, heat transfer and phase change phenomena are also scrutinized by MD simulations.
Unprecedented details of nanoscale processes such as droplet collision, fuel droplet evaporation, and CO2 capture
and storage under subcritical and supercritical conditions are examined at the atomic level. Finally, the outlook
for atomistic simulations of combustion and energy systems is discussed in the context of emerging computing
platforms, machine learning and multiscale modelling.

1. Introduction

1.1. The atomic and molecular nature of combustion

Combustion  is  a  multiscale  and  multiphysics  process,  involving
molecular diffusion, mixing, chemical reactions and soot formation at
atomic scales; fuel droplet collisions and evaporation at mesoscales; heat

transfer, fluid dynamics and turbulence at macroscales. Understanding
the  multiphysics  nature  of  combustion  and  the  intricate  interactions
among different scales holds the key to many unsolved mysteries still
surrounding the combustion process in realistic conditions (as opposed
to  benchmark  cases).  Combustion  research  in  the  past  has  predomi-
nantly  targeted  its  macroscopic  phenomena  and  properties,  while  its
atomic and molecular behaviors have been largely ignored. It is true that

* Corresponding author. Department of Mechanical Engineering, University College London, Torrington Place, London, WC1E 7JE, UK.

E-mail address: K.Luo@ucl.ac.uk (K.H. Luo).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2023.101084
Received 18 September 2022; Received in revised form 4 February 2023; Accepted 12 February 2023

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)101084Availableonline29April20230360-1285/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Q. Mao et al.

quantum  chemistry  is  widely  applied  in  combustion  research,  but  its
primary goal is to extract subatomic information of very small systems
for  macroscopic  modelling,  such  as  the  discovery  of  novel  reaction
pathways, determination of reaction rate constants and thermochemical
properties of species with the help of statistical methods. There is a big
gap in our knowledge about the dynamic behaviors of atoms, molecules
and  radicals  that  are  actually  taking  place  in  combustion  especially
under extreme conditions. After all, the underlying phenomena behind
all  phenomena  in  combustion,  including  macroscopic  properties,  are
due to molecular movements, collisions and reactions. One example is
the process of nascent soot formation, which starts with gas-phase mo-
lecular  collisions  and  reactions, forming  gaseous  precursors  that  then
nucleate to form solid particles [1–3]. None of the macroscopic models is
able  to  describe  this  atomic  and  molecular  phenomena  satisfactorily.
Another example is the transition from subcritical to supercritical fuel
evaporation  [4–6].  The  sudden  disappearance  of  the  liquid-gas  in-
terfaces and surface tension is due to molecular actions that cannot be
easily explained through macroscopic analysis. In this comprehensive
review, we fill the current gap in the atomistic description and molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations of combustion and associated phenomena
such as fluid dynamics, heat transfer and phase change. In addition, we
cover MD applications to other energy conversion devices such as fuel
cells and batteries as well as carbon capture and storage (CCS). In short,
we highlight the progress made in the development and application of
MD methods for combustion and energy research.

1.2. Current status of combustion simulation

Combustion and energy systems typically involve flow, multiphases
and phase change, heat transfer and chemical reactions that take place
across  scales  from  atomic  to  macroscales,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  1.
Correspondingly,  there  is  a  hierarchy  of  numerical  simulation  tech-
niques ranging from quantum mechanics (QM) to Euler solvers that offer
different  scale-resolving  capabilities,  levels  of  physical  insight  and
computational costs. In combustion research, the past several decades
have  witnessed  increasing  efforts  in  scale-resolving  numerical  and
experimental  studies  that  have  greatly  expanded  the  range  of  scales
accessible.  In  particular,  computer  simulations  have  made  impressive
strides  in  reaching  extreme  scales  at  both  the  large  end  (such  as  the
whole aeroengine combustor [7]) and the small end (like catalytic re-
actions  aided  by  functionalized  graphene  sheets  [8]),  owing  to  the
phenomenal growth in supercomputing. As in many other disciplines,

Fig.  1. Overview  of  the  time  and  length  scales  for  multiscale  modeling  in
combustion. representative images [3,5,18–23] from different modeling scales.
Reprinted  with  permission  from  Refs.  [3,5,18–23].  (A  colour  version  of  this
figure can be viewed online.)

numerical  simulation  has  become  the  third  pillar,  along  with  the
established twin pillars of experiment and theory, for combustion and
energy  research  [9].  Thanks  to  the  pioneering  work  of  Spalding  and
co-workers [10], and Jones et al. [11] since the 1970s, generous-purpose
computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD)  based  on  the  Reynolds-averaged
Navier-Stokes  (RANS)  has  revolutionized  combustion  research  and,
importantly,  combustion  engineering  analysis  and  design.  With  the
rapid advancement in supercomputing, large eddy simulation (LES) has
been  increasingly  used  in  turbulent  combustion  simulation  [12–14],
which resolves large scales down to a cut-off scale in the turbulent in-
ertial subrange. To resolve the full-scale range down to the Kolmogorov
microscales, albeit still within macroscales, direct numerical simulation
(DNS) has been introduced [15–17], which has become widely acces-
sible only since the 1990s due to its high computational cost. For the
fluid mechanics and combustion communities, the main choices have
been:  DNS  for  fundamental  research,  LES  for  both  academic  and  in-
dustrial research, and RANS for industrial applications. Yet all the three
methods are macroscopic approaches based on the continuum assump-
tion which become less and less accurate as the scales of the problems
under  investigation  become  smaller  and  smaller.  While  the  laws  of
conservation are always right, the various constitutive relations used in
conjunction  with  the  macroscopic  approaches  have  limited  applica-
bility. At the scales of chemical reactions, for example, molecular effects
are dominant, and even subatomic phenomena need to be accounted for.
The  statistical  molecular  behaviors  of  gases  and  liquids  are  better
described  by  the  kinetic  theory,  which  establishes  the  link  between
molecular kinetics and their macroscopic properties such as viscosity,
mass diffusivity and heat conductivity. A general governing equation is
the Boltzmann equation from which the Navier-Stokes equations and the
constitutive  relations  can  be  derived  after  successive  approximations.
One may ask why the Boltzmann equation is not solved directly to yield
general solutions to flow and combustion problems. The answer is that
the  original  Boltzmann  equation  is  a  nonlinear  integro-differential
equation that is hard to solve. A more realistic approach is the lattice
Boltzmann  method  (LBM),  which  can  be  regarded  as  a  simplified
discrete solver for the Boltzmann equation that recovers the conserva-
tion laws at the macroscales. Starting from the early 1990s [24], LBM
has  experienced  a  phenomenal  growth  in  methodology  development
and application. It has been successfully applied to single-phase flow,
multiphase flow, heat transfer, phase change, turbulence, and acoustics
[25,26]. More recently, LBM has also been extended to reactive flows in
complex  boundaries  [27],  vortex  [28],  and  supersonic  flows  [29].
Because of its kinetic origin, LBM is considered a mesoscopic method
that bridges the microscopic and macroscopic worlds. In practice, LBM
has been used as an alternative method to Navier-Stokes solvers, with
applications ranging from combustion [30,31], multiphase flow [32,33]
to aerodynamics over an entire car [34].

Fundamentally, any flow, combustion and energy systems are man-
ifestations of molecular systems consisting of individual atoms, mole-
cules,  radicals  and  charged  particles.  The  subatomic  and  molecular
structures  as  well  as  the  interatomic  and  intermolecular  interactions
ultimately determine the properties, dynamics and thermodynamics of
any macro-system in a bottom-up manner. This can be easily understood
if one considers the dramatically different performances of hydrogen-
fueled and methane-fueled combustion engines with identical designs.
Although it is possible to measure macro-properties and compare macro-
behaviors  directly,  the  differences  and  similarities  between  the  two
engines  are  better  explained  if  the  molecular  structures  and  conse-
quently the chemical kinetics of the fuels are considered. Furthermore,
some  macro-phenomena  such  as  cool  flames  and  sooting  are  hard  to
explain without knowing the detailed chemical kinetics at the atomic
level.  An  even  more  challenging  task  is  to  predict  ignition  and  com-
bustion dynamics as well as emissions for a given fuel without consid-
ering  the  molecular  structure  and  properties  of  the  fuel.  In  short,
fundamental  insights  into  the  subatomic,  atomic  and  molecular  dy-
namics  are  required  in  order  to  understand  and  predict  macroscopic

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010842

Q. Mao et al.

behaviors and properties of combustion.

At the subatomic scales, quantum effects become important as light
particles  like  electrons  have  both  particle  and  wave  characteristics,
which  are  beyond  the  description  of  Newtonian  mechanics.  Instead,
systems  with  quantum  effects  are  described  by  the  QM  theory.  The
mathematical foundation of QM is the Schr ̈odinger equation with the
general form written as,

hydrogen atoms are not adequately described [38]. Therefore, within
the engineering context, the main aim of computer simulations of mo-
lecular systems is to compute macroscopic properties from microscopic
interactions  [35].  Compared  with  the  typical  macroscopic  and  meso-
scopic  modeling  for  engineering  applications,  MD  involves  less  hy-
pothesis  or  empiricism,  making  it  a  fundamental  research  tool.  The
connection  between  the  microscopic  behavior  and  macroscopic  prop-
erties can be built through the laws of statistical mechanics.

iħ

∂
∂t

|Ψ(r, t)〉 = ̂H|Ψ(r, t)〉

(1)

1.3. Scope of the review

̂
where Ψ is a wave function giving the state of the quantum system,
H is
the Hamiltonian operator, t and i are the time and the unit imaginary
number,  respectively.  Solving  the  Schr ̈odinger  equation,  if  possible,
would give full information about the states and dynamics of atoms and
molecules, such as their electronic structures ‘on the fly’. An exact so-
lution  to  the  Schr ̈odinger  equation,  however,  is  only  possible  for  the
simplest matter, such as a hydrogen atom. For any more complex sys-
tems,  approximate  solutions  may  be  obtained  up  to  a  few  atoms  or
molecules. The calculated energies based on QM can be used to derive
chemical  kinetics  for  reactions  of  fuel  combustion  and  pollutant  for-
mation. Abandoning electronic structure while retaining atomistic res-
olution, molecular mechanics (MM) approach, i.e., classical MD using
force  field  potentials  extends  the  simulation range  to  a  few thousand
atoms on the nanosecond time scale, by applying the Newton’s equation
of motion to describe the time evolution of any particles (atoms, mole-
cules or  radicals) for a  set of initial  conditions. Solving the  Newton’s
equation of motion for a system of atoms and/or molecules forms the
central task of classical MD just like solving the Schr ̈odinger equation is
the central task of QM. Once the trajectories and velocities of individual
atoms  and/or  molecules,  subjected  to  interatomic  and/or  intermolec-
ular forces, are obtained by MD, the system’s macroscopic behaviors and
properties are also determined. The only catch, however, is that in the
classical MD, the subatomic electronic structure and dynamics are not
computed, so inherently quantum-mechanical events, such as chemical
reactions (i.e., chemical bond breaking and formation), photoinduced
processes  and  charge  transfer  are  excluded.  To  simulate  chemical  re-
actions, a way has to be found to combine the subatomic information
from QM with the atomic description of MD. This leads to a variety of
simulation methods that sit in between QM and classical MD. One such
method is the reactive force field (ReaxFF) MD, which seeks to balance
capability (for chemical reactions), accuracy and computational cost. All
these methods will be described in detail in Section 2. Suffice to say,
despite  a  late  start,  atomistic  methods  especially  classical  MD  and
ReaxFF MD have already made a significant impact on topics related to
combustion and energy systems. MD and its variants fill an important
gap between macroscopic CFD, mesoscopic LBM and even experiment in
tackling complex problems across the full range of scales.

(cid:0) 9 to 10

(cid:0) 10 to 10

In  this  review  paper,  we  focus  on  MD  simulations  for  molecular
systems of interest to combustion, energy and flow applications using
either reactive force fields or classical force fields. Such MD simulations,
though  less  rigorous  than  QM,  are  the  only  way  to  reach  over  1000
(cid:0) 7
atoms covering a wider range of time scales (typically from 10
(cid:0) 7 m) [35,36]. Moreover, MD can
s) and length scales (from 10
easily  treat  the  liquids,  macromolecules,  solutions,  amorphous  solids,
etc. which are not accessible by QM [35]. In addition, MD is capable of
modeling  both  equilibrium  and  non-equilibrium  processes,  which  is
proven to be valuable in the study of thermal fluids [37]. Finally, MD
with reactive force fields can describe the heterogeneous reaction pro-
cesses  including nucleation, phase  transformation, transport, and  sur-
face reaction. On the other hand, it should be noted that MD is unable to
directly investigate properties associated with the electronic structure of
molecules, certain materials such as band gap, optical properties, and
magnetism, and the interaction of these properties with nanostructures
[36]. Since MD employs the point mass, the low-temperature (0–10 K)
molecular  motion  and  the  detailed  motion  of  light  atoms  such  as

Different from the existing books [38–40] and review papers [35,36,
41–44] on MD, the present review aims at the application of the MD
method in combustion and energy fields. Unique or unprecedented in-
sights  are  provided  from  the  atomic  and  molecular  perspectives,  in
contrast to the usual macroscopic description. It covers the fundamental
principles, force field development, numerical simulation strategies and
recent applications. In the next section (Section 2), an overview of MD
algorithms  and  force  fields  is  provided,  together  with  a  review  of
mathematical models of intermolecular and intramolecular interactions.
For  applications  of  MD  in  combustion  and  energy  systems,  different
topics and processes investigated with the MD method are summarized,
illustrating phase transitions and interplays among gas, liquid and solid
phases as shown in Fig. 2. Pure gas-phase reaction, including gas fuel
pyrolysis  and  oxidation,  will  be  introduced  in  Section  3.  Section  4
mainly  reports  the  heterogeneous  reactions  between  gas  and  solid
phases,  including  solid  fuel  pyrolysis,  energetic  fuel  combustion,  and
catalytic  reaction,  while  Section  5  discussed  the  progresses  in  the
gas-to-particle conversion of soot and functional nanoparticles in flames.
In Section 6, MD simulations of the phase transition between gas and
liquid phases as well as the interface reactions will be introduced, which
covers the  applications  in the areas of  fluid mechanics,  heat transfer,
batteries and carbon capture and storage. Subsequently, a summary is
provided together with a general outlook in Section 7. Finally, in Sec-
tion  8,  future  directions  for  atomistic  and  multiscale  simulations  are
discussed in the context of rapidly developing hardware and software
towards exascale computing.

2. Methodology of molecular dynamics

2.1. Historical development of QM and MD

Molecules are composed of atoms each of which consists of a nucleus
and  electrons.  Each  nucleus  contains  positively  charged  protons  and
non-charged neutrons, which are in turn made up of quarks. The elec-
trons orbit around the nucleus at discrete energy levels. Light particles
like  electrons  have  both  particle  and  wave  characteristics  that  are
beyond the description of Newtonian mechanics. Instead, systems with
quantum  effects  are  described  by  the  QM  theory  represented  by  the
Schr ̈odinger equation. A solution to the Schr ̈odinger equation gives the
wave function in terms of position and time. In the rest of the paper,
unless  otherwise  stated,  QM  refers  to  the  numerical  solution  of  the
Schr ̈odinger equation that determines the structure and dynamics of an
atomic or molecular system. Several methods such as Hartree-Fock (HF),
second-order  Møller-Plesset  perturbation  (MP2),  density  functional
theory  (DFT),  and  coupled  cluster  single-double-triple  (CCSDT)  have
been successfully developed to study the electronic structure. Applica-
tions of QM have led to significant advances in combustion chemistry
and chemical kinetics [51–53]. Particularly, the HF method simplifies
the determination of the wave function and the energy of a many-body
the
quantum
electron-electron  interactions  in  an  average  manner  rather  than  indi-
vidual interactions. In the HF model, each electron is described by an
orbital, and the total wave function is a product of all the orbitals. The
orbitals are expanded in a basis set, and integrals are computed with the
computational  cost  scaling  as  the  fourth  power  of  the  number  of  the

state  by  considering

stationary

system

in  a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010843

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 2. Schematic of selected combustion and energy topics studied with the MD method, showing phase transitions and interplays among gas, liquid, and solid
phases. Individual plots are reprinted with permission from Refs. [4,8,45–50]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

basis function. The HF model can account for about 99% of the total
energy  while  the  remaining  1%  is  the  correlation  energy  due  to
instantaneous interactions between electrons [39]. The 1% correlation
energy, however, is important because relative energies within the 1%
window  of  absolute  energies  often  dominate  chemical  processes.
Therefore, much effort is needed to improve the HF theory in order to
achieve the so called ‘chemical accuracy’. Further simplification of the
HF  model  leads  to  semi-empirical  QM  methods  by  approximating  or
neglecting  two-electron  integrals,  thus  significantly  reducing  the
computational cost. Semi-empirical methods rely on parameterization,
with  the  values  of  parameters  determined  by  best  matches  to  experi-
mental data or QM. On the other hand, semi-empirical methods have a
smaller number of parameters to determine and a more sophisticated
functional  so  that they  are  less  dependent on  experimental data  than
force field methods. A distinctive advantage of semi-empirical methods
is their ability to account for the bond breaking and bond forming in
chemical reactions as well as molecular polarization, as the electronic
wave functions are calculated, albeit in a highly simplified way. Due to
the introduction of simplifications, it is challenging for both force field
methods and semi-empirical methods to achieve ‘chemically accurate”
energy  calculations,  that  is,  to  an  accuracy  within  0.05  eV  (or  5  kJ
(cid:0) 1). A very different method is the DFT, which is based on the idea
mol
that the ground state electronic energy is completely determined by the
electron density [54]. Thus, the problem of calculating the electronic
structures  of  a  many-body  quantum  system  is  simplified  into  con-
structing  suitable  functionals  to  connect  the  system  energy  with  the
electronic  density.  As  the  electronic  density  is  only  a  function  of  the
three  spatial  coordinates  and  independent  of  the  system  size  N,  DFT
methods  are  computationally  efficient.  Moreover,  it  includes  the  cor-
relation energy at a comparable computational cost as the HF method
(without considering the correlation energy) [55]. The DFT methods as

pioneered by Kohn and Hohenberg have become very popular, despite
numerous drawbacks [56,57].

Due  to  the  high  computational  cost  of  QM,  various  simplified
atomistic methods have been proposed. On one extreme, MM is a highly
simplified  method  to  represent  the  interactions  between  atoms  and
molecules with empirical force fields using parameterization. The MM
methods are thus called force field methods. The basic ‘building blocks’
in MM methods are atoms instead of electrons, where atoms of different
sizes and ‘softness’ interact with each other through bonds of different
lengths and ‘stiffness’ in a ‘ball and spring’ manner [58]. The bonding
information  must  be  specified  explicitly,  rather  than  being  obtained
from solving the electronic Schr ̈odinger equation. The electronic energy
is expressed as a parametric function of the nuclear coordinates, with the
parameters fitted to experimental and/or QM results. In the meantime,
the quantum aspects of the nuclear motion are also neglected. MM as-
sumes the steric energy of a molecule to arise from a few specific in-
teractions  within  a  molecule,  which  includes  the  stretching  or
compressing  of  bonds  beyond  their  equilibrium  lengths  and  angles,
torsional  effects  of  twisting  about  single  bonds,  the  van  der  Waals
(vdW), and the electrostatic interactions between partial charges in a
molecule due to polar bonds. The strategy of hybrid QM/MM originally
introduced by Warshel and Levitt [59] is for systems that are too large,
in terms of the electronic degrees of freedom, to be treated entirely by
QM  but  requires  detailed  description  of  bond  breaking/forming  or
electron transfer reactions. In the hybrid QM/MM method, the active
site is calculated by considering the electronic structures obtained by
QM, while the remaining part is treated classically by MM.

In contrast, the commonly called MD approach is a computer simu-
lation method for studying the time evolution of molecular systems by
tracing  the  trajectories  of  individual  atoms  and  molecules.  For  atoms
and molecules with velocities much lower than the speed of light, the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010844

Q. Mao et al.

ns). When force fields are available and well-calibrated, the classical MD
is realistic for large and complex systems (for example, solvents) and/or
complex molecules (such as proteins and DNA). The main drawback of
the classical MD is that its results depend on the quality of force fields,
which have often been validated within limited conditions. To overcome
some  of  the  limitations  of  classical  force  fields,  reactive  force  fields
[61–66] have been developed to allow bond breaking and forming. The
reactive  force  field,  particularly  the  ReaxFF  method  proposed  by  van
Duin et al. [66] expresses the energy terms as a function of the bond
order  (or  bond  distance).  The  energy  function  creates  a  continuous
surface connecting the reactants and products via all the intermediate
states,  which  makes  the  ReaxFF  feasible  for  simulating  chemical  re-
actions.  The  ReaxFF  method  also  allows  the  treatment  of  many-body
polarization  and  charge  delocalization  effects.  Crucially,  the  ReaxFF
MD can simulate large molecular systems for a long physical time that is
out of the reach of the AIMD simulations [41].

The overall appeal of CGMD is the accessibility of broader temporal
and spatial scales and it is bridges the microscale and mesoscale. Due to
the reduction in the degree of freedom and elimination of fine interac-
tion details, the simulation of a CGMD system requires fewer compu-
tational resources and goes faster than that for the same system in all-
atom representation [67]. CGMD is often used in large molecular and
biomolecular  systems,  such  as  lipid  bilayer  [68],  ribosome  [69],  and
proteins [70]. In Table 2, the various quantum and atomistic simulation
methods  are  compared,  in  terms  of  capability,  computational  cost
scaling with the system size N, and main features.

The  first  MD  simulation  performed  on  a  computer,  IBM  704,  was
attributed to Alder and Wainwright in 1957 [71]. Since then, advances
in  simulation  methodologies  and  compute  architecture  have  signifi-
cantly extended both the time and length scales attainable by MD. The
IBM  704  had  a  peak  performance  of  12,000  flops  while  today’s
best-performing supercomputer, Frontier, has a peak speed of 1,685.65
peraflops!  On  a  typical  desktop  workstation,  it  is  possible  to  conduct
AIMD for up to 100 atoms and 10 ps [72]. On Summit, the world’s fifth
fastest supercomputer with 200.79 peraflops, Jia et al. [72] simulated
127 million Cu atoms and 679 million water molecules for 1 ns per day
with AIMD-like accuracy, using a machine learning-based force fields
(ML-FFs) MD. For empirical force field MD, a system of a trillion atoms is
achievable.

In the past 70 years, MD has emerged as an efficient and powerful
method in describing the dynamical evolution of simple Lennard-Jones
(LJ) molecules [73] up to the complex many-body systems in a broad
spectrum  of  disciplines  including  physics,  chemistry,  materials,
biomedicine,  and  various  branches  of  engineering  [35,37,74].  Fig.  4
illustrates the time evolution of the number of MD papers published in
the last sixty years since the first paper in 1950s. A dramatic growth can
be observed after the year of 2000, and it is about 50,000 publications
relating  MD  topic  in  2020,  and  more  than  14  papers  per  1000

Fig.  3. Relations  among  different  MD  methods  with  QM,  semi-empirical
method, and MM. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

dynamical equations can be described by classical Newtonian mechanics
under the influence of force. The Schr ̈odinger equation, however, de-
scribes the evolution of particles at subatomic with mass less than that of
a proton [39]. Therefore, for systems of interest with the ‘building block’
of atom or molecule, the Newton’s equation of motion is applicable. The
heart  of  any  MD  method  is  the  way  to  determine  the  force  field
describing the interaction of the system. In terms of the potential energy
surface,  MD  methods  can  be  divided  into:  ab  initio  MD  (AIMD),
semi-empirical MD (SEMD), ReaxFF MD, classical MD (generally short
for MD), and coarse-grained MD (CGMD). The relations among different
MD methods are displayed in Fig. 3 by considering correlation against
QM, semi-empirical and MM. Specifically, the basic idea of AIMD is to
determine the forces acting on the nuclei from electronic structure cal-
culations that are performed ‘on the fly’ [60]. The AIMD method thus
necessitates  the  simultaneous  solution  of  the  Newton’s  equation  of
motion  for  nuclei  and  the  electronic  Schr ̈odinger  equation.  Conse-
quently,  the  overall  computational  cost  of  AIMD  is  very  high.  The
advantage of AIMD stems from the fact that it applies to systems where
the electronic structure changes significantly during the molecular dy-
namic process with chemical reactions. The classical MD, on the other
hand, uses force fields to describe the interactions between atoms, which
are based on either experimental data or separate electronic structure
calculations. The computational cost of the classical MD is low (scaling
with O(NlogN-N2)), so that a system with a very large number of atoms
(on the order of billions) can be simulated for a long time (hundreds of

Table 2
Comparison among MD methods.

Key features

CPU scaling order

System size (atom number)

Physical time

Method

AIMD

SEMD

ReaxFF MD

Classical MD

electronic states
chemical reaction
simplified HF-theory with empirical corrections

based on bond order
chemical reaction
physical process
no bond breaking and formation

CGMD

‘pseudo-atoms’, irrelevant structural details biomacromolecules

»O(N3)
N: number of basis functions
O(N3)
N: number of basis functions
O(NlogN)
N: number of atom
Explicit: O(N2)
Ewald: O(N3/2)
PPPM: O(NlogN)
N: number of atom
Explicit: O(N2)
Ewald: O(N3/2)
PPPM: O(NlogN)
N: number of pseudoatom

<100

~100 ps

up to 50,000

100 ps - 1ns

up to 300,000

~10 ns

millions to billions

~100 ns

up to 100 billion

>1 ms

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010845

Q. Mao et al.

Fig.  4. Time  evolution  of  the  number  of  MD  papers  (“molecular  dynamics”
appears  in  either  the  title,  abstract,  or  keywords)  and  MD  papers  per  1000
publications. The data is extracted from Web of Science. (A colour version of
this figure can be viewed online.)

publications. Nevertheless, all these atomistic methods were previously
confined  to  science  disciplines  like  physics,  chemistry,  biology  and
biomedicine. Only in the past decade or so, have atomistic simulation
methods  like  MD  spread  to  the  engineering  community.  The  present
review aims to make these fundamental and powerful simulation tools
more accessible to the combustion and energy community.

2.2. Molecular dynamics

Before starting an MD simulation, a molecular system is built con-
sisting of all interacting components (e.g., atoms and molecules) as a
realistic representation of the system from either experimental structure
or comparative modeling data under investigation. The result of an MD
simulation provides the trajectories of all n atoms as a function of time,
based  on  which  the  system’s  thermodynamic  properties,  correlation
functions, transport properties and so on can then be determined. Fig. 5
shows a basic MD algorithm.

The dynamics of any molecular system is governed by the Newton’s

equation of motion with forces acting on atoms,

→
F

i = (cid:0) ∇iU = (cid:0)

(

→ ∂
i
∂xi

+ j

→ ∂
∂yi

+ k

→ ∂
∂zi

)

U

a→

i =

→
F
i
mi

(2)

(3)

where U is the potential energy depending on the coordinates of atoms

→
in the system.  F

, and mi  are the force, acceleration, and mass of

→
i,  ai
→
atom i. The force,  F
i, acting on atom i is calculated from the first-order
derivative  of  the  potential  energy  U.  The  positions  and  velocities  of
atoms in the system at time t are then solved by integrating over time,

→ =

d2
dt2 ri

d
dt

→
→ = ai
vi

v→

i = v→0

i + a→
it

r→

i = r→0

i + v→0

i t +

1
a→
2

it2

(4)

(5)

(6)

→
i and  v

→
where  r
i are the position and velocity of atom i. The superscript
’0’  presents the initial value  of the term. For  a system of N atoms, it
constitutes  a  set  of  3  N  second-order  ordinary  differential  equations,
which  are  of such  complexity  that cannot be  solved  analytically, and
therefore,  a  numerical  integrator  or  solver  is  normally  used  in  MD

Fig. 5. Schematic of a basic MD algorithm.

simulations. The Verlet algorithm is the simplest to obtain trajectories
(positions) of all atoms by numerically solving the Newton’s equation of
motions. Details are described below. First, the coordinate of an atom at
time t + δt is expressed using the Taylor expansion around time t,

r→(t + δt) = r→(t) +

r→(t) δt +

d
dt

1
2!

d2
dt2 r→(t) δt2 +

1
3!

d3
dt3 r→(t) δt3 + O

(cid:0)

)

δt4

Similarly, the Taylor expansion at t (cid:0) δt is,
d2
dt2 r→(t) δt2 (cid:0)

r→(t) δt +

r→(t (cid:0) δt) = r→(t) (cid:0)

d
dt

1
2!

1
3!

d3
dt3 r→(t) δt3 + O

(cid:0)

)

δt4

Summing up (Eq. (7)) and (Eq. (8)) gives,

r→(t + δt) = (cid:0)

r→(t (cid:0) δt) + 2 r→(t) +

d2
dt2 r→(t)(δt)2 + O

(cid:0)

)

δt4

Subtracting (Eq. (8)) from (Eq. (7)) leads to,

v→(t) =

d r→(t)
dt

=

1
2δt

[ r→(t + δt) (cid:0)

r→(t (cid:0) δt)] + O

(cid:0)

)

δt2

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010846

Q. Mao et al.

That  is,  the  atom  velocities  at  one  time  step  ahead  are  calculated
from the positions at the current and the previous time step. In the Verlet
algorithm, the above transformed equation set is solved instead of the
original Newton’s equation of motion. Due to the cancellation of odd-
order error terms, the intrinsic error in the calculated trajectory of the
Verlet  algorithm  or  local  truncation  error  is  therefore  at  the  order  of
O(δt4), and that of the velocity is O(δt2).

To  further  increase  the  simulation  accuracy,  a  Verlet  Leapfrog  al-
gorithm is proposed where velocities are updated at half-integer time
steps, and the new positions are based on the resulting velocities as,

(

t +

v→

i

)

δt
2

(

t (cid:0)

= v→

i

)

δt
2

+

→
i(t)
F
mi

δt

r→

i(t + δt) = r→

i(t) + v→

i

(

t +

)

δt

δt
2

Then, the velocity at time t is determined as,
(

)]

(

)

[

v→

i(t) =

v→

i

t (cid:0)

+ v→

i

t +

δt
2

1
2

δt
2

(11)

(12)

(13)

Since the velocities and positions are not defined at the same time
with  the  Verlet  Leapfrog  algorithm,  kinetic  and  potential  energies
cannot  be  calculated  simultaneously,  as  well  as  the  total  energy.  To
rectify this mismatch, the velocity-Verlet algorithm (Eqs. (14)–(16)) is
proposed,

(

t +

v→

i

)

δt
2

= v→

i(t) +

→
i(t)
F
mi

1
2

δt

r→

i(t + δt) = r→

i(t) + v→

i

(

t +

)

δt

δt
2

→
→(t + δt) = vi
vi

t +

(

)

δt
2

+

1
2

→
Fi

(t + δt)
mi

δt

(14)

(15)

(16)

The error in the velocity-Verlet algorithm is of the same order as that
in  the  Verlet  scheme.  However,  with  only  one  vector  of  position  and
velocity being tracked, the velocity-Verlet algorithm requires less com-
puter  memory.  Therefore,  most  MD  simulations  are  now  performed
using the velocity-Verlet algorithm.

The selection of an appropriate time step, δt, is a compromise be-
tween simulation accuracy and computational cost. A smaller time step
will improve the accuracy of the numerical solutions but requires more
simulation  steps  to  obtain  a  trajectory  with  desired  dynamics.  By
contrast, a larger time step will cause larger fluctuations of the energy,
leading to instability in simulations. Typically, the time step should be at
least an order of magnitude smaller than the smallest characteristic time
scale of the motion in the system. For intramolecular motions, the fast
process is the vibrations of hydrogen atoms, which corresponds to 1014
(cid:0) 1 [39,75]. Therefore, the time steps in MD are typically on the order of
s
(cid:0) 15  s).  In  the  case  of  flexible  molecules,  δt  needs  to  be  small
1  fs  (10
enough to capture the fastest intramolecular vibrational motions, so the
time step can be smaller, in the range of 0.5–1 fs. For MD simulations
with reactive force fields, such as ReaxFF, an even smaller time step of
0.1  fs  is  generally  used  to  capture  the  bond  breaking  and  formation.
Table 3 lists the recommended time steps for typical MD systems.

Table 3
The recommended MD time steps for typical molecular systems [75].

System

Motion mode

monoatomic molecule
rigid molecule
non-rigid molecule,
harmonic bond

non-rigid molecule, non-

harmonic bond

transitional motion
transitional, rotational motion
transitional, rotational,
vibrational motion
transitional, rotational,
vibrational, torsion motion

Time step (s)

–14

10
5 × 10
2 × 10

(cid:0) 15

(cid:0) 15

(cid:0) 16–1 ×

1 × 10
(cid:0) 15
10

Checking the energy conservation in a microcanonical ensemble is a
good way to see if a time step employed is sufficiently small for a system.
Two criteria based on energy fluctuations caused by the local truncation
error of the algorithm (Eq. (17)) and the round-off error (Eq. (18)) are
used to ensure the stability of the numerical integration [76],

|ΔU| =

⃒
∑N
⃒
⃒
⃒

i=1

1
N

Ui (cid:0) U0
U0

⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒ ≤ 0.003

(17)

where U0 is the initial total energy of the system and N is the number of
steps.

ΔUrms =

√

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(Ui (cid:0) 〈Ui〉)2

∑N

1
N

i=1

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
)2

∑N

(cid:0)

(Ukin)i (cid:0) 〈(Ukin)i〉

1
N

i=1

≤ 0.01

(18)

where Ukin is the kinetic energy.

A final remark is that due to the extreme sensitivity of the trajectories
to the initial conditions as well as simulation noises, which results in the
Lyapunov  instability  [38],  several  replica  simulations  should  be  con-
ducted  and  the  average  values  are  taken  as  the  final  MD  results  to
achieve convergence, reproducibility and reliability.

2.3. Force fields

In  MD  simulations,  the  interatomic/intermolecular  potential  en-
ergies  are  parameterized  by  force  fields,  which  are  mathematical  ex-
pressions describing the relation of the potential energy with the atom
coordinates.  The values  of the force  field parameters are  obtained by
fitting  experimental  data  or  QM  calculations.  The  force  field  can  be
roughly classified into two categories: classical force field and reactive
force  field.  Here,  the  classical  force  field  is  specified  for  the  all-atom
system, which is different from the coarse-grained force field based on
‘pseudo-atoms’. In the classical force field, the building blocks are in-
dividual atoms, the atom connections are fixed and chemical reactions
are not accounted for. To allow chemical reactions, the reactive force
fields, such as reactive empirical bond order (REBO) [62,63] and ReaxFF
[66], are developed, which are expressed in terms of the bond order and
remain  applicable  during  bond  breaking  and  formation.  The  reactive
force  field  MD  bridges  QM  and  classical  MD,  and  is  an  attractive
compromise between simulation accuracy and computational cost. More
details  of  the  classical  and  reactive  force  fields  are  described  in  the
following sections.

2.3.1. Classical force field

The classical force field is developed based on individual atoms of
defined  types.  A  variety  of  force  fields  have  been  constructed  with
varying  degrees  of  complexity  and  targeted  at  different  kinds  of  mo-
lecular  systems.  Basically,  a  classical  force  field  consists  of  intra-
molecular and intermolecular potentials,

U = Uintramolecular + Uintermolecular

Uintramolecular = Ubond + Uangle + Utorsion + Udihedral + Uimproper + ...

Uintermolecular = UvdW + UCoulombic

(19)

(20)

(21)

where the intramolecular interactions represent the 2-, 3-, and 4-body
interactions  of  covalently  bonded  atoms  within  a  molecule  due  to
bond  stretching,  angle  bending  and  torsion  around  bonds,  while  the
intermolecular interactions are between nonbonded atoms due to van
der Waals and Coulombic interactions. The values of parameters in the
classical force field expression are determined by either QM calculations
or experimental data from neutron, X-ray and electron diffraction, NMR,
infrared,  Raman  and  neutron  spectroscopy,  etc.  [39]  Note  that  the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010847

Q. Mao et al.

Table 4
Representative intramolecular potentials.

Potential

Bond

harmonic potential
[66]

Morse potential
[77]

Angle

harmonic potential

CHARMM
potential [78]

cosine potential
[79]

Dihedral

harmonic potential

cosine potential
[79]

OPLS potential
[80]

Improper

harmonic potential

Fourier potential
[80]

Expression

Applicability

(cid:0)

1 (cid:0) e(cid:0) α(r(cid:0) re )

re: equilibrium bond distance

U(r) = K(r (cid:0) r0)2
K: spring constant r0: equilibrium bond distance
)2
U(r) = De
De: well depth
α: ‘width’ of the potential
U(θ) = K(θ (cid:0) θ0)2
K: bending constant
θ0: equilibrium bond angle
U(θ) = K(θ (cid:0) θ0)2 + KUB(r (cid:0) rUB)2
KUB: constant for Urey-Bradley term rUB: equilibrium bond length
between 2nd and 3rd atoms
U(θ) = 1
K[cos(θ) (cid:0) cos(θ0)]2
2
K: bending constant
θ0: equilibrium bond angle
U(φ) = K(φ (cid:0) φ0
K: bending constant
φ0: equilibrium value of the dihedral angle
U(φ) = K[1 + cos(nφ (cid:0) φ0
K: bending constant n: multiplicity, representing the periodicity
φ0: equilibrium value of the dihedral angle
K2[1 (cid:0) cos(2φ)] + 1
U(φ) = K1[1 + cos(φ)] + 1
2
2
1
K4[1 (cid:0) cos(4φ)]
2
K1, K2, K3, K4: bending constants
)2
U(χ) = K(χ (cid:0) χ0
K: energy constant
χ0: equilibrium value of the improper angle
U(w) = K[C0 + C1 cos(ω) + C2 cos(2ω)]
K: energy constant
C0, C1, C2: real coefficients for cosine terms: #0, #1 and #2
ω: angle between the il axis and the ijk plane

K3[1 + cos(3φ)] +

)2

)]

systems with bonded atoms vibrating around the equilibrium
states

systems with large displacements, anharmonicity of bonds

systems where bonded atoms vibrate around the equilibrium
states

large hydrocarbon, biomolecular systems with restriction for the
movement of 2nd and 3rd atoms

periodic and smooth for all conditions

valid for dihedral angle with one minimum

commonly used in force fields of CHARMM, COMPASS etc.

high precision of the dihedral potential barrier for many polymer
properties, used in OPLS

maintain the planarity of the molecular structure

commonly used in OPLS-AA potential, especially for alkanes

molecule’s topology bonds are permanent in the classical force field. In
this section, we provide a summary of the most widely used classical
force fields for energy and combustion. The physical meanings of indi-
vidual  terms  in  the  force  fields  are  explained  and  the  corresponding
applications are indicated.

-  Bond potential: The bond potential is common for covalent species.
Table 4 lists the expressions and applicability of the common bond
potentials.  The  bond  stretching  is  often  represented  by  a  simple
harmonic function, which indicates that the bond cannot be broken
and  is  only  suitable  for  systems  with  bond  stretching  around  its
equilibrium  states  [66].  Compared  to  the  harmonic  oscillator
approximation, the Morse potential has a better prediction for the
vibrational structure of a molecule as it explicitly includes the effects
of bond breaking and also accounts for the anharmonicity of bonds
[77].

-  Angle  potential:  The  angle  potential  is  a  3-body  interaction,
describing the angular vibrational motion occurring between three
adjacent  covalently  bonded  atoms.  As  listed  in  Table  4,  the  most
widely  used  angle  potentials  include  the  expressions  of  harmonic,
CHARMM [78], and cosine [79]. Note that bond stretching and angle
bending are both high-frequency motions.

-  Torsion potential: There are two types of torsions: dihedral angle
potential and improper torsion potential. The dihedral potential is a
4-body  torsion  angle,  describing  the  angular  spring  between  the
planes formed by the first three and last three atoms of a consecu-
tively bonded quadruple of atoms as shown in Table 4, which con-
strains the rotation around a bond. Dihedral plays a crucial role in
determining the structure and stability of a molecule as the torsional
motions are less stiff. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure the correct
degree of molecular rigidity and to reproduce the major conforma-
tional  changes  due  to  rotations  around  bonds.  The  parameters  in

dihedral  are  usually  derived  from  ab  initio  calculations  and  then
refined using experimental data, such as molecular geometries and
vibrational spectra. In the meantime, the improper torsion is intro-
duced to describe the out-of-plane motions formed by three atoms
centered  around  a  fourth  atom  as  seen  in  Table  4.  It  is  used  to
maintain  chirality  on  a  tetrahedral  extended  heavy  atom  or  to
maintain the planarity of certain atoms. The most common dihedral
potentials  and  improper  potentials  are  presented  in  Table  4,
respectively.

Intermolecular potentials include the pairwise van der Waals poten-
tial and the electrostatic potential. Table 5 lists the most widely used
expressions for both van der Waals and electrostatic potentials. Specif-
ically, the van der Waals interaction exists between any two nonbonded
atoms  arising  from  the  balance  between  attractive  and  repulsive  po-
tentials. The attractive interaction between induced dipoles leads to a
(cid:0) 6, and the repulsion comes from the overlap of
term that varies with r
the electron clouds of two atoms at close range. The 12–6 Lennard-Jones
(LJ) potential is the most widely used expression for the van der Waals
interactions. In early MD studies, fluids are considered to comprise soft-
sphere, LJ molecules [81]. Here, the types of molecules are named in
terms of the  force fields  applied: LJ fluids, for example, indicate that
only the LJ potential is considered; for soft-sphere fluids, the attractive
(cid:0) 6 in the LJ potential is omitted. Dimensionless (reduced) units are
term r
usually used in MD simulations of LJ liquids, with the atomic mass m,
length  σ  and  energy  ε  as  the  scaling  factors.  As  most  fluids  follow  a
generic phase diagram, these simple fluid models, when used in equi-
librium MD, are able to offer reliable predictions of fluid properties, like
diffusion coefficient, viscosity [82,83] and surface tension [84], and are
still  widely  used  nowadays.  Typically,  the  parameters  of  ε  and  σ  for
different  pairs  of  atoms  are  based  on  combining  rules  of
Lorentz-Berthelot [85,86]. For example, the corresponding depth of the

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010848

Q. Mao et al.

Table 5
Representative pairwise intermolecular potentials.

Potential

Expression

van der Waals

LJ potential [81]

Buckingham potential [88]

Born-Mayer-Huggins
potential [92]

Morse potential [93]

Electrostatic

interaction

Coulombic potential

(σ/r)6]

U(r) = 4ε[(σ/r)12 (cid:0)
ε: well depth
σ: distance when U(r) = 0
U(r) = Ae((cid:0) r/ρ) (cid:0) C/r6
A and C: well depth constants
ρ: ionic-pair dependent length
U(r) = Ae(σ(cid:0) r)/ρ (cid:0) C/r6 + D/r8
A, C, D: constants
σ: interaction-dependent length
ρ: ionic-pair dependent length
e(cid:0) 2α(r(cid:0) re ) (cid:0) 2e(cid:0) α(r(cid:0) re )
U(r) = De
De: well depth
α: width of the potential
U(r) = Cqiqj/εr
C: energy-conversion constant qi, qj: partial charges on the
atom i and j
ε: dielectric constant

re: equilibrium distance

[

]

Applicability

van der Waals gases [106]

hydrocarbon [107–112], organic molecular crystals [88],
metal/metal oxides [89–91]

alkali halides [92]

equilibrium properties of gases and gaseous mixtures [93]

long-range interaction between two charged atoms

(σi + σj). Though the repulsion expressed in r

well for the interaction between atoms i and j is given by the geometric
mean, εij = (εiεj)1/2. Depending on the selection of force fields, σij can be
determined by the geometric average, σij = (σiσj)1/2, or the arithmetic
(cid:0) 12 of the
average, σij = 1
2
LJ potential is  the most commonly  used, it diverges when two  atoms
approach each other. This may create instabilities that require special
treatment in molecular dynamics simulations. Besides the 12-6 LJ po-
tential,  the  9-6  LJ  potential  is  occasionally  used,  as  in  the  COMPASS
force  field  [87].  In  addition  to  the  LJ  force  fields,  the  Buckingham,
Born-Mayer-Huggins  and  Morse  potentials,  are  also  widely  used  to
describe  the  van  der  Waals  interactions.  The  exponential  function
expressed  in  the  Buckingham  potential  is  preferred  in  the  studies  of
organic molecular crystals [88], metal and metal oxides [89–91], as it
describes the exchange repulsion in a more realistic exponential func-
tion of distance. Besides the exponential repulsion and the dipole–dipole
dispersion  terms  in  the  Buckingham  potential,  a  dipole-quadrupole
dispersion  term  is  included  in  the  Born-Mayer-Huggins  potential,
which is widely used for alkali halides [92]. The Morse potential uses
exponential expressions for both repulsion and attraction terms, which
is  satisfactory  in  correlating  the  equilibrium  properties  of  gases  and
gaseous mixtures [93].

The  Coulombic  potential describes  the  long-range  electromagnetic
interactions between two charged atoms. The charge depends on both its
electronic density and the surrounding atoms. However, it is not trivial
to  reduce  the  density  obtained  from  high-level  QM  calculations  to  a
manageable description used in an MD simulation. Typically, the partial
atomic charge is derived by fitting to experimental thermodynamic data
or ab initio calculations. The atom electronegativity [94,95] is assigned
to each atom and then applied to the calculation of the Coulombic po-
tential.  However,  for  systems  with  polarization  effects,  such  as  H2O,
polarizable force fields, e.g., SPC, SPC/E, TIP3P, TIP4P, and TIP5P have
to be introduced to obtain a reliable structure of liquid water [96–100].
Usually, long-range interactions like electrostatic interactions cannot be
directly  computed  as  summation  in  real  space.  Thus,  reciprocal
space-based  truncating  methods,  such  as  the  Ewald  algorithm  [101,
102], particle-particle particle-mesh (PPPM) algorithm [103,104], and
multi-level summation method (MSM) [105], are proposed and applied
in the calculation of Coulombic interactions.

To achieve different applications, force fields with variants for each
term were proposed and developed in the past years. The many-body
force  field  of  MM  [113–116],  assisted  model  building  with  energy
refinement  (AMBER)  [117],  chemistry  at  Harvard  macromolecular
mechanics  (CHARMM)  [78,118,119],  and  consistent  force  field  (CFF)

[120]  are  commonly  used  for  hydrocarbon,  organic  compounds,
biomolecule, etc. To cover a wide range of elements in the periodic table,
force fields such as the universal force field (UFF) [121] and DREIDING
[122,123]  based  on  the  property  of  atoms  were  developed,  and  the
parameters  have  sound  physical  meanings  from  experiments  or  theo-
retical calculations. In the combustion and energy fields, the CHARMM
is widely used for modelling polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
and  hydrocarbon  molecules  [124].  Force  fields  of  DREIDING,  MM,
COMPASS,  and  optimized  potentials  for  liquid  simulations  all-atom
(OPLS-AA) have been used to perform atomistic simulations of heavy
hydrocarbon  fuels  especially  for  the  liquid  phase  with  the  focus  on
thermodynamic properties, phase transfer, and so on. For simple noble
gases, the nonbonded intermolecular interaction typically expressed by
LJ or Buckingham expression is sufficient [109,112,125–128].

2.3.2. Reactive force field

Unlike  the  permanent  bonds  in  the  classical  force  field,  atoms
participating  in  each  term  of  interactions  in  the  reactive  force  field
depend on their current configurations as bonds effectively break and
form  as  atoms  move.  There  are  several  types  of  reactive  force  fields
including the embedded atom model (EAM) [129,130], modified EAM
(MEAM)  [131],  charge  optimized  many  body  (COMB)  [132],  Tersoff
[64], Stillinger–Weber (SW) [133], reactive bond order (REBO) [62,63],
adaptive intermolecular REBO (AIREBO) [134,135], electron force field
(eFF)  [136,137],  and  ReaxFF  [41,66,138].  These  are  generally  much
more complex than classical force fields, and the force field parameters
are typically listed in the form of tables or documents rather than given
analytically.  These  reactive  force  fields  can  dynamically  simulate  the
bond  formation  and  breaking  and  can  thus  investigate  chemical  re-
actions. The EAM and MEAM are used to study the structure and ther-
modynamics  of  metallic  systems,  including  bulking  properties,  grain
boundaries,  surfaces,  alloys  and  mechanical  properties  [139].  The
Tersoff potential was initially formulated to simulate silicon [140] and
then improved to give more accurate elastic properties of Si as well as
the  properties  of  liquid  Si  [141].  Subsequently,  it  was  extended  to
describe  the  multicomponent  systems  of  Si–C  and  Si–Ge  [64].  Analo-
gously,  the  SW  potential  was  developed  for  investigating  the  melting
behaviour  of  Si  semiconductors  [133],  which  was  later  extended  to
liquid S [142], liquid F [143], Si–F [144], and Si–O [145] systems. It has
also been widely applied in the study of flame synthesized silicon-based
nanoparticles  [146–149].  The  REBO  [62,63]  potential  based  on  the
Tersoff formalism with additional terms includes nonlocal effects and
correct for an inherent overbinding of radicals. It was applied to simu-
lating  carbon-based  systems  such  as  graphite,  diamond,  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)1010849

Q. Mao et al.

hydrocarbons. Subsequently, the REBO potential was upgraded to the
second generation [150], which produced significantly better bond en-
ergies,  lengths,  and  force  constants  for  C–C  bonds.  In  order  to  study
liquids, polymers, and thin-film carbon-based systems, the AIREBO po-
tential was developed by incorporating the nonbonded interactions and
torsional parameters into REBO [151]. Similar to the REBO potential,
the COMB potential was also based on the Tersoff formalism [132,152].
Originally proposed for the Si/SiO2 systems, COMB employs a variable
charge  transfer  scheme  thereby  allowing  the  automatic  capture  of
interfacial properties. The development of COMB has so far included Hf,
Cu, Al, Zn, Ti, Zr, U and their oxides as well as C/H/O/N organic mol-
ecules  [153,154].  The  eFF  is  a  potential  for  a  system  that  involves
electrons  and  is  capable  of  stimulating  excited  systems,  where  the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation may break down over a long period
of  time  [136,137].  For  instance,  eFF  can  be  used  to  investigate  the
shock-compressed dense matter and semiconductor etching by plasmas
[155]  and  the  electric  field  effects  on  ethanol  oxidation  [156].  In
particular, the ReaxFF force field [41,66,138] defines each element as
one  atom  type,  and  the  corresponding  ReaxFF  force  fields  have  been
developed to covalent, metallic and ionic elements covering the whole
periodic  table.  In  this  chapter,  we  will  focus  on  the  ReaxFF  method
describing its formulation and parametrization.

Uangle = f1

(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

f1

BOij

BOjk

)

(cid:0)

(cid:0) pangle2

θo (cid:0) θijk

f2
)2

){

[
pangle1 (cid:0) pangle1 exp

(cid:0)

Δj
] }

(25)

where θo is the equilibrium angle for θijk. It changes from around 109.47
for sp3 hybridization (π-bond = 0) to 120 for sp2 (π-bond = 1) to 180 for
sp  (π-bond  = 2)  based  on  the  geometry  of  the  central  atom  j  and  its
neighboring atoms of i and k. The overcoordination, Δj, is for the dif-
ference between the total bond order around the atom j and the number
of its bonding electrons Valj. f1  is a function of bond order, and f2  is a
function of the angle. The expressions of Δj, f1 and f2 are defined as,

Δj = (cid:0) Valj +

∑neighbours(i)

∑

BOji

j=1

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

f1

f2

)

BOij

(cid:0)

= 1 (cid:0) exp

(cid:0) pangle3 BOpangle4

ij

)

)

Δj

= pangle5 (cid:0)

(cid:0)

)
pangle5 (cid:0) 1

(cid:0)
2 + exp
)
pangle6 Δj

(cid:0)
1 + exp

(26)

(27)

)

(28)

)

pangle6 Δj
+ exp

(cid:0)

(cid:0) pangle7 Δj

where pangle1  to pangle7  are fitting parameters to the angle.

The expression of the torsion angle among atom i, j, k, and l is,

2.3.2.1. The ReaxFF force field. The ReaxFF force field is expressed as
[41,66],

(cid:0)

Utorsion = f3

U = Ubond + Uover + Uunder + Ulp + Uangle + Utorsion + UvdW + UCoulombic

+ Uspecific

(22)

+

+

1
2

where  terms  on  the  right-hand-side  represent  energies  of  bond,  over-
coordination  penalty,  under-coordination  stability,  lone  pair,  valence
angle,  torsion,  van  der  Waals,  Coulombic  and  specific  interactions,
respectively. Note that the specific terms include conjugation, hydrogen
binding, C2 corrections, etc., which are considered to capture properties
particular to the system of interest. Different from the intramolecular
interaction in the classical force field, the intramolecular interaction in
the ReaxFF force field is parameterized in terms of the bond order (BO),
which is an index of bond strength initially introduced by Tersoff [63].
The  bond  order  distinguishes  contributions  from  σ  bond,  π  bond  and
double-π  bond  based  on  the  bond  distance  between  atoms,  and  is
expressed as,

= exp

)pbo2

[
pbo1 ⋅

(

rij
rσ
o

BOij = BOσ
]

[
+ exp
pbo3 ⋅

ij + BOππ
ij + BOπ
]
)pbo4
(
rij
rπ
o

ij

[
+ exp

)pbo6

]

(23)

pbo5 ⋅

(

rij
rππ
o

o, rπ

o, rππ

where rσ
o  represent equilibrium bond lengths of σ bond, π bond
and  double-π  bond,  respectively.  pbo1  to  pbo5  terms  are  parameters  to
model  the  bonds.  The  energy  terms  in  the  ReaxFF  force  field  are
calculated for every pair of atoms as a function of the interatomic dis-
tance  or  bond  order.  According  to  the  bond  order,  ReaxFF  finds  the
connectivity (bond, angle, and dihedral) among atoms at each time step.
To simulate the dynamic bond breaking and bond formation, the Morse
potential is employed to describe the bond stretching in the ReaxFF force
field as follows,

Ubond = (cid:0) Dσ

e BOσ

[
pbe1
ij exp

(
1 (cid:0) BOσ
ij

pbe2

) ]

(cid:0) Dπ

e BOπ

ij (cid:0) Dππ

e BOππ

ij

(24)

e , Dπ

e , and Dππ

where Dσ
e  are the well depth parameters of σ bond, π bond
and double-π bond, respectively. pbe1 is the bond parameter for σ bond.
Besides  the  bond  energy,  the  valence  angle  energy  also  utilizes  the
Morse potential,

)

sin θijk sin θjkl

[

(cid:0)

1
V1
2

)

1 + cos φijkl

BOij, BOjk, BOkl
{

V2 exp

ptor1

jk (cid:0) 1 + f11

) )2

(cid:0)

Δj, Δk

(
BOπ

]

)

(cid:0)

1
2

V3

1 + cos 3φijkl

}

(cid:0)

)

1 (cid:0) cos 2φijkl

(29)

where f3 and f4 are similar to f1 and f2, respectively, and V1, V2 and V3 are
torsional rotational barriers.

In addition to valence interactions which depend on overlap, there
are  repulsive  interactions  at  short  interatomic  distances  due  to  Pauli
principle orthogonalization and attraction energies at long distances due
to  dispersion.  These  interactions,  consisting  of  van  der  Waals  and
Coulombic  potential,  are  included  for  all  atom  pairs,  thus  avoiding
awkward alterations in the energy description during bond dissociation.
To avoid energy discontinuities when charged species move in and out
of  the  non-bonded  cutoff  radius,  ReaxFF  force  field  employs  a  Taper
correction as proposed by de Vos Burchart et al. [157] The van der Waals
interaction also uses a distance-corrected Morse potential,

{

UvdW = Tap Dij

exp

[
αij

(

1 (cid:0)

(cid:0)

)

rij
f5
rvdW

) ]

(cid:0) 2 exp

(

αij

1 (cid:0)

[

1
2

)

(cid:0)

f5

rij

=

[
rpvdW1
ij

+

(

1
γij

)pvdW1

] 1

pvdW1

(cid:0)

)

rij
f5
rvdW

) ] }

(30)

(31)

where Tap is the Taper correction, Dij is the well path of atoms i, j. f5 is
shielded  interaction,  γij  and  pvdW1  are  the  van  der  Waals  radius  and
exponent parameter.

The  long-range  Coulombic  interaction  does  not  depend  on  bond
order and is calculated between every pair of atoms. Excessive short-
range nonbonded interactions are avoided by including a shielding term,

UCoulombic = Tap⋅C⋅
[

(cid:0)

qi⋅qj
/
1

γij

r3
ij +

]1/3

)3

(32)

The  atomic  charges  are  calculated  using  a  geometry-dependent
charge calculation scheme combined with the electronegativity equal-
ization  method  (EEM)  [158].  The  EEM  charge  derivation  method  is
similar  to  the  charge  equilibration  (QEq)  method  [94].  The  only

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108410

Q. Mao et al.

difference, apart from parameter definitions, is that EEM does not use an
iterative scheme for hydrogen charges, while QEq uses a more rigorous
Slater orbital approach to account for charge overlap. Additionally, for
long-range interactions, ReaxFF uses a cutoff distance (which is typically
set to 10 Å) to reduce the computational cost. To eliminate any energy
discontinuity  and  reduce  the  range  of  the  Coulombic  interactions,  a
seventh-order Taper function is employed [66]. Further description of
the ReaxFF energy terms can be found in the literature [66,138].

The  inclusion  of  polarizable  charge  description  and  bond-order-
dependent  3-  and  4-body  terms  in  ReaxFF  makes  it  uniquely  appli-
cable for both metallic and covalent systems. Thus, ReaxFF MD has now
become  a  widely  used  computational  tool  to  study  reactive  systems,
enabling  researchers  throughout  the  world  to  investigate  previously
inaccessible problems. It has been employed in a large range of com-
bustion  issues  associated  with  the  hydrocarbon  chemistry  [66,138].
Meanwhile,  its  inherent  ability  to  create  the  energy  barriers  and  the
long-range bond-order terms render ReaxFF suitable for studying tran-
sition  states  and  complex  reactions  between  hydrocarbons  and
metal-based  materials  [41,159,160].  Besides  combustion  problems,
ReaxFF MD has also been extensively used to investigate a wide range of
applications in material formation [160–163], catalytic reactions [159,
164,165], and electrochemical reactions [166,167]. Table 6 summarizes
some  representive  ReaxFF  force  fields  with  potential  applications  in

Table 6
ReaxFF force field and applications.

ReaxFF force field

Applications

H/O
C
C/H
C/H/O
C/H/O/N/S/Mg/P/Na/Cu/Cl
C/H/Ar/He/Ne/Kr
C/H/O/N/S/Si/Pt/Zr/Ni/Cu/

Co/He/Ne/Ar/Kr/Xe

C/H/O/N/S/Si
H/O/N/B
C/H/B/N

Al/H/O
C/H/O/Al
Pd/O
C/H/O/Ge
C/H/O/Ca/Si
H/S/Mo
V/O/C/H
C/H/O/Fe/Al/Ni/Cu/S/Cr
Ni/C/H
C/H/O/Ni/Pt
C/H/O/N/S/Si/Pt/Zr/Ni/Cu/

Co
C/H/Fe

C/H/O/Fe/Cl/Si/Al
Cu/C/O/H
Cu/Zr
Li/Si
Li/S
H/O/Si/Al/Li
C/H/O/N/S/Mg/P/Na/Li
H/O/Si/Al/Li
C/H/O/S/Mo/Ni/Li/B/F/P/N
C/H/O/N/S/Si/Pt/Ni/Cu/Co/

Zr/Y/Ba

C/H/O/Cs/K/Na/Cl/I/F/Li
C/H/O/N/S/Mg/P/Na/Ti/Cl/

F/K/Li

C/H/O/N/S/Mg/P/Na/Cu

C/H/O/N/S/Si/Na/Al
C/H/O/Fe/Al/Ni/Cu/S/Cr/

Si/Ge

liquid water [168]
carbon condensed phases [169]
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons [170]
hydrocarbon [138,171]
hydrocarbon/water weak interactions [172]
noble gas ion irradiation of graphene [173]
laser-induced incandescence of soot [174]

energetic materials [175–177]
ammonia borane [178]
liquid carbon-boron-nitrogen hydrogen storage
materials [179]
aluminum-water [180]
aluminum/aluminum hydride [181,182]
palladium/palladium oxide [160]
GeO2/Ge interfaces [183]
hydration of calcium oxide surface [184]
molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) [185]
vanadium oxide catalyst [65]
butane oxidation over a Cr2O3 catalyst [186]
hydrocarbon catalyzed by nickel [187]
platinum-nickel catalyst [188]
transition metal catalyzed reaction [165]

hydrogen with iron and iron carbide interface
[189]
iron surface catalysis [190]
Cu-metal surface catalysis [191]
liquid Cu and Zr metal [192]
lithiation of silicon [193]
sulfur cathode in lithium battery [194]
lithium-aluminum silicate [195]
lithium battery electrolyte [196]
SiO2/Al2O3 electrodes of lithium ion battery [197]
lithium-sulfur battery [166]
solid oxide fuel cell [198]

electrolyte–water [199]
aqueous electrolytes confined in 2D-TiO2/Ti3C2T2
MXene heterostructure [200]
adsorption of ammonia on metal-organic
framework [201]
methanol to olefin reactions in zeolite [202]
surface reactions in atomic layer deposition [203]

combustion and energy systems.

2.3.2.2. Parameterization of the ReaxFF force field. Given the complexity
of the ReaxFF functional form as described in the previous section, the
development  of  a  ReaxFF  parameter  set  is  a  significant  task.  Unlike
classical, non-reactive force fields (see Section 2.3.1), where there is
typically a single interaction type (e.g., bond, angle, dihedral, and non-
bonded) that dominates the energy contributions for a particular inter-
atomic distance, in ReaxFF, multiple terms contribute to the total en-
ergy, especially in the bonded range [66]. ReaxFF force field does not
use  non-bonded  exclusions.  Therefore,  both  the  van  der  Waals  and
Coulombic terms, while officially labelled as ‘non-bonded’ interactions,
will contribute to bonded atoms. As such, in ReaxFF, the van der Waals
potential will almost always be strongly positive. Even though the Morse
function used in ReaxFF has an attractive tail, the sum over all van der
Waals potentials will almost always be dominated by the strong van der
Waals  repulsion  between  bonded  atoms.  ReaxFF  employs  bond/angle
and bond/dihedral coupling, which is essential in a reactive force field,
since angular and dihedral energies need to go smoothly to zero when a
bond goes to zero bond order for energy conservation. Even at angular
distances  and  dihedral  distances,  the  bond  order  terms  strongly
contribute. Only when the bond orders go to zero, the energy landscape
of the ReaxFF force field becomes more tractable, as only the Coulombic
and van der Waals terms remain up unto the Tapering cutoff (typically
10 Å).

Due to this wide range of energy contributions, ReaxFF can describe
molecules and materials in multiple, and physically quite different ways,
such as covalent and/or ionic. For example, for an NaCl crystal, ReaxFF
can describe it as a fully covalent material, with strong bond orders and
dissociation energies and small partial charges. Alternatively, the NaCl
crystal can be described as an ionic material with weak bond orders and
low  covalent  dissociation  energies  but  with  high  partial  charges  and
strong Coulombic attractions. Both the ‘covalent’ and the ‘ionic’ option
can result in a force field that reproduces the NaCl density and lattice
energy.  Clearly,  in  the  case  of  the  NaCl  crystal,  the  ionic  option  is
physically more correct [204]. Therefore, the ReaxFF force field devel-
oper needs to be aware of the material property. As such, to start the
ReaxFF development, it is recommended to get the partial charges in the
right  range  by  training  against  DFT-based  charge  distributions.  The
charges  can  be  done  using  fixed  molecular  geometries  without  opti-
mizing bond, angle, or dihedral. ReaxFF charges are mainly fit to Mul-
liken populations, which is the best obtained for DFT using relatively
small basis sets. But recently, more sophisticated charge methods, like
Hirshfeld charges, have been used in the ReaxFF training. For the NaCl
example mentioned previously, this will obviously result in Na charges
close to +1 and Cl charges close to (cid:0) 1. These charges will, by default,
result  in  a  very  strong  and  negative  Coulombic  energy,  which  forces
ReaxFF to essentially switch off the covalent terms during its training to
reproduce  the  NaCl crystal heat of formation.  The above example in-
dicates that sufficient and diverse data is required to successfully train a
ReaxFF parameter set; with insufficient or non-diverse data there will be
many ways in which the ReaxFF energy terms can reproduce these data,
leading  to  physically  unrealistic  descriptions,  like  the  ‘covalent’  NaCl
material mentioned previously.

After  developing  the  charges,  the  next  step  is  typically  the  bond
terms. For that, one can take a fairly strainless molecule. For example,
the C–C bond in an ethane molecule is compressed and extended typi-
cally up to around 50% compression and up to around 300% extension
in DFT calculations. For the extended cases, DFT energies on the triplet
surface can be generally used since these better represent the neutral
(radical) dissociation product. Similar DFT calculations can be done for
all  unique  bond  types  (e.g.,  C–C  and  C–H  for  hydrocarbons)  and  for
relevant double and triple bond cases. These data then become the first
ReaxFF training set. Typically, the highest weight in the training is given
for data points close to the equilibrium and to the dissociation energy.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108411

Q. Mao et al.

Highly compressed points and points between 50% and 250% extension
typically get lower given weight.

It is good to start with reasonable initial parameters. Given the wide
range  of  available  ReaxFF  descriptions  (Table  6),  it  is  almost  always
possible to find a ReaxFF description using bond and angle parameters
with periodic table elements close to the force field development targets.
It is recommended to start the training against these bond data to get the
basic bond lengths and dissociation energies in the right domain. Sub-
sequently, DFT data for the angular and, if necessary, dihedral terms can
be added, allowing training of the associated angular and dihedral pa-
rameters.  Dihedral  interactions  are  most  relevant  for  double-bonded
cases  and  for  most  first-row  elements  but  may  not  be  necessary  for
heavier  elements  as  the  ReaxFF  non-bonded  interactions,  which  are
calculated between all atom pairs irrespective of connectivity, can often
account for them.

The ReaxFF training set for the molecular system is different from the
condensed material system. The core ReaxFF training set for molecular
systems is detailed in Chenoweth et al. [138] for C/H/O 2008 force field.
For condensed phase systems, volume/energy equations of state can be
added starting with high-symmetry isotropic cases, but also adding more
complex anisotropic distortions later on [205]. At this point, the ReaxFF
description should give a reasonable reproduction of molecular or ma-
terial  structure.  Meanwhile,  state  data  like  reaction  energy  profiles,
vacancy energies and vacancy migration energies can be added to the
training set. For reaction pathways, ReaxFF uses bond restraints, which
are  essentially  a  series  of  Gaussians  to  restrain  the  atoms  during  the
reaction pathway. It is advised to not only include the reactant, product
and transition state in the training set but also the full pathway scan,
normally 10–20 points, to the training set. Therefore, both the barrier
and the curvature of the reaction path can be well reproduced. These
reaction  path  data  typically  are  given  the  highest  weight  in  the  final
training set. Meanwhile, the weight of the basic bond/angle/dihedral
distortion data is set lower, since the prime focus of ReaxFF is mostly
reaction dynamics.

The actual parameterization can be done using various approaches.
Initially, most ReaxFF parameters were trained using a simple single-
parameter  concept  [206].  While  this  method  has  the  advantage  of
being humanly tractable, it is not very efficient and has a significant risk
of getting stuck in an undesirable local minimum. For that reason, since
2015 various more sophisticated parameterization methods have been
developed,  including  Genetic  Algorithm  concepts  [207–210],  Monte
Carlo  (MC)  based  methods  [211]  and,  recently,  neural-network  (NN)
based approaches [212]. These methods all enable faster convergence of
the ReaxFF training set error with often superior end results compared to
the simple, single-parameter search methods.

For the more sophisticated molecules and materials, it is often found
that the initial force field, no matter how substantial its training set is,
will lead to unexpected chemistry. Here, the initial force field means a
force field has information on the elements forming the constituents of
the  interested  system  but  not  specifically  trained  against  it.  As  such,
force field developers should be ready to question the initial force field
predictions and test any unexpected chemical events against DFT. If the
force field predictions are incorrect, add these new configurations back
into the training set and re-train. Typically, after a couple of such iter-
ations, a force field is obtained that provides an accurate prediction.

Table 7
Number  and  percentage  of  terms for  each  energy  contribution  in  CH3(CH2)n-
2CH3 [39].

n

Natom

Ubond

Uangle

Utors

Unon-bonded

10
20
50
100

32
62
152
302
N

31 (5%)
61 (3%)
151 (1%)
301 (1%)
(N (cid:0) 1)

30 (10%)
60 (6%)
300 (3%)
600 (1%)
2(N (cid:0) 2)

81 (14%)
171 (8%)
441 (4%)
891 (2%)
3(N (cid:0) 5)

405 (70%)
1710 (83%)
11025 (93%)
44550 (96%)
1/2 N(N (cid:0) 1) (cid:0) 3 N + 5

2.3.3. Computational cost

With  the  aim  to  model  systems  via  more  realistic  representatives,
force  fields  with  detailed  description  and  refinement  in  the  intermo-
lecular  and  intramolecular  interactions  are  more  widely  adopted  for
scientific studies. Normally, the computational cost increases with the
complexity of the force field, which enables the unprecedented atomic-
scale fidelity to physical and chemical phenomena. Among all terms in
the force field, the non-bonded intermolecular interactions of the van der
Waals and electrostatic are the most time-consuming, whose computa-
tional  cost  grows  as  the  square  of  the  system  size  (N,  atom  number)
whereas that of the bonded interactions scales linearly with the system
size. Table 7 lists the number and percentage of individual energy terms
for  linear  alkanes  CH3(CH2)n-2CH3  [39].  The  computational  time  for
calculating the non-bonded interaction accounts for more in percentage
with  the  increasing  atom  number  in  a  molecule,  and  scales  approxi-
mately with the square of the number of atoms.

Plimpton and Thompson [213] reviewed several popular force fields
developed over the past 30 years by comparing the relative complexity
and computational cost. The relative computational cost for both clas-
sical  and  reactive force  fields  is  benchmarked in  the  LAMMPS imple-
mentation for a prototypical problem as shown in Fig. 6(a). Note that the
listed  force  fields  all  consider  the  many-body  effects.  The  growing
computational complexity of these force fields has a trend similar to the
Moore’s  law  for  the  exponential  growth  of  transistor  counts  in  semi-
conductor  chips.  Specifically,  the  classical  force  field  is  cheaper  than
those reactive force fields, and the force fields of ReaxFF, COMB, eFF,
and AIREBO are predominately expensive. Recent progresses in the ML
motivate the development of ML-FFs. The CPU cost of different ML-FFs
versus the test error is included in Fig. 6(b) for ML-FFs of GAP, MTP,
NNP, SNAP and qSNAP performed by LAMMPS on a single CPU core. As
can be seen, the computational cost for the ML-FFs varies significantly
with the designed test error. A better accuracy can only be attained at
the price of greater computational cost. The ‘optimal’ MTP, NNP, SNAP,
and  qSNAP  ML-FFs  tend  to  be  2  orders  of  magnitude  more  efficient
computationally than the GAP potential [214].

2.4. Technical issues

2.4.1.

Initial conditions

Before starting a simulation, a molecular system is built consisting of
all interacting components in a simulation box. This system needs to be
as  realistic  as  possible.  Meanwhile,  other  conditions  such  as  the
configuration of the system, velocities of atoms, the type of ensemble,
the  boundary  condition,  the  numerical  algorithm,  etc.,  have  to  be
decided as prerequisites for an MD simulation.

- Geometry  and  configuration  construction:  The  atomic  configu-
ration for the target system needs to be created first. Simple crystal
materials, with lattice structures of square (sq) and hexagonal (hex)
for 2D simulations, and simple cubic (sc), face-centered cubic (fcc),
body-centered cubic (bcc), and hexagonal closest packed (hcp) for
3D simulations, can be built directly with the simulation package,
such  as  LAMMPS  [215].  However,  more  complex  structures  are
frequently required for modelling. In the case of a crystal, the ge-
ometries are typically available in the form of a crystallographic file
or constructed from a supercell combining several unit cells. For a
disordered system, the positions can be generated randomly or from
the  entropic  motions  of  atoms  in  an  ordered  structure.  Complex
configurations  of  these  heterogeneous  systems  for  multiphase
modeling can be constructed with software platforms like Material
Studio [216] and Packmol [217]. Since the initial configuration is a
major source of uncertainties in MD simulations, it is important to
sample sufficiently. For example, in the study of the metal-PAH re-
actions,  binary  collision  happens  in  any  orientation.  To  achieve
statistical  significance,  1000  independent  collision  configurations
were constructed considering different collision orientations [218].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108412

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 6. (a) Single CPU cost in seconds per-atom per-time step versus developed year for the force field. The line represents a doubling in computational cost every two
years, akin to Moore’s Law for hardware complexity. (b) Test error versus computational cost with different ML-FFs. Reprinted with permission from Refs. [213,214].

-  Initial velocity: To generate a dynamic trajectory, the initial atomic
velocities can be sampled  from uniform,  Gaussian, or  other distri-
butions and then scaled to produce the requested initial temperature
of  the  system.  Meanwhile,  a  random  seed  is  used  to  initialize  the
pseudorandom atomic velocities for replica simulations.

-  Boundary condition: The periodic boundary condition is employed
to mimic the three-dimensional bulk crystal and liquid fluid phase,
homogeneous  gas  phase  and  two-dimensional  planar  surface.  In
these conditions, the interactions between atoms can be across the
boundary, and atoms can freely exit one side of the box and re-enter
from  the  other  side.  However,  for  an  isolated  system  like  isolated
nanoparticles [90,91,219], atoms do not interact across the bound-
ary. Therefore, the nonperiodic boundary condition is applied, and
the simulation box size must be sufficient to avoid artifacts arising
from boundary conditions in these cases.

-  Ensemble:  MD  measures  time  averages  in  an  ensemble  to  obtain
statistical  averages  of  the  properties.  Microcanonical  ensemble
(NVE),  canonical  ensemble  (NVT),  isothermal-isobaric  ensemble
(NPT),  and  isoenthalpic-isobaric  ensemble  (NPH)  are  commonly
used in MD simulations. Specifically, the NVE represents an adiabatic
isolated system with constant atom number, volume, and total en-
ergy.  The  NVT  ensemble  keeps  the  atom  number,  volume,  and
temperature  constant  via  thermostats.  In  the  NPT  ensemble,  the
atom number, pressure, and temperature are kept constant where a
barostat is additionally required to keep the pressure constant. The
NPH  ensemble  maintains  constant  atom  number,  pressure  and
enthalpy.

Table 8
Thermostat algorithms used in MD simulations.

Algorithm

Brief description

Example

Langevin
Nose-

Hoover

Berendsen

randomizing velocities [222]
introducing extra terms to
represent a dynamic coupling to a
heat bath [224]
scaling of velocities [225]

Andersen

Lowe-

Andersen

coupling the system to a heat bath
via stochastic forces that modify
the kinetic energy of the atoms or
molecules [228]
based on Andersen algorithm
[228], with the relative velocity of
pairs of particles rescaled [230]

hydrodynamic boundary
conditions at fluid-solid
interface [223]

multiphase water flow in
carbon nanotubes [226]
oligosaccharide chain
dynamics under physiological
flow [227]
pure water [229]

blood flow on endothelial cells
[221,231]

-  Thermostats and barostats: The thermostats are used to re-scale the
velocities  of  atoms/molecules  in  MD  simulations  to  control  the
temperature, while the barostats re-scale the size of the simulation
domain to control the pressure. The thermostat couples a fictitious
heat  bath  with  a  part  or  the  whole  system,  and  the  coupling  is
commonly  achieved  by  altering  Newton’s  equations  of  motion  or
atom velocities during the simulation. Table 8 summarizes the most
widely  used  thermostat  algorithms  that  have  been  applied  in  MD
simulations. Different algorithms may potentially lead to thermostat-
dependent  dynamical artifacts. In a  comparative study  by  Basconi
and  Shirts  [220],  a  few  well-established  thermostat  algorithms,
including  Andersen,  Langevin,  Berendsen,  and  Nose-Hoover,  are
selected  to  investigate  transport  properties  of  water.  Their  studies
suggest that transport properties, which are expected to be irrelevant
to time, derived from Andersen and Langevin are time-dependent; by
contrast,  properties  obtained  from  Berendsen  and  Nose-Hoover
thermostats  are  stable  and  consistent  with  those  of  NVE.  Another
comparison  is  conducted  between  bulk  velocities  obtained  from
Berendsen and Lowe-Andersen thermostats for blood flow on com-
plex cell surface, and Lowe-Andersen algorithm performs better in
capturing the flow velocity trend [221].

2.4.2. Simulation procedure

Each MD simulation can be divided into three main parts. First, the
constructed structure of the system is minimized via algorithms such as
conjugate  gradient  (CG)  and  steepest  descent  (SD),  to  eliminate  the
overlapping of atoms. Second, an equilibration stage is run in a specific
ensemble,  which  allows  for  the  dynamic  feedback  between  the  reser-
voirs  and  the  system  to  control  the  volume  and  the  kinetic  energy
fluctuating around the desired mean values as expected in an equilib-
rium system. Note that for the MD simulations of gas-phase reactions
based on reactive force fields, no chemical reactions are expected during
the  equilibrium  process.  Therefore,  intermolecular  interactions  like
bond  formation  and  bond  breaking  are  excluded  and  the  vibrational
equilibrium  of  individual  molecules  or  radicals  is  performed  to  the
specified simulation temperature. In experiments, the well-distributed
translational  and  rotational  velocities  come  from  sufficient  collisions
with  surrounding  molecules,  which,  however,  is  difficult  to  achieve
within  the  limited  durations  in  MD  simulations.  Thus,  based  on  the
principle  of  equipartition  of  energy,  the  translational  and  rotational
velocities of species are assigned directly from Maxwellian distributions
of the specified temperature [3,170].

Finally comes the production stage. The duration of a simulation was
chosen as a compromise between a suitable length to explore meaningful
system dynamics and computational affordability for the study. The data
and  the  observables  of  interest  for  the  postprocessing  are  extracted

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108413

Q. Mao et al.

during  the  steady  state.  Averaging  methods  are  applied  in  the  post-
processing  of  MD  data,  including  mass-averaging,  local  volume-
averaging, and time-averaging. Specifically, averaging can be conduct-
ed over replicate simulations, and it can also be conducted over atoms
within one simulation to represent a local quantity. From a statistical
perspective, it is necessary to show error bars for the averaged data and
to  conduct statistical  tests when  two  parameters  are compared.  Krzy-
winski and Altman [232] presented a useful guide for MD researchers to
better interpret their data via error bars.

2.4.3. Acceleration of MD simulations

To increase the efficiency of an MD simulation, acceleration methods
are proposed to save the computational cost and potentially extend the
MD simulations to a large physical time scale. The acceleration can be
divided into the following aspects:

(1)  Reducing the computational cost of the force field

-  Long-range solver: In an MD simulation, the calculation of the
potential is the most CPU-intensive task. Specifically, the non-
bonded  long-range  intermolecular  interaction  is  the  most
expensive  as  discussed  in  Section  2.2.3.  The  pair-wise  in-
teractions of electrostatic potential and van der Waals potential
need to be treated explicitly, as the electrostatic potential does
not  decay  with  distance  rapidly  enough  to  allow  a  simple
truncation  scheme  as  for  the  van  der  Waals  interaction.  The
computational cost for electrostatic interaction can be reduced
significantly  by  the  Ewald  summation  [233]  via  scaling  with
the  number  of  atoms  as  O(N3/2),  while  for  large  systems  the
computation of the short-range interaction can scale as O(N).
Another treatment of the long-range intramolecular interaction
is  the  PPPM  [234]  method,  which  allows  for  scaling  of  O
(NlogN).

-  Intramolecular constraint: This method allows a large time
step for the rigid molecules. As discussed in Section 2.1, δt must
be much smaller than the fastest motion in the system, which
corresponds to intramolecular vibrations for  a molecular sys-
tem. Therefore, the SHAKE method [235], in which the high
frequency motions are frozen by applying distance constraints
to  the  bond  lengths  and  angles,  is  developed.  The  use  of  the
SHAKE  method  for  a  rigid  molecule  may  result  in  saving
computational time by a factor of 5–10, as δt can be increased
while maintaining energy conservation.

-  United  atom  models:  This  strategy  employs  a  united  atom
model with several atoms joined into a single interaction site.
One example is to represent CH3 or CH2 groups as a single site.
In  this  way,  not  only  the  fastest  degrees  of  freedom  are
removed,  but  also  the  number  of  calculated  sites  is  largely
reduced. However, some atomic details are inevitably lost, so
this  method  may  be  considered  a  kind  of  coarse-grained  MD
[236].

-  Neighbor and cell lists: In a system composed of N atoms, for
each  atom,  we  need  to  compute  the  distances  with  the
remaining N (cid:0) 1 atoms. To save the computational cost, it is
more  convenient  to  use  the  cell  list  or  linked-list  method  to
evaluate  the  total  forces  on  an  atom  within  the  truncated
radius. For the force calculation of a given atom, the search can
be  limited  to  those  atoms  located  in  the  same  subcell  or  the
neighboring subcell with a distance smaller than the truncated
radius. With the help of this approach, it may achieve a scaling
of O(N) if there are no long-range interactions.

(2)  Extension of the simulation time

-  Multiple  time  steps:  This  approach  allows  for  an  accurate
evaluation  of  the  intramolecular  motions,  but  uses  different
time steps to integrate different degrees of freedom. High fre-
quency motions like bond stretching are evaluated at each time
step,  while  the  low  frequency  motions  are  evaluated  less

frequently (typically every 5–10 δt) and the same values for the
calculated low-frequency forces are used until the next update.
This method is particularly appropriate to simulate proteins or
other macromolecules showing a broad spectrum of relaxation
times.

-  Dynamics  acceleration  methods:  Processes  that  occur  in  a
long range of time can be viewed as a sequence of infrequent
transitions from one potential state to another. Many acceler-
ation  approaches  are  thus  developed  via  modifying  the  dy-
namics to transit among states efficiently. This kind of method
consists of bias potentials [237], elevated temperatures [238],
parallel-replica  [239],  a  collective  variable-driven  hyper-
dynamics method [240], and so on. The dynamics acceleration
MD simulation is mainly employed in the condensed phase but
rarely in the gaseous phase.

(3)  Advances in computing software and hardware

-  Graphical  processing  units  (GPU)  parallelization:  The
increased  capabilities  and  flexibility  of  recent  GPU  hardware
combined with high-level GPU programming languages such as
CUDA  and  OpenCL  have  unlocked  the  potential  of  atomistic
simulations. The high degree of parallelism and floating-point
arithmetic capability of GPUs can attain one to two orders of
magnitude  speedup  over  CPU  codes  [241].  Most  of  the  MD
packages,  such  as  LAMMPS  [215],  CHARMM  [78],  AMBER
[242],  NAMD  [243]  and  GROMACS  [79],  are  now  available
with  GPU  accelerators.  Compared  to  the  classical  MD,  MD
simulations  with  the  ReaxFF  force  field  are  approximately
10–50 times more expensive computationally due to its explicit
modeling of bond forming and breaking, the dynamic charge
equilibrium, and smaller time steps. Therefore, the GMD-Reax
[244] and PuReMD [245] are developed to accelerate simula-
tions to reach spatio-temporal scales of nanometers and nano-
seconds.  Particularly,  GMD-Reax  is  the  first  reported  GPU
implementation  of  ReaxFF  with  single-precision  arithmetic
operations and can run on single GPU. GMD-Reax is up to six
times faster than the USER-REAXC package on a small molec-
ular system. Subsequently, the PuReMD-GPU has incorporated
double precision for single and multiple GPUs, which shows up
to a 16-fold speedup on an NVIDIA C2075 GPU, compared with
a  single  core  of  an  Intel  Xeon  processor  for  a  variety  of
benchmarks.

2.5. Software for MD simulation and postprocessing

There are well established software suites for MD simulations, such
as  LAMMPS  [215],  DL_POLY  [246],  CHARMM  [78],  AMBER  [242],
NAMD [243], GROMACS [79], Tinker [247] and ADF [248]. Most of
these can be run on a variety of computing platforms, either series or
parallel. Particularly, the parallelism for LAMMPS is based on the spatial
decomposition of the simulation domain, which is similar to NAMD. For
CHARMM  and  AMBER,  the  atom-decomposition  strategy  is  used  for
parallelism.  LAMMPS  is  capable  of  modeling  atomic,  polymeric,  bio-
logical, metallic, granular, and coarse-grained systems in liquid, solid,
and gaseous  states. DL_POLY can simulate a variety  of biological and
non-biological materials, while CHARMM, AMBER, NAMD, and GRO-
MACS are primarily designed for biological systems. The ReaxFF force
field is available in the software packages of LAMMPS, ADF, and Ma-
terials Studio among all discussed above. More details of the software
suites  are  listed  in  Table  9.  Advances  in  GPU  make  it  accessible  to
computational  scientists,  which  is  also  incorporated  into  most  MD
software packages.

To  display,  animate  and  analyse the  atomic  behaviors  and  system
evolutions, advanced visualization tools are required. The widely used
visualization packages are VMD [249], AtomEye [250], PyMol [251],
Raster3D [252], RasMol [253], and OVITO [254], to name just a few. All
the  mentioned  software  suites  can  be  operated  in  Linux,  MacOX  and

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108414

Q. Mao et al.

Table 9
Software suites for molecular dynamics simulations.

Software

Main features

GPU

License

Website

LAMMPS

DL_POLY

ADF

Materials
Studio

CHARMM

AMBER

• wide range of interatomic potentials for soft and solid-state materials
• coarse-grained models for mesoscale to continuum
• scalable
• easy to extend
• soft-materials, polymers, macromolecules, ionic systems and solutions

• suitable for chemistry and material systems
• suite: ReaxFF, UFF, QM-MM with Amber and Tripos force fields, DFT and

semi-empirical methods

• Graphical User Interface (GUI)
• materials: polymers, carbon nanotubes, catalysts, metals, and ceramics
• construct/import graphical models of materials
• GUI
• biological systems
• implicit solvent models
• high performance
• biomolecular simulation

NAMD

• high-performance simulation of large biomolecular systems

GROMACS

Tinker

• biomolecular systems
• fastest single processor performance
• biopolymers

Yes

free open source

https://www.lammps.org/

No

partly

proprietary,
free academic use,
source code
proprietary,
commercial,
gratis trial

https://www.scd.stfc.ac.uk/Pages/DL_
POLY.aspx

https://www.scm.com/

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

proprietary,
trial available

proprietary,
commercial

http://www.accelrys.com/

https://www.charmm.org/

proprietary,
free open source
proprietary
free academic use, source
code
free open source

https://ambermd.org/

https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/na
md/

https://www.gromacs.org/

Yes

proprietary, gratis

https://dasher.wustl.edu/tinker/

Table 10
Visualization tools for molecular dynamics simulations anaylsis.

Software

Main features

License

Website

VMD
AtomEye

PyMol
Raster3D

RasMol
OVITO
VARxMD

• large biomolecular systems
• condensed-matter systems
• large-scale atomic system (>1 million atoms)
• parallel
• structural biology
• photorealistic molecular graphics
• proteins or other molecules
• proteins, nucleic acids and small molecules
• materials phenomena and physical processes
• chemical reactions for ReaxFF MD siumlations
• large scale coal models and a high-density polyethylene model.

proprietary, free use noncommercial
free, source code

https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd/
http://li.mit.edu/Archive/Graphics/A/

commercial, open source
free, proprietary

https://pymol.org/2/
http://www.bmsc.washington.edu/raster3d/

free, open source
free, open source license
not publicly available

http://www.openrasmol.org/
https://www.ovito.org/
–

Windows. VMD and AtomEye are suitable for large biomolecular sys-
tems. AtomEye is particularly designed for condensed-matter systems,
with atom number larger than 1,000,000. OVITO is for the analysis of
materials phenomena and physical processes. Most packages also offer
plug-ins for data analysis or provide an interface to customize functions
for  post-processing.  For  example,  OVITO  supports  a  Python  interface
where the users can extend the capabilities of OVITO by developing new
functions. For complex chemical reactions simulated by ReaxFF MD, the
Chemical Trajectory Analyzer (ChemTraYzer) [255] and Visualization
and  Analysis  of  ReaxFF  Molecular  Dynamics  (VARxMD)  software
packages [43,256] are developed to facilitate the exploration of reaction
networks  and  pathways  through  bond  order  analysis  between species
from MD trajectories. Moreover, the VARxMD [43,256] is accessible for
GUI and visualization of large molecules. More details of the visualiza-
tion tools are displayed in Table 10.

2.6. Uncertainty analysis of MD simulations

Results from the MD simulations act as post hoc rationalization of
experimental findings. In order to have better estimations of the accu-
racy, precision and reproducibility of results from MD simulations, un-
certainty quantification of the MD trajectories is essential and indeed for
applications has a large impact on observations or predictions. To get a

full  grip  on  uncertainty  in  MD  simulations,  errors  from  systemic  and
random  sources  need  to  be  identified.  Specifically,  systematic  errors
originate from inaccuracies inherent to the investigated system, such as
imperfect  design  (e.g.,  initial  configuration,  velocity  distribution,  de-
grees of freedom, boundary conditions, resolution, etc.), parameteriza-
tion (e.g., force field, time step), conduct (e.g., numerical integrators,
constraints, thermostat, and barostat, etc.), and the measurement and
analysis methods performed for output. On the other hand, the random
variation also named systematic noise or stochastic error is caused by
the intrinsically chaotic nature of classical MD due to thermal fluctua-
tions of atoms [257]. In general, the fluctuation of a system is inversely
proportional to the number of atoms [258]. Limited by the computa-
tional expense, the intrinsic noise is unlikely to be suppressed by just
increasing N→∞ for most applications.

The  ensemble  method  is  proposed  to  perform  the  uncertainty
quantification for MD simulations via efficiently sampling in the phase
space. Specifically, an ensemble approach employs a set of independent
MD simulations,  referred  to  as  ‘replicas’  both  in statistical  mechanics
and within the uncertainty quantification domain, to obtain the required
averages and associated parameters. Each replica needs to be simulated
long  enough  to  sample  the  most  relevant  conformational  space  to
evaluate  one  or  more  properties  of  interest.  Based  on  the  ensemble
methods, errors can be significantly reduced. For example, an ensemble

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108415

Q. Mao et al.

of 300 replicas during the investigation of Young’s modulus of a bulk
material  is  examined  to  achieve  95%  confidence  of  the  true  values
[259]. Meanwhile, with the ensemble simulations, sensitivity analysis
can be performed to understand the variance in properties arising from
different inputs.

2.7. Experimental validation and comparison

Like other numerical modeling methods, validation and comparison
against experiments are of great importance for accuracy and reliability
of MD results. However, the large gap between the experiments and the
MD simulations in terms of time and length scales present challenges in
making direct comparisons in most cases. Nevertheless, several steps can
be taken to ensure accuracy and reliability of MD simulations:

(1)  Force field validation

The force field, which largely determines the accuracy and reliability
of MD results, is typically trained using experimental data as well as QM
data. Take the Matsui and Akaogi’s TiO2 force field as an example [260].
The  crystal  structure,  volume  compressibility  and  expansivity,  and
enthalpy  of  different  TiO2  polymorphs  (anatase,  rutile,  brookite,  and
TiO2 II) have been validated against experimental data. For ReaxFF force
fields,  direct  comparisons  between  experiments  and  simulations  have
been performed in terms of the heat of formation, molecular geometries
including bond and angle for gas species [66], lattice constant, density,
bulk modulus, cohesion energy, and vacancy energy for the condensed
phase [160].

(2)  Validation of MD simulation results

MD  simulation  results  are  validated  against  experimental  data
whenever available. For instance, MD simulations of the solid phase at
high temperatures are usually compared with experiments in terms of
melting  points,  heat  capacities,  and  other  thermodynamic  properties
with experiments. Moreover, some complex properties including X-ray
diffraction  (XRD)  patterns  for  crystal  structure  [47],  thermal  conduc-
tivity  [261],  droplet  vaporization  rate  [4],  ionic  conductivity  [262],
diffusion  coefficient  [263],  etc.  can  be  obtained  from  the  trajectories
calculated by MD, for comparison with experimental values. Last but not
least,  direct  comparison  between  microscopic  experimental  observa-
tions and MD simulations has become more accessible with the devel-
opment  of  experimental  techniques.  For  instance,  grain  boundary
formation during nanoparticle sintering has been observed in both TEM
images and MD results, which will be further discussed in Section 5.2.4.

(3)  Mutual validation with experiments

As a first-principle method, MD results are reliable and accurate if
the force field is properly trained. MD and experimental results can be
used for mutual validation through detailed comparison. In particular,
ab initio MD (AIMD) has been used to calculate the vibrational spectra
via  time-correlation  functions  of  atoms,  by  means  of  which  mass-
weighted power spectra, IR spectra, and Raman spectra can be numer-
ically  determined  [264]  for  comparison  with  experimental  data.
Compared  with  QM  simulations  that  only  provide  time-independent
results of limited molecules, trajectory-based MD simulations can well
deal with anharmonic effects and consider intermolecular interactions
such as hydrogen bonds by calculating the autocorrelation function of
atomic  velocities.  Recently,  Wӧhl  et  al.  [265]  utilized  the  spectra
calculated with an AIMD-IHM approach in calibration of properties of
liquid fuel mixture that are measured by experiments.

2.8. Limitations of the MD method

Despite  recent  progresses,  MD  simulations  suffer  from  intrinsic

limitations  of  force  fields.  The  correct  prediction  of  mechanisms  and
kinetics of chemical reactions and physical processes is dependent on the
quality of the underlying force field. The force field is constructed often
by experience, using tabulated experimental data or data from electronic
structure  calculations  even  in  the  case  of  ReaxFF,  ML  and  NN-based
force  fields.  Nearly  all  of  the  on-the-fly  generated  data  and  most
training data sets for force fields are based on DFT methods, which are
better  than HF and  semi-empirical methods  and  provide mostly  good
equilibrium  properties  and  molecular  structures.  However,  DFT-
calculated  transition  state  energies,  which  are  most  important  for
chemical kinetics, often error on the low side even with the best func-
tionals. Therefore, the generated force fields suffer from the same lim-
itations  as  the  data  or  methods  used  for  training  them,  which  then
translate into an unreliable preference for some channels and masking of
certain processes. Another issue is that most force fields are restricted to
ground  state  adiabatic  energies.  Non-adiabatic  processes  and  the
description of the chemistry of elements that exist in various electronic
states are limited or deficient. In practice, due to a lack of generality,
specific force fields need to be constructed for different targeted appli-
cations  or  different  conditions.  For  example,  to  reproduce  a  specific
nature  of  the  H2O  molecule,  different  force  fields  with  variations  in
forms  and  degrees  of  complexity  are  proposed,  which  account  for
different  sites  of  interactions  (such  as  3-,  4-,  and  5-site  interactions
models of TIP3P, TIP4P, and TIP5P, respectively), the rigid or flexible
bonds (such as SPC and flexible SPC), and polarization effects (such as
SPC/E model) [266].

3. Gas phase combustion

In-depth  understanding  of  chemical  kinetics  and  reaction  mecha-
nisms  relies  on  detailed  knowledge  about  the  atomic  and  molecular
behaviors of gas-phase hydrocarbon fuels. Though DFT calculations can
accurately determine the transition state and energy barrier of a reaction
as well as distinguishing a preferential reaction pathway, the calculation
cannot be easily performed without a good initial guess and the high
computational  cost  is  always  a  limitation.  As  for  the  development  of
chemical mechanisms, a mathematical optimization process is usually
applied.  In  this  section,  we  discuss  the  application  of  MD  to  gain
fundamental insights into pyrolysis of gas-phase hydrocarbons, chemi-
cal pathway analysis, collision energy transfer in reactions, and so on, in
order to facilitate chemical kinetic model development as a supplement
to  conventional  methodology  based  on  quantum  chemistry  with  high
computational cost and efforts.

3.1. Pyrolysis of hydrocarbons

Pyrolysis is usually the first step in the utilization of hydrocarbons
and  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the  subsequent  combustion  process.  It  is
usually a complex process involving hundreds of chemical species and
thousands of reactions. Comprehensive understanding of pyrolysis re-
actions over a wide range of temperatures and pressures is required for
improved utilization of fuels and reduced pollutant formation. By per-
forming  ReaxFF  MD  simulations,  the  mechanisms  of  pyrolysis  of  hy-
drocarbon or its mixtures and the effects of temperature, pressure, and
density can be studied in detail. Besides methane, the complex pyrolysis
reactions of various heavy hydrocarbon fuels such as toluene, n-heptane,
n-dodecane,  hexadecane,  JP-10  are  extensively  investigated  via  MD
simulations  to  uncover  their  important  primary  decomposition  path-
ways and key intermediate species. Specifically, Lümmen [267] applied
ReaxFF  MD  simulations  to  investigate  the  pyrolysis  of  methane  at
various  temperatures  and  densities  to  understand  their  effects  on  the
formation of large hydrocarbon molecules. The number of species and
types increase dramatically with the rising temperature, while the in-
fluence of density is not remarkable. It is found that ethylene, acetylene
and  C3H4  are  the  richest  products,  as  well  as  the  formation  of  a
six-membered carbon ring structure. The main decomposition pathway

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108416

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 7. Comparison of ReaxFF and QM energies for various steps in the mechanism of JP-10 oxidation observed during a ReaxFF MD simulation. Reprinted with
permission from Ref. [45]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

of n-heptane is via the unimolecular dissociation as reported by Ding
et  al.  [268],  which  is  initiated  by  the  C–C  bond  breaking,  and  the
cleavage of central C–C bonds is much easier than the terminal ones.
Additionally, the radical pool dominates the pyrolysis process, in which
the  H  radical  is  the  most  vital  intermediate.  The  calculated  apparent
activation  energy  of  n-heptane  pyrolysis  also  agrees  with  the  experi-
mental observations. The C–C bond cleavage and the dehydrogenation
were reported to be the two main pathways of the initiation reactions in
the n-dodecane pyrolysis [269]. Chen et al. [270] performed both single
and multi-component fuel. Temperature is found to have a significant
impact  on  product  distributions  and
the
multi-component  hexadecane  pyrolysis.  Moreover,  the  obtained
enthalpy of reaction and Arrhenius parameters are in good agreement
with QM and experimental results.

reaction

rates

in

In  addition  to  the  above  straight-chain  hydrocarbons,  pyrolysis  of
complex  tricyclic  hydrocarbon  JP-10  was  investigated  by  Chenoweth
et  al.  [45].  The  decomposition  of  JP-10  was  found  to  be  initiated
through the formation of either an ethylene and a C8 hydrocarbon or two
C5  hydrocarbons as in experiments. The product distribution and acti-
vation energy are comparable with experimental results. Moreover, the
ReaxFF and QM energies for various steps in the mechanism of JP-10
oxidation were compared as shown in Fig. 7, which validates the use
of  ReaxFF  for  investigating  the  combustion  of  hydrocarbon  fuels.
Recently,  Liu  et  al.  [271]  proposed  the  overall  mechanism  of  JP-10
pyrolysis  through  large-scale  ReaxFF  MD  simulations  and  the  results
were supported by the single-pulse shock tube experiment. This work
provided in-depth analysis including the three-stage characteristics and
reaction path branching ratios of JP-10 pyrolysis, thereby extending the
understanding  of  overall  picture  and  evolution  profiles  of  the  major

products during JP-10 pyrolysis. A further study on the pyrolysis of two
different fuel components, i.e., JP-10/toluene and n-dodecane/toluene,
was carried out by Ashraf et al. [272]. They found that the role of py-
rolysis products that assisted other less reactive molecules to decompose
is more important than that of the activation energy of the most reactive
component of a fuel mixture on its overall pyrolysis characteristics.

For  reactions  taking  place  at  extremely  high  temperatures  and
pressures, some reactions could occur in picoseconds or even in femto-
seconds. Current experimental techniques are unable to capture those
fast-changing reactions under such conditions and the relevant experi-
mental studies are usually conducted at low temperatures and/or low
pressures instead. ReaxFF MD is particularly suitable for investigating
such extreme systems, which could provide valuable atomistic insights
into the reaction pathways. It is also noteworthy that employing a high
temperature  and/or  a  high  pressure  to  accelerate  reactions  in  hydro-
carbon  systems  is  a  common  strategy  to  overcome  the  limitation  of
computing  power.  By  comparing  some  macroscopic  properties  (e.g.,
product distribution and activation energy) with experimental results,
the  validity  of  the  microscopic  observations (e.g.,  reaction  pathways)
extracted from ReaxFF MD simulations can be verified. In short, ReaxFF
MD is now an established method to investigate chemical reactions of
various hydrocarbon systems and their mixtures.

3.2. Development of chemical kinetics

The  ReaxFF  MD  method  can  be  used  to  explore  chemical  kinetic
mechanisms  without  any  prior  knowledge  about  the  studied  species
[255,273,274]. The accuracy of the force field strongly determines the
reliability of the MD results. Generally speaking, the ReaxFF force field

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108417

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 8. Correlations between rate constants obtained from the high-temperature methane oxidation trajectories by QM/TST and ReaxFF and from (a) GRI-Mech 3.0
(GRI3) and (b) Aramco Mech 1.3 (ARAMCO). The red dashed lines represent identity of the rate constants. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [273].

has a higher accuracy compared to the HF and semi-empirical method of
PM3,  which  lies  between  DFT  methods  of  B3LYP/6-311G(d,p)  and
M06–2X/6-311G(d,p)  [275].  Based  on  trajectories  from  ReaxFF  MD
simulations,  quantitative  results  for  complex  chemical  reaction  net-
works  by  determining  the  rate  constants  of  elementary  reactions,
equilibration  of  molecular  modes,  and  reaction  pathways  can  be
extracted by the ChemTraYzer [255]. This method was proved to suc-
cessfully  derive  a  reaction  chemical  kinetic  mechanism  for  the  high
temperature  combustion of  methane, and  the  obtained reaction  path-
ways and rate constants are in good agreement with available experi-
mental  data.  Later,  D ̈ontgen  et  al.  [273]  extended  the  ChemTraYzer
approach by combining the phase space sampling of ReaxFF MD with
the  thermochemistry  and  kinetics  prediction  capabilities  of  QM  for
automated chemical kinetic modelling. The structures of the species and
transition states were analysed and automatically extracted by Chem-
TraYzer from the ReaxFF MD simulations, and then the energies were
recalculated via a higher-level of QM method. Meanwhile, the thermo-
chemistry and kinetics data of species provided in the ChemKin format
were conducted in an automated manner via postprocessing QM results.
Fig. 8 shows good correlations between the predicted rate constants for
barrierless reactions from high-temperature methane oxidation trajec-
tories obtained from the hybrid ReaxFF MD and QM method, and the
respective rate constants in Fig. 8(a) the GRI3 model and Fig. 8(b) the
ARAMCO model. To overcome the computational limitations and slow
kinetics, rate constants of rare reactions from ReaxFF MD were assessed
based  on  the  Poisson  distribution  [274].  Superior  to  the  arithmetic
average method, both the rate constants and the confidence intervals
obtained by the Poisson-based method were found to be independent of
the number of simulations performed. Meanwhile, the upper bounds for
rate constants of reactions can be estimated from a ReaxFF MD simu-
lation.  The  statistical  uncertainties  of  the  sampling  rates  of  reaction
events observed in MD simulations are generally less than one order of
magnitude. Importantly, the computational efficiency of ReaxFF MD is
at least 4 to 6 orders of magnitude higher than that of the ab initio MD
method,  which  leads  to  dramatically  improved  phase  space  sampling
[273].

Recently, ML-based MD simulations were applied in the combustion
community to unravel the complex reaction processes, leading to dis-
covery of some novel chemical reaction pathways that are not consid-
ered  in  kinetic  mechanisms  before  [276].  In  the  study,  methane
combustion  was  simulated  based  on  a  NN  potential  trained  from  a
high-dimensional NN model with energies from ab initio calculations.
The complete reaction network of methane combustion was then con-
structed  from  the  ReaxFF  MD  trajectory.  The  NN  potential  model  is

orders of magnitude faster than the conventional DFT calculations. Since
the NN potential is particularly trained against the specific DFT calcu-
lations  which  are  interest  to  the  system,  the  accuracy  is  theoretically
higher  than  the  ReaxFF  force  field  as  which  is  not  always  generic
appliable for every system though contains the same element informa-
tion. Besides, compared to the training process, the NN potential is more
systemically  accessible,  whereas  the  ReaxFF  force  field  still  relies  on
experience to some extent. Therefore, MD simulations based on the NN
potential may potentially be applied to study complex combustion sys-
tems  at  the  ab  initio  level  of  accuracy  and  provides  an  atomic-level
understanding of detailed reaction processes .

3.3. Determination of collisional energy transfer

The  collisional  energy  transfer  parameters  are  important  for  the
phenomenological  rate  coefficients  of  unimolecular  and  chemically
activated  reactions,  which  are  sensitive  to  the  pressure.  To  solve  the

Fig.  9. The  average  energy  transferred  in  deactivating  collisions,  <ΔEdown>,
for the MP2/aug’-cc-pVDZ (blue squares) and TB + exp/6 (black circles) PESs
for (a) C2H6  + He and (b) C2H5  + He. The error bars show 2σ  statistical un-
certainties. Simple expressions fit to the TB + exp/6 results are shown as red
dashed lines. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [111].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108418

Q. Mao et al.

pressure-dependent  reaction  kinetics,  the  master  equation  (ME)  is
theoretically  proposed  to  describe the  time  dependence  of  the  micro-
canonical state populations of the reactants, products and intermediates.
Particularly, the collisional energy transfer model, <ΔEd>, used in ME
calculations were highly empirically with assumptions of independence
of initial rotational states, initial and final energies, and the exponential
probability distribution of energy transfer.

Pioneer studies for the collisional energy transfer between bath gases
and reactants/intermediate species have been carried out by Jasper and
co-authors  [109–111].  They  applied  the  MD  method  to  study  energy
transfer parameters for CH4 ↔ CH3 + H reaction in bath gases, including
He, Ne, Ar, Kr, H2, N2, CO and CH4. It was found that the energy transfer
parameters  are  insensitive  to  the  level  of  theory  describing  the  intra-
molecular CH4 potential, and a computationally efficient semiempirical
tight-binding (TB) potential is good enough. However, it is sensitive to
the  shape  of  the  repulsive  part  of  the  intermolecular  potential.  The
exponential Buckingham repulsive expression (exp/6) has better accu-
racy than the LJ expression for quantitative predictions. Furthermore,
the ‘third-body’ collisions for linear, branched, and cyclic hydrocarbons
including  both  radicals  and  saturated  and  unsaturated  molecules  in
atomic and diatomic bath gases are investigated in a similar way [111].
Fig. 9 shows the calculated <ΔEd> from the potential energy surfaces
(PESs)  of  the  TB  + exp/6  and  MP2,  together  with  the  fitted
single-parameter exponential down model. It indicates that the <ΔEd>
predicted by the TB + exp/6 PES has good agreement with the MP2 PES
for C2H6 + He, while it overpredicts by roughly 20% for C2H5 + He at
low  temperature.  Results  from  the  study  provided  a  complete
first-principle
and
pressure-dependent  rate  constants  for  the  single-well  unimolecular
system.

characterization

temperature

the

of

The  pressure-dependent  rate  constants  are  also  important  in  the
development of accurate PAH chemistry. However, the existing reaction
kinetic mechanisms still lack the accuracy of these types of reactions. For
example,  the  rate  constants  for  the  most  widely  known  hydrogen
abstraction  carbon  addition  (HACA)  PAH  growth  pathway  deviate
substantially from the high-pressure limit [277]. The collisional transfer
parameters for the system between large aromatics and bath gases of He
and Ar were firstly studied by Wang et al. [112] based on trajectories
from MD simulations. The potential energy surfaces between PAHs and
bath gases were described by the Buckingham potential, and the ReaxFF
force field was used to represent the intramolecular interaction within
the  PAH  molecules.  The  phase-space  average  energy  transferred  per
deactivating collisions, 〈ΔEdown〉, was obtained, which is a bit higher in
the bath gas of Ar compared to that of He at the same temperature. The
dependence of 〈ΔEdown〉 is found to be similar for PAHs of naphthalene,
corannulene and coronene, which are all larger than benzene. Moreover,
the energy transferred per unit time increases monotonically with the
PAH size.

4. Multiphase combustion

The multiphase combustion is highly complex, which involves phase
change and/or interfacial reactions. The fundamental understanding is
desirable and crucial for developing reaction mechanisms of multiphase
combustion. With the introduction of MD, the dynamics process of the
multiphase reaction can be obtained, which could benefit the explana-
tion of experimental observations and provide effective inputs for DFT
calculations. In this section, we discuss the application of MD methods to
several  typical  multiphase systems, including the  combustion of  solid
fuels, energetic materials, and catalysis.

4.1. Pyrolysis of solid fuels

4.1.1. Coal pyrolysis

Coal has  a  complicated carbonaceous  structure containing  various
functional groups [278], which is also a major resource for electricity

generation and steel production. The research of coal has attracted much
interest in the past decades with the aim to achieve more efficient uti-
lization and better pollution control. Coal pyrolysis plays a vital role in
the transformation. It is considered to be the initial step in most of the
coal conversion processes such as gasification, liquefaction, and com-
bustion, which results in up to 70% weight loss [279–281]. However,
due to the high complexity of coal pyrolysis involving a vast number of
reactions and intermediates, understanding of fundamental mechanisms
in coal pyrolysis is still incomplete.

More than 134 molecular representations of coal have been proposed
since 1942 [282]. One of the earliest researches on coal pyrolysis using
ReaxFF  was  undertaken  by  Salmon  et  al.  [283],  who  studied  a
macro-model  of  Morwell  brown  coal  and  successfully  reproduced  the
observations of thermal decomposition processes of defunctionalisation,
depolymerisation and rearrangement of the residual structure in various
experiments.  This  demonstrates  the  feasibility  of  ReaxFF  method  for
investigating  pyrolysis  of  complex  organic  matter.  Later,  Zhou  et  al.
[284] examined the Wender brown coal and reported that the pyrolysis
process started with the breaking of bridge bonds, closely followed by
the detachment of functional groups. Different from the Salmon et al.’s
result  that  gaseous  hydrocarbons  were  produced  by  cleavage  of  C–C
bonds of the lignin side chain [283], in their simulations, gas products
were generated from the reactions between small intermediate species.
Meanwhile, it was found that the temperature has a significant impact
on the pyrolysis process and the formation of gas products. Similarly, in
the study of the brown coal pyrolysis, Bhoi et al. [285] found that the
reactions  are  initiated  by  the  dehydrogenation  reaction  of  hydrogen
radicals, whereas the density has little impact on the pyrolysis process.
Zhan et al. [286] investigated the initiation mechanisms of pyrolysis
of Hatcher subbituminous coal. It was found that the primary decom-
position  reactions  began  with  intramolecular  changes  including  the
cleavage of C–C and  C–O bonds. The pyrolysis products were formed
mainly through decarbonylation of functional groups and reaction be-
tween intermediates. Hong and Guo [287] focused their research on the
understanding of secondary reactions of tar under different conditions
during the pyrolysis of Hatcher Zhundong coal by considering the effects
from  temperature  and  heating  rate.  Besides  investigating  the  single
component  coal,  Gao  et  al.  [288]  employed  large-scale  ReaxFF  MD
simulations to study the pyrolysis of a multi-component Fugu subbitu-
minous coal. The pyrolysis process was divided into three stages, namely
the  activation  stage,  the  fast  pyrolysis  stage  and  the  recombina-
tion/condensation stage, and the oxygen-containing functional groups
were found to be critical for the initialization of pyrolysis.

Li’s  group  conducted  a  number  of  researches  on  the  pyrolysis  of
bituminous coal [289–293]. A combined Wiser and Shinn bituminous
coal was firstly constructed and used to explore the initial decomposi-
tion mechanisms and detailed chemical reaction  network of pyrolysis
[289].  Afterwards,  they  developed  the  first  GPU-enabled  ReaxFF  MD
program to carry out the cheminformatics analysis of the largest coal
model  at  that  time,  with  a  Liulin  bituminous  coal  molecular  model
consisting  of  28,351  atoms  [292].  The  paradigm  of  the  model  con-
struction and modeling is shown in Fig. 10. A comprehensive investi-
gation  of  Liulin  coal  pyrolysis  was  provided  by  taking  advantages  of
chosen results from models at different scales [292,293]. In addition to
the initiation mechanisms and products profile, Castro-Marcano et al.
[294] performed pyrolysis simulations on a large-scale (>50,000 atoms)
molecular model of Illinois No. 6 coal to analyse the effects of sulfur
content  on  the  pyrolysis  reactions.  It  was  indicated  that  sulfur  atoms
enhanced the reaction rates during coal pyrolysis, leading to a higher
production rate of inorganic gases and tars.

4.1.2. Biomass pyrolysis

Concerns about climate change and the finite nature of fossil energy
have  prompted  the  development  of  alternative  energy  resources.
Biomass is an abundant renewable source that can be used to produce
energy/fuels  or  manufacture  chemicals  [295,296].  Among  the  many

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108419

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 10. The paradigm for using the ReaxFF MD in coal pyrolysis simulation with GPU-based high-performance computing and cheminformatics analysis. Reprinted
with permission from Ref. [292]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

conversion processes, pyrolysis and combustion are the primary means
for making use of biomass [297]. The structure of biomass is complex
and its composition is diverse with lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose as
main constituents [298]. Study of the fundamental mechanisms of py-
rolysis and combustion of biomass would be beneficial for its efficient
utilization.

The oxidation of lignin compounds in softwood is investigated for the
purpose of exploring the carbon fiber production from lignin [299]. The
overall activation energies for conversion was calculated and the initial
mechanisms  of  formation  of  formaldehyde  was  identified  as  a  major
product.  The  mechanisms  were  revealed  for  stabilizing  reactions
resulting in cyclic and rigid connections in softwood lignin fibers, which
are important for further processing into carbon fibers. Later on, Beste
[300]  conducted  a  further  research  using  a  different  softwood  lignin
model.  The  focus  of  this  research  was  to  detect  the  chemical  trans-
formations that convert flexible linkages in lignin to rigid connections
concerning the stabilization reactions in polyacrylonitrile-derived car-
bon fibers. It was found that the 5-5 linkage showed the highest reac-
tivity toward cyclization and dehydrogenation. This work inspires the
development of improved processing techniques for converting lignin to
carbon fibers. Zhang et al. [301] investigated the pyrolysis of Adler’s
softwood lignin model by large-scale ReaxFF MD simulations. The initial
mechanism of the overall behaviour of lignin pyrolysis was uncovered
and the pyrolysate evolution was employed to classify the process into
three stages. In their follow-on research [302], it was further extended to
the initial conversion pathways of linkages and their linked monomer
units in pyrolysis of the same softwood lignin model. Also, the initial
conversion ratio of various linkages and their linked aryl monomers was
calculated. These results were helpful for understanding the controlling
mechanism of the aromatic chemicals production from lignin pyrolysis.
Importantly, ReaxFF MD simulations of pyrolysis of lignin from varied
sources [303] revealed the roles of oxygen-containing functional groups
that  characterize  the  chemical  structures  and  differences  in  pyrolysis
chemistry,  and  in  doing  so,  demonstrated  ReaxFF  MD  as  a  feasible
approach for fast evaluation of reactivity differences in similar fuel or
energy systems  (e.g., reactivity  differences  of pyrolysis of  RP-1 [304]
and RP-3 [305] between simple surrogate and representative mixture
fuel models).

The initial reaction mechanism of cellulose pyrolysis was studied by
Zheng et al. [306] and a detailed reaction scheme for major pyrolyzates
was  proposed  to  reveal  the  major  pathways  occurring  in  the  initial
thermal  decomposition  of  cellulose  as  seen  in  Fig.  11.  It  is  worth
mentioning  that  they  compared  the  product  evolutions  at  high  tem-
peratures within a short simulation time, as well as those at low tem-
peratures  within  a  long  simulation  time.  They  showed  reasonable
agreement with each other, which proved the validity of widely used
simulation  strategy  of  adopting  artificially  increased  temperatures  in
applications  of  the  ReaxFF  MD  method.  Additionally,  the  very  close
temperature range between their simulations and experiments indicated
that ReaxFF is a promising technique for investigating the chemistry of
pyrolysis of complex molecular systems. Paajanen and Vaari [307] used
cellulose  molecules  with  different  molecular  weights  and  initial  con-
formations to study the kinetics and products of cellulose pyrolysis. The
initial step of the thermal decomposition process was identified and the
calculated  kinetic  parameters  agreed  with  previous  ab  initio  and
experimental results. Furthermore, the kinetic parameters were found to
be independent of the molecular weight and initial conformation.

Moreover, Chen et al. [308] constructed a simplified biomass model
containing all three main constituents of lignin, cellulose and hemicel-
lulose and applied it in the simulations of the pyrolysis and combustion
processes  under  various  oxidative  and  humidity  environments.  From
pyrolysis simulations, it is suggested that the pyrolysis products of each
of the three constituents are similar, and the C–C bonds are more diffi-
cult than the C–O bonds to be broken in the hydrothermal treatment.
H2O atmosphere leads to higher H2  production while CO formation is
increased  under  the  mixed  H2O/O2  atmosphere.  The  primary  finding
from the combustion simulations is that the reactions are faster under
fuel-lean  rather  than  fuel-rich  conditions.  Meanwhile,  more  H2O  and
fewer  H2  are  generated  under  the  O2/CO2  atmosphere  with  the
increasing concentration of CO2. Moreover, the co-pyrolysis mechanism
of seaweed polysaccharides and cellulose are investigated by both ex-
periments and ReaxFF MD simulations [309]. Strong synergistic effects
among seaweed polysaccharide and cellulose molecules are observed,
and it is found that the co-pyrolysis could increase the molecular frag-
ments number, pyrolysis conversion rate, and gas production rate in the
median  temperature  range.  This  research  demonstrated  the  new

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108420

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 11. A reaction scheme of cellulose pyrolysis obtained in ReaxFF MD with the aid of VARxMD. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [306].

pyrolysis method of seaweed and its associated co-pyrolysis mechanism.
Different  from  those  relatively  small  hydrocarbons  mentioned  in
Section  3.1,  coal  and  biomass  are  both  macromolecules  with  huge
molecular  masses  and  complex  structures,  which  require  very  large-
scale  computation  or  simplification  of  the  molecular  structure.
Furthermore, postprocessing of the results is also challenging due to the
huge data sets produced by the MD simulations. Consequently, in-depth
understanding  of  the  reaction  mechanisms  of  such  material  is  still
limited.

4.2. Combustion of energetic materials

The  combustion  of  energetic  materials,  especially  explosives
including  nitromethane  (NM),  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  (RDX),
cyclotetramethylene-tetranitramine  (HMX),
trinitrotoluene  (TNT),
hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane  (CL-20),  pentaerythritol  tetranitrate
(PETN), and triaminotrinitrobenzene (TATB), has recently been inves-
tigated  by  ReaxFF  MD  simulations.  Findings  about  the  fast-changing
reactions  during  the  combustion  process  of  energetic  materials  (usu-
ally  under  extreme  conditions)  are  important  to  improve  the  perfor-
mance and safety during the energetic material combustion.

Han et al. [310] studied the thermal decomposition of NM at high
temperatures  (2000–3000  K).  It  was  found  that  the  decomposition of
NM at 3000 K is initiated by the intermolecular proton transfer leading
to  CH3NOOH  and  CH2NO2,  whereas  the  isomerization  reaction
involving the scission of the C–N bond and the formation of the C–O
bond  to  form  CH3ONO  initiates  the  NM  decomposition  at  2000  and
2500 K. It was reported by Rom et al. [311] that density also affects the
initial  thermal  decomposition  pathways.  Unimolecular  C–N  bond
cleavage dominates the decomposition at low densities and the domi-
nant mechanisms at high densities switch to the H-transfer and/or N–O
bond rupture. The ignition of RDX from hot spots created using a con-
stant temperature thermal pulse was investigated by Joshi and Chaud-
huri [312]. They captured the three stages of the ignition process, i.e.,
thermal initiation, incubation (dominated by intermolecular and intra-
molecular hydrogen transfer reactions) and thermal runaway (accom-
panied by a series of rapid exothermic chemical reactions). Zheng et al.

[313]  studied  the  nanocrystal  effect  on  the  solid  phase  thermal
decomposition of RDX and divided the process into the solid-affected
stage  and  the  following  less-condensed  phase  stage.  It  was  observed
that  the  RDX  decomposition  originates  from  the  inside  of  the  nano-
crystal instead of its surface.The kinetic rate of RDX decay in solid phase
decomposition is faster in smaller sized nano-crystals. In addition to the
pure  RDX,  studies  on  the  thermal  decomposition  of  its  mixture  with
Al-based materials were also covered by ReaxFF MD simulations [314,
315]. HMX has an eight-membered ring structure, which is similar to
RDX (six-membered ring structure). Zhou and Huang [316] examined
the  effects  of  defects  on  thermal  decomposition  of  HMX  and  demon-
strated  that the contribution  of  the  three main  initiation  mechanisms
(N–NO2  bond  dissociation,  HONO  elimination,  and  concerted  ring
fission) is affected by vacancies and varies with temperature. Their re-
sults also showed the accelerated HMX decomposition with increased
reaction rate constant and reduced activation barrier in the presence of
vacancies. Long and Chen [317] conducted a systematic study on the
reaction kinetics of HMX. The obtained detonation velocity and deto-
nation  pressure  (9984  m/s  and  38.3349  GPa)  are  consistent  with
experimental results (9110 m/s and 39.5 GPa) and N2, H2O, and CO2 are
found to be the main products. The thermal decomposition of liquid TNT
indicated  that  unimolecular  C–N  bond  scission  is  dominant  at  low
densities,  whereas  dimer  formation  and  decomposition  to  TNT  de-
rivatives and smaller gas products are main reactions at high densities
[318].  Moreover,  enhanced  carbon-clustering  is  observed  at  higher
densities. Similarly, clusters easily form during the thermal decompo-
sition of CL-20 as the density increases [319]. The thermal decomposi-
tion of CL-20 was found to be initiated by the cleavage of N–NO2 bond
followed by C–N bond breakage, and these initiation reactions are the
same at different temperatures [320]. Increasing the density and tem-
perature  mainly  increase  the  decomposition  rate  of  CL-20.  However,
with  the  introduction  of  high  pressure  or  shock  instead  of  the  direct
cleavage of N–NO2  bond, O atoms tend to transfer to the N atom con-
nected to NO2, leading to the N–NO2 bond breakage. In addition to the
pure  CL-20,  the  thermal  decomposition  of  its  cocrystal  systems  (e.g.,
CL-20/HMX,  CL-20/TNT)  was  also  studied  as  co-crystallization  is  an
effective method to improve the thermal stability of energetic materials.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108421

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 12. Ignition  and oxidation process of ANPs  in a high temperature and pressure oxygen atmosphere. Reprinted with  permission from Ref. [324].  (A colour
version of this figure can be viewed online.)

In accordance with the experimental observations, the ReaxFF MD re-
sults  also  showed  improved  thermal  stability  of  the  cocrystal,  which
could be attributed to the intermolecular interactions between its en-
ergetic components that slowed down the decomposition kinetics of the
cocrystal [321,322].

Aluminum nanoparticles (ANPs) are widely used in propulsion sys-
tems  such  as  solid  rocket  propellants  due  to  its  high  energy  density,
excellent catalytic activity, and low cost. In recent years, ReaxFF MD has
been extensively employed to study the complex combustion reaction of
ANPs. Hong and van Duin [323] investigated the mechanism of oxida-
tion kinetics of ANPs and the oxidation states in the oxide layer, where
they  found  a  three-stage  oxidation  mechanism  and  the  oxidation  of
ANPs was affected by both the temperature and the oxygen gas pressure.
Chu et al. [324] studied the ignition and oxidation of core-shell Al/Al2O3
nanoparticles in a high temperature and pressure oxygen atmosphere.
The whole oxidation process can be divided into four stages as shown in
Fig. 12, i.e., preheating, melting, fast Al core oxidation, and moderate
oxide  shell  oxidation.  The  initial  environmental  temperature  and  the
equivalent pressure had significant impacts on the preheating and the
fast  Al  core  oxidation  was  more  sensitive  to  the  equivalent  pressure.
Additionally,  they  further  proposed  a  size-derived  oxidation  model,
which could conveniently but accurately predict the reaction dynamics
of  ANPs  [325].  The  physicochemical  evolution  of  the  combustion  of
ANPs in three typical oxidizers (CO2, H2O, and O2) was also considered
recently,  and  three  principal  reaction  modes  are  classified,  including
physical adsorption, chemical adsorption, and reactive diffusion [326].
Liu et al. [327] focused on the thermodynamic and structure properties
of core-shell ANPs during the ignition and combustion process. It was
reported that atomic diffusion behaviours and oxygen molecules domi-
nated the combustion process. Moreover, a shorter ignition delay and a
higher combustion temperature were presented in the case of ANPs with
a  thinner  shell,  directly  influencing  the  radiative  heat  transfer  rate
during the combustion process. Zhang et al. [328] proposed a chain-like
oxide nucleation and growth mechanism during the oxidation of ANPs,
which was highly dependent on the oxygen content, temperature, and
nanoparticle size. The origin of the microexplosion-accelerated oxida-
tion mechanism (MEAOM) mentioned experimentally was also clarified
by Li et al. [329] via simulating the direct oxidation of molten ANPs.
They  found  that  the  MEAOM  originated  from  the  self-sustained  fast

evaporation and the fast formation of hot spots and voids. Furthermore,
conditions  of  high  temperature,  dense  O2  and  small  particle  size  are
potentially to obey the MEAOM.

In  addition  to  ANPs,  research  on  combustion  characteristics  of
aluminium hydride (AlH3) has attracted increasing interest in the recent
several years as it is considered to be a promising replacement for Al in
hybrid  and  solid  propellants.  Representative  studies  include  those  by
Luo’s group [330,331]. Briefly speaking, the most apparent difference
between the oxidation of AlH3 and that of Al is that the former involves
the dehydrogenation process. The dehydrogenation and oxidation are
found to proceed simultaneously although the oxidation rate is limited
during the dehydrogenation period, after which is the conventional Al
oxidation stage. Three distinctive stages during the AlH3  oxidation are
observed regarding to the formation of H2 and H2O [330].

Combustion  of  energetic  materials  typically  occurs  under  extreme
conditions, where ReaxFF MD has shown its advantages in capturing the
dynamic processes of fast reactions that are difficult or even impossible
for experimental techniques. Findings at the atomic level revealed by
ReaxFF  MD  provide  valuable  insights  into  combustion  of  energetic
materials in actual applications, which are lacking from experimental
results at low temperatures and/or low pressures. It is worth mentioning
that for combustion of nanoparticles, there may exist a certain critical
size,  below  which  the  nanoparticles  behave  very  differently.  Such  a
critical size varies from one material to another. However, limited by the
computing power, the size of nanoparticles adopted in the majority of
existing ReaxFF MD studies is usually less than 10 nm. Further investi-
gation is needed to clarify whether MD results of such a small size are
representative  of  properties  of  larger  nanoparticles.  Additionally,  MD
simulations of multi-particle combustion systems are desired.

4.3. Catalytic combustion

To assist and enhance the complete combustion of hydrocarbons at
low temperatures, metal-/metal oxide catalysts and supported catalysts
are frequently selected in combustors especially micro-combustors. The
initiation  temperature  and  mechanisms  are  usually  changed  in  the
presence of a catalyst, which enhance the target reaction. Surface re-
actions play a key role during the catalytic process and are the emphasis
of the analysis. Using ReaxFF MD simulations, the dynamic process of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108422

Q. Mao et al.

catalytic reactions, especially those at the interface, can be captured to
uncover  the  underlying  catalytic  mechanisms,  which  could  help  the
design of catalysts. For the catalysts with a support, the synergistic effect
between the catalyst and the support can also be studied.

4.3.1. Metal and metal oxide catalysts

Hydrocarbon  combustion  enhanced  by  metal-based  catalysts  has
been  intensively  studied  via  ReaxFF  since  its  emergence.  Chenoweth
et al. [65] developed a V/C/H/O force field to describe the reactions of
hydrocarbons with vanadium oxide catalysts and validated it by simu-
lating a system of gas methanol exposed to the (001) surface of V2O5. A
preliminary Ni/C/H force field was developed by Mueller et al. [187]
with the purpose of depicting adsorption, decomposition, reformation
and  desorption  of  interactions  between  hydrocarbons  and  nickel  sur-
face.  They  then  used  this  force  field  to  specifically  investigate  the
adsorption  and  decomposition  of  various  hydrocarbons  including
methane, ethyne, ethane, benzene, etc. on a nickel nanoparticle [332].
This force field was later extended to Pt/Ni/C/H/O enabling the study of
heterogeneous catalysis application involving Pt or/and Ni [188], and
subsequently  the  Pt/H/O  force  field  [333].  Goddard  et  al.  [334,335]
determined  the  structures,  mechanisms,  and  kinetics  of  selective
ammoxidation and oxidation of propane over multi-metal oxide (MMO)
catalysts, providing insights into the design of more selective and active
MMO systems. As a part of the ongoing research on methane reforming
by  plasma  catalysis,  Somers  et  al.  [336]  firstly  focused  on  the  in-
teractions  between  CHx  radicals  and  several  nickel  catalyst  surfaces,
where  they  summarized  the  influence  of  temperature  and  surface
structure on the reactions. Catalytic methane combustion is a hot topic
due to its greatest C–H bond strength among all the saturated hydro-
carbons. Mao et al. [18] investigated the catalytic oxidations of methane
over palladium-based nanoparticles with and without oxygen coating,
demonstrating the complete dynamics process of the catalytic reactions
as  well  as  the  calculation  of  activation  energies.  An  investigation  of
catalytic  ethanol  oxidation  over  aluminium  nanoparticles  was  con-
ducted  by  Zhang  et  al.  [337].  They  observed  that  the  initiation  tem-
perature  of  ethanol  oxidation  was  reduced  with  aluminium
nanoparticles and different oxidation states of aluminium nanoparticles
affected the initial reactions of ethanol on the surfaces of nanoparticles.
Additionally, the activation energy was computed to be consistent with
DFT calculations.

4.3.2. Supported catalysts

To promote the accessible surface of a catalyst, supports are used to
increase  the  surface  area  of  catalyst  and  reduce  the  deactivation  of
catalysts through sintering. Senftle et al. [159] employed the integrated
DFT/ReaxFF  method  to  assess  the  stability  and  activity  of  methane
activation at the interface between Pd clusters and a CeO2 support. The
results indicated that methane initiation occurred rapidly in the pres-
ence of Pd mixing with CeO2 lattice and such catalytic sites yielded low
methane  activation  barriers.  Besides  the  metal-oxide  support,  func-
tionalized  graphene  sheet  (FGS)  is  found  to  lower  the  burning  rate
[338]. Therefore, ab initio MD simulations were performed to uncover
the  catalytic  activity  of  FGS  originates  from  lattice  defect  complex
within  the  graphene  sheet,
i.e.,  vacancies  functionalized  with
oxygen-containing  groups,  and  demonstrate  the  detailed  mechanism
[339]. To further identify the effect of functionalities of the FGS on the
catalytic activity, Zhang et al. [340] performed ReaxFF MD simulations
on similar nitromethane/FGS systems. Results revealed the dependency
of catalytic activity on the density of nitromethane, functionalities of the
graphene sheet, and temperature. In addition, pyrolysis and oxidation
mechanisms of the tricyclic hydrocarbon JP-10 on FGS were studied by
ReaxFF  MD  simulations,  where  the  OH  functional  group  on  FGS
enhanced the JP-10 initiation and intermediate reactions by lowering
the energy barrier in contrast to unimolecular decomposition reactions
or through reactions with O2  [341]. Through functionalizing graphene
sheet with both Pt and oxygen-containing groups, Feng et al. [8] showed

much better catalytic effect of Pt@FGS on methane oxidation compared
with  single  Pt  or  FGS  catalyst.  As  indicated  in  Fig.  13,  the  catalytic
methane  oxidation  is  initiated  by  the  cleavage  of  C–H  bond  and  the
production of hydroxyl. The observed H transfer  process suggests the
enhanced  dehydrogenation  of  Pt@FGS  and  interatomic  exchanges
activate the catalytic cycle and dominate the catalytic process. It is also
found that FGS can be further oxidized mostly at the edge of the sheet to
increase the functionality as shown in Fig. 13(b7). Besides promoting
the  oxidation  of  the  small  alkanes,  graphene  oxide  (GO)-based  nano-
composites  are  promising  additives  for  practical  applications  of  ener-
getic materials of RDX [342], which acts not only an excellent support
for nanoparticles, but also promotes the RDX decomposition. The cata-
lytic effect is found to be better at low temperatures than that at high
temperatures, and the primary initiation reactions of RDX are originated
from the functional groups on the GO with H exchanging between the
functional groups on GO and RDX/RDX intermediates.

Aluminosilicate  zeolite  is  another  class  of  support  catalyst  for
chemical  conversions.  A  novel  but  important  reaction  pathway
involving CH3 radical is observed in the methanol conversion olefin over
H-ZSM-5  zeolite  in  addition  to  the  commonly  accepted  formation  of
methoxyl from methanol activation and the popular chain-growth route
resulting from the activation of methanol molecules [202]. It was also
suggested that the rate-determining step for the reactions of methanol to
olefin is not the methanol activation but the C–C chain formation. Chen
et al. [343] studied the catalytic cracking of hexadecane in the presence
of  ZSM-5  catalysts,  namely  ZSM-5,  hydrated  ZSM-5  and  hydrated
Al/ZSM-5.  It  was  revealed  that  the  functionality  of  the  zeolite  and
temperature played vital roles in the generation of different products.
For  instance,  the  surface  hydroxyl  group  on  hydrated  ZSM-5  could
promote the yield of ethylene at higher temperature and the introduc-
tion of aluminium on hydrated ZSM-5 would increase the production of
C3  -  C4  and  prevent  the  formation  of  C–O  bonds  under  lower
temperatures.

With the help of ReaxFF MD simulations, detailed interactions be-
tween the catalyst and reactant can be obtained, which are then used to
develop  the  catalytic  mechanisms. Especially,  the  visualization of  the
dynamic catalytic process produced from the MD trajectory benefits the
understanding of the catalytic reactions, which is also the advantage of
ReaxFF MD for studying catalytic combustion. For supported catalysts,
the  generic  ‘synergistic  effect’  normally  mentioned  in  experimental
studies  is  further  explained  by  showing  the  interactions  between  the
catalyst  and  the  support.  The  influence  of  synergistic  effect  of  the
catalyst on combustion can then be analysed in detail. In spite of these
advantages, due to the complex composition and structure of the cata-
lyst used in some practical or new combustion systems, there may not be
an appropriate force field for ReaxFF MD simulations, when a complex
or novel catalyst is introduced. In this case, either modification/exten-
sion  of  an  existing  force  field  or  development  of  a  new  force  field  is
required to investigate the target system.

5. Mechanism in nanoparticle formation

Combustion of hydrocarbon fuel, fossil fuel, and biomass not only
generates greenhouse gases, but also produces pollutants, such as CO2,
NOx, volatile organic compounds, and, in particular, nano-sized partic-
ulates  (e.g.,  soot)  [1,344].  These  soot  particles  are  notorious  as  envi-
ronmental  and  health  hazards.  Due  to  the  stringent  international
regulations on combustion system emissions, the accurate prediction of
soot formation from various fuel sources is one of the key components
guiding the design of next-generation combustion devices. On the pos-
itive side, the high-temperature combustion environment can be utilized
to  facilitate  the  synthesis  of  functional  nanoparticles  with  specific
properties.  These  designed  nanoparticles  are  potentially  applicable to
medicine, catalysis, electronics, and material science [345]. In flames,
the formation of soot and functional nanoparticles shares high similar-
ity,  which  involves  a  series  of  complex  multiphase,  multiscale

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108423

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 13. Proposed overall catalytic mechanism for methane oxidation catalyzed by Pt@FGS: catalytic mechanisms for (a) Pt and (b) FGS. Reprinted with permission
from literature [8]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

physico-chemical  processes,  including  reaction,  nucleation,  collision,
sintering and coagulation. All of the above processes occur in very small
timescales,  typically  a  few  milliseconds  [345].  The  long  history  of
research  on  soot  formation  has  yielded  many  useful  insights  into  the
synthesis of nanomaterials. Understanding their formation mechanisms
is key to achieving clean combustion through controlling soot formation
and  designing  the  flame  synthesis  of  functional  nanoparticles  for
large-scale industrial application. In this section, we review the progress
in applying the MD method to study soot and nanoparticle formation
mechanisms  of  nucleation,  collision,  sintering,  phase  transformation,
etc. in the high-temperature combustion-related conditions from atomic
and molecular perspectives.

5.1. Soot particle formation

Gaseous  PAHs  are  generally  accepted  as  the  precursor  for  soot
inception. The complexity of the chemical and physical processes during
soot  formation  from  PAH  precursors  makes  it  both  numerically  and
experimentally  challenging  to  establish  a  reliable  model  with  sound
physical meaning to account for the gas-to-particle conversion. From the
experimental perspective, it is difficult to detect the low number density
and short-lived PAHs. From the numerical simulation perspective, the

molecular complexity and the range of time and length scales involved
are beyond the capability of both quantum chemistry calculations and
macroscopic continuum-based simulation approaches. MD, in contrast,
can just fill the gap and shed light on the dynamics of nascent particle
inception. To reveal the underlying mechanism of soot formation, a lot
of theoretical studies have been performed on an atomic or molecular
scale  in  very  recent  years  with  the  aid  of  MD  simulations.  Table  11
summarizes the studies in soot formation in terms of stages in detail.

Table 11
Soot formation processes investigated with the MD method.

Stage

Force field

System

Nucleation

Collision

Sintering
coagulation

isoPAHAPa
OPLS-AA
ReaxFF
PM3
ReaxFF

isoPAHAP
coarse-
grained

pyrene to circumcoronene [346]
PAHs and PAHs with aliphatic chains [119]
naphthalene to circumcoronene [3]
pyrene [2]
naphthalene to coronene molecule/radical [170,
275]
coronene50 clusters [347]
round and flat carbonaceous nanoparticles [348]

a IsoPAHAP force field [349] is developed based on the OPLS-AA force field.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108424

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 14. Nucleation mechanisms of PAHs in homogenous systems from MD simulations [3]. The closed red squares, black stars and blue circles represent physical
nucleation, no nucleation and chemical nucleation, respectively. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [3]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

5.1.1. Nascent soot nucleation

The nucleation (also called inception) is a critical step starting from
gas-phase PAH monomers and yields condensed nascent soot particles.
The  details  of  the  nucleation  of  nascent  soot  particle,  however,  are
poorly understood. There are different proposed assumptions trying to
characterize  this  process.  The  MD  simulations  of  the  formation  of
nascent soot particles from PAHs was first performed by Violi and co-
workers [119]. By tracing the growth of PAHs to dimers and clusters,
it was found that the aliphatic chains attached to aromatics facilitate the
growth  of  soot  particles  at  high  temperatures.  Kraft  and  co-authors
developed  a  transferable  anisotropic  force  field  (isoPAHAP)  based  on
the OPLS-AA force field [349] to study the physical nucleation of PAHs
into  soot  particles  [346]  and  size-dependent  melting  of  PAH  clusters
[350]. The above studies only describe the physical nucleation process
with  classical  MD  simulations.  However,  the  chemical  process  is  also
ubiquitous in soot formation. Mao et al. [3] employed the ReaxFF MD to
investigate the soot formation from simple to complex PAH monomers.
The effect of temperature and PAH mass on soot nucleation mechanism
is shown in Fig. 14. At low temperatures, all types of PAHs experience
physical nucleation and form incipient soot particles comprising locally
stacked  clusters  with  different  orientations.  As  the  temperature  in-
creases, PAH dimers and trimers form but these do not grow further into
nascent soot particles. Large PAH monomers have a higher possibility of
growing into incipient particles than small PAHs due to their stronger
intermolecular  interactions.  The  threshold  lines  dividing  the  physical
nucleation  and  no  nucleation  regimes  agree  well  with  the  boil-
ing/sublimation [351] and feasible dimerization temperatures [1] of the
PAHs from theoretical calculations. At 2500 K, larger PAHs can grow
into incipient particles in stacked structures with ‘carbon bridges’ on the
edge through chemical nucleation. Additionally, PAHs can nucleate to
form  fullerene-like  nascent  particles.  Besides  the  six-membered  aro-
matics, PAHs with five-membered rings are also with significant con-
localization  of  π-electrons  on
centrations.  For
non-hexagonal/rim-based pentagonal rings allows for Kekul ́e aromatic
soot precursors to possess a triplet diradical ground state, which pro-
motes barrierless chain reactions between these reactive sites, and forms
thermally stable aromatic rim-linked hydrocarbons under flame condi-
tions [352,353].

such  PAHs,

It  should  be  noted  that  in  real  combustion  processes,  there  are
abundant reactive species, such as H and OH, which participate in the
reaction with PAHs molecules by generating PAH radicals at a temper-
ature  much  lower  than  their  dehydrogenation  temperature.  These
reactive  species  then  facilitate  the  further  growth of  the  PAH  via  the
HACA route by C2H2, C4H4  or C4H2  additions, as well as the chemical
nucleation  in  a  relatively  low  temperature  region  via  radical-radical
recombination compared to the homogenous nucleation system [354].

Trace metals, such as Na, K, Al, and Fe, are present in practical hydro-
carbon fuels and engine lubricating oils at PPM (Parts Per Million) levels
[355–357],  which  are  equivalent  to  PAHs  in  concentration,  and  may
potentially act as nuclei for the nucleation. A recent study by Mao et al.
[218] indicates that the PAH growth and soot nucleation are enhanced
dramatically in the presence of Fe atoms, which leads to faster growth
and larger clusters compared to the pure PAH system at typical flame
temperatures.  The  pathways  for  PAH  growth  and  soot  nucleation  are
highly  dependent  on  temperature.  At  moderate  temperatures,  soot
nucleation results from both physical and chemical mechanisms, while a
pure chemical mechanism dominates at high temperatures.

In these qualitative studies of soot nucleation, the number density of
gas molecules needs to be set at a level much higher than the realistic
situation in order to enhance the collision time among molecules. Also,
the impact of gas composition is usually ignored. These suggest that the
MD results are better used to gain fundamental insights or guide model
development  rather  than  quantitative  comparison  with  experimental
data.

5.1.2. Collision and dimerization

In soot modelling, the conversion of the gas-phase precursor to the
nascent  soot  particle  is  represented  by  the  PAH  dimerization  with
empirical fitting coefficients for the Brownian motion, while its ratio-
nality is still under debate. Therefore, several studies [2,170,275] have
been  performed  to  reveal  the  dynamics  and  kinetics  of  the  binary
collision of PAHs and its nucleation to soot from the atomic level. The
pioneering study by Frenklach and co-authors [2] utilized MD with the
semi-empirical  parametric  method  3  (PM3)  to  study  the  physical
dimerization  of  pyrene  at  1200  and  1600  K,  and  concluded  that  the
energy transferring from translational energy to internal rotational and
vibrational  energy  helps  to  extend  the  lifetime  of  dimers.  Due  to  the
limited  simulation  time  and  PAH  varieties,  the  reverse  process  of
decomposition, as well as the statistic averaging were not well distin-
guished [2]. To overcome these difficulties, Mao et al. [170] performed
a more systemically study of the dynamics and kinetics of the reversible
homo-molecular PAH dimerization. Due to the intermolecular interac-
tion,  the  enhancement  factors  during  PAH  collisions  decrease  with
increasing PAH size and temperature. Based on the relationship between
the  mean  number  and  lifetime  of  surviving  PAH  dimers,  a  reversible
PAH dimerization model was developed based on forward and reverse
processes.  The  reversible  PAH  dimerization  model  agrees  well  with
experimental  data  in  terms  of  the  PAH  dimerization  trend  [358]  at
different  temperatures.  Results  further  indicate  that  the  physical
dimerization  of  PAHs,  such  as  pyrene  and  coronene,  can  hardly
contribute to soot nucleation at typical flame temperatures. More stable
or  strong  binding  interactions  are  required.  Afterwards,  the  PAH

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108425

Q. Mao et al.

related to the PAH radical concentration.

Moreover, the free energy profiles of homo-molecular dimerization
of oxygenated PAHs were studied by Elvati et al. [118], and the binding
energy is even lower than its corresponding PAH molecules. Besides the
planar PAHs, the curved PAHs (cPAHs) containing integrated pentagons
in soot inception were studied by Martin et al. [359], and the binding
energy as a function of PAH molecular mass is shown in Fig. 15. It is
found  that  the  binding  energy  of  cPAHs  with  one  or  two  pentagonal
rings in homodimers is comparable with that of planar PAH molecules.
However,  for structures with more than three  pentagons, the  binding
energy of  cPAHs  is  significantly lower  than that  of  planar PAHs.  The
homogeneous nucleation of cPAHs at flame temperature is unlikely to be
found in soot formation.

5.1.3. Sintering and coagulation

The  competition  between  collision  and  sintering  of  nascent  soot
particles  determines  nanoparticle  morphology  and  internal  structure.
Chen  et  al.  [347]  indicated  that  the  phase  transformation  also  takes
place during the soot nanoparticle sintering. Specifically, the irregular
spherical nascent soot particle in the liquid phase can transform into a
columnar  particle  in  the  solid  phase.  This  study  interpreted  experi-
mental observations of soot particles, suggesting that small soot particles
are liquid-like, while larger soot particles behave as fractal-like solids
[347]. Later, Hou et al. [360] studied the homogeneous sintering of PAH
clusters with diameters in the range of 3–6 nm and temperature from
300 to 750 K, and found that the sintering rate depends on the melting
point  of  PAH  clusters.  Fig.  16  shows  the  sintering  rate  at  different
temperatures  as  a  function  of  the  dimensionless  surface  area  and  the
centre of mass (COM). When the two PAH clusters are sintering above
(cid:0) 2 ns
the melting point, the characteristic sintering time τs is around 10
and sintering is not affected by the crosslinking level of the PAHs as the
PAH clusters are liquid-like. In contrast, the sintering of two PAH clus-
ters at temperature below the melting point (TMP) can last more than 5
ns, and the sintering process is hindered by the crosslinks between PAH

Fig.  15. Binding  energy  of  flat  and  curved  PAH  molecules  as  a  function  of
molecular mass. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [359].

radical(cid:0) radical  recombination  was  investigated  and  compared  to  the
binary collisions of the corresponding PAH molecules [275]. Similar to
the  dimers  formed  from  the  PAH  molecules,  the  majority  of  binary
collisions  lead  to  the  formation  of  dimers  bound  with  intermolecular
interactions, while few of them are connected through covalent bonds
from radical(cid:0) radical combinations after the collision. The collision ef-
ficiency  for  the  radical(cid:0) radical  recombination  was  found  to  increase
with  increasing  PAH  size,  radical  site,  and  temperature,  while  the
contribution of PAH radical recombination to soot nucleation is strongly

Fig. 16. Evolution of dimensionless surface area (a) and dimensionless COM distance (b) during sintering of two TRIPYR50 at various temperatures. (c) Snapshots of
two TRIPYR50 sintering at t = τs and 5 ns at different temperatures. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [360]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108426

Q. Mao et al.

molecules  within  the  solid-like  PAH  clusters  due  to  enhanced  steric
effect.

The morphology of soot particles may also be affected by the initial
particle  structure.  Violi  and  Izvekov  [361]  studied  the  effect  of  tem-
perature  on  the  coagulation  of  both  round  and  flat  carbonaceous
nanoparticles.  The  stepwise  coagulation  was  characterized  by  firstly
producing spherical particles as coalescence dominates. As the rate of
coalescence becomes lower than the coagulation rate, the aggregates of
primary particles are then formed. Compared to the initial flat carbo-
naceous  nanoparticles,  the  round  nanoparticles  are  more  likely  to
agglomerate,  and  the  agglomeration  is  well  pronounced  at  low
temperatures.

5.1.4. Condensation

Further  growth  of  soot  particles  comes  from  the  condensation  of
gaseous  PAH  molecules  or  radicals.  However,  theoretical  studies  of
condensation are rare and the process is normally assumed to follow the
nucleation  mechanism  in  soot  models  [362,363].  Particularly,  Chung
and Violi [119] selected C180  fullerene to represent the soot particles,
and studied the soot condensation of PAH monomers at different tem-
peratures. Results from the study imply that fullerenes have a limited
effect  on soot  nucleation as  PAHs  cover the  first layer  of  fullerene in
most cases, while a second or third layer of PAHs is only detected at low
temperatures. However, for more realistic soot particles, the surface is
not entirely clean and there are some aliphatic chains, which may pro-
mote the interface reactions and condensation of gaseous PAHs.

5.2. Functional nanoparticle synthesis

Flame synthesis has become an industrial method to produce func-
tional  nanomaterials  with  the  advantages  of  high-throughput,  large-
scale,  and  single-step  process  [345,364].  The  formation  of  functional
nanoparticles  in  the  high-temperature  flame  environment  is,  to  some
extent, similar to that of soot. The chemical reaction of the precursor
occurs  almost  simultaneously  with  flame  reactions,  which  generates
is  an
monomers.  The  nucleation  of  metal-oxide  monomers
enthalpy-driven process and thermodynamically favoured, which usu-
ally occurs instantaneously and exhibits different behaviour from PAH
nucleation that is driven by entropy [1]. The generated primary particles
then collide and sinter into spherical nanoparticles or nano-aggregates.
The performance of nanoparticles depends on their morphology, crys-
talline and lattice structure. The phase transformation and crystalliza-
tion  of  nanoparticles  are  reported  to  take  place  during  the  sintering
process, while the final nanoparticle morphology depends significantly
on  the  competition  between  collision  and  sintering.  A  better  under-
standing of formation processes of functional nanoparticles can guide
the  selection  of  precursors  and  the  design  of  reactors  with  the
well-defined temperature- and species-time history. As these processes
occur at nano or even smaller scales, direct experimental observations
are challenging. MD simulations play a unique role in studying these key
processes. Examples of the MD investigations of functional nanoparticle
formation are listed in Table 12 according to stages.

Table 12
Nanoparticle formation stages investigated with the MD method.

Stage

Force field

System

Reaction and Nucleation

Collision
Sintering

Sintering-induced crystallization and

phase transformation

ReaxFF
ReaxFF
Matsui-Akaogi
Matsui-Akaogi

Stillinger–Weber
Matsui-Akaogi

Matsui-Akaogi
Matsui-Akaogi

H2O and TTIP [365]
C–TiO2 [46]
anatase [366]
anatase/rutile [91,
219,367–369]
silicon [146]
anatase, rutile,
amorphous [370]
anatase [90]
anatase [47]

5.2.1. Precursor reaction and particle nucleation

(cid:0) 15–10

As most precursor reactions and nanoparticle nucleation proceed at
extremely  small-time  scales.  Take  TiO2  nanoparticle  formation  as  an
example, the time scale of the hydrolysis reaction of precursor titanium
(cid:0) 12  s. The experimental
tetraisopropoxides (TTIP) is between 10
study  [371]  and  quantum  theories  like  DFT,  transition-state,  RRKM
theory [372] have contributed to determining the reaction kinetics of
TTIP  reaction.  To  figure  out  the  detailed  evolution  from  precursor
molecules to nanoclusters, Wei et al. [365] investigated the hydrolysis
reaction of TTIP in the H2O environment via the ReaxFF MD simulation,
which reveals the complete dynamic process of TTIP conversion at the
atomic  level.  By  fitting  the  molecule  number  of  TTIP  and  H2O  to  a
second-order reaction model, the global reaction rate constant of TTIP
hydrolysis at 1 atm was identified. Moreover, two key reaction pathways
are elucidated according to the evolution of main decomposition prod-
ucts, which involve the dissociation of a C–O bond in TTIP to form in-
termediate Ti-containing species and TiO2, and the combination via the
formation of Ti–O–Ti bridges by generating clusters with CxHy groups. In
addition  to  the  precursor  reactions,  the  nucleation  mechanisms  of
nascent TiOx  nanoparticles are  also of interest. Via developing a  new
Ti/C/H/O ReaxFF force field, Hou et al. [373] revealed the inception
mechanism of TTIP precursor droplet conversion to Ti-containing clus-
ters in O2 rich and lean conditions as shown in Fig. 17. Results suggest
that high pyrolysis temperature does not necessarily promote the for-
mation of incipient Ti-containing clusters, due to less stable Ti–O bonds
at high temperatures. The concentration of TiO2  increases in the con-
dition  with  ambient  O2.  Furthermore,  decreasing  high-temperature
residence time boosts the formation of Ti-containing clusters by facili-
tating the condensation of TiO2 vapours.

Besides gas-phase reactions, heterogeneous reactions that are related
to the surface growth and coating also play an important role in particle
formation. Hou et al. [46] utilized ReaxFF MD to gain atomic insights
into  the  carbon  coating  process  on  the  TiO2  nanoparticle.  Both  small
aliphatic molecules like C1–C4 species and large PAHs have been placed
around  the  TiO2  nanoparticle  for  surface  coating.  Both  physical  and
chemical  adsorption  processes  can  be  identified  by  cluster  analysis
based on the minimum distance between two atoms together with spe-
cies  analysis  based  on  the  bond  order  in  the  ReaxFF  force  field.  The
optimal coating temperature is T ≤ 1200 K due to the unstable bonds
between C and Ti/O. In addition, for T ≥ 1500 K, hydrocarbon molecules
can  nucleate  to  soot  clusters  rather  than  coating  on  TiO2.  This  work
shows the ability of the MD method in optimizing reaction conditions
and guiding experimental investigations.

5.2.2. Collision of nanoparticles

Particle collisions in the flame environment are mainly governed by
Brownian motion. The Brownian collision rate is significantly enhanced
by  van  der  Waals  interactions  between  nanoparticles.  Marlow  [374]
derived  a  rigorous  expression  for  the  enhancement  factor  by  van  der
Waals interaction in the free molecular and transition regimes. For ionic
crystals, the effect of long-range Coulombic interaction is quite complex.
Intensive  studies  on  the  collision  dynamics  and  kinetics  have  been
performed  by  Li  and  co-authors  [366,375].  Through  simulating  a
spherical nanoparticle, the asymmetric distribution of Ti and O ions on
the nanoparticle surface results in permanent dipoles that are approxi-
mately proportional to the surface area in magnitude [375]. As shown in
Fig.  18,  the  Coulombic  dipolar  interaction  is  orders  of  magnitude
stronger than the van der Waals interaction at long-range distances. The
time-averaged dipole moment decreases from 60 D (Debye) at 1673 K to
2.1 D at 273 K for a 3 nm TiO2 nanoparticle. Zhang et al. [366] further
quantified  the  enhancement  effect  of  collisional  rate  caused  by  the
permanent dipoles of nanoparticles. The enhancement factor was eval-
uated by the relationship between the critical capture radius of nano-
particles and dipole orientations. For 2 nm TiO2 NPs at 273 K, the MD
simulation predicts an average enhancement factor of about 8.59, which
is  much  greater  than  the  value  of  3.78  when  only  the  van  der  Waals

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108427

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 17. Illustration of the inception mechanism of TiO2  from TTIP droplets at high temperature reactors. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [373]. (A colour
version of this figure can be viewed online.)

process cannot be considered as elastic or hard spheres as in the con-
tinuum regime, but must be treated as being composed of atoms and
molecules  as  in  MD.  Koparde  and  Cummings  [367]  investigated  the
initial stage of sintering of anatase and rutile, and it was found that neck
formation  takes  place  upon  the  first  contact  between  the  two  nano-
particles,  followed  by  broadening  of  the  neck  region.  The  relative
orientation  between  the  two  nanoparticles  due  to  the  dipole-dipole
interaction  strongly  influences  the  shrinkage  of  the  particle  neck.
Zachariah and Carrier [146] found that the sintering time and particle
morphology are highly sensitive to the temperature, which determines
whether the particle is solid-like or molten. Zhang et al. [219] revealed
the effect of size-dependent particle structure on the sintering process.
For a single anatase nanoparticle below the melting point, the particle
exhibits a core-shell structure with the crystalline structure in the centre
surrounded by an amorphous shell. When the diameter of the anatase
particle is below 2.4 nm, atoms located in the highly-curved amorphous
shell can weaken the lattice structure in the crystal cores, so that the
entire nanoparticle is amorphous. Therefore, the sintering between 2 nm
particles is viscous-controlled, while the 3 nm nanoparticle is initially
controlled by surface diffusion at the first stage and then dominated by
the grain-boundary diffusion at the late stage.

To better understand the sintering process at the late stage, Mao et al.
[90]  and  Buesser  et  al.  [369]  extended  the  MD  simulation  time  to
hundreds  of  nanoseconds  and  obtained  the  full  picture  of  the  nano-
particle sintering process. As seen in Fig. 19, the sintering neck begins to
grow from 0.14 to 1 ns dominated by the grain diffusion mechanism,
resulting  in  the  reduction  of  the  surface  area  and  the  increase  of  the
temperature. During 1~10 ns, some atoms in the former grain boundary
and  surface  region  diffuse  to  the  initially  concave  region  between
nanoparticles,  contributing  to  the  neck  growth  as  well  as  the  overall
structural transition from ellipsoid to the sphere, accompanied by the
further rising of the temperature. Finally, the structure of the sintered
nanoparticle tends to approach a spherical shape slowly from 10 to 140
ns,  as  the  temperature  history  remains  constant  before  increasing
slightly from 40 to 120 ns due to phase transformation, which will be
discussed in the next part, and plateaus afterword.

The  sintering rate  is  a  parameter  useful  in  design of  processes  for
large scale manufacture and processing of nanoparticles. Buesser et al.
[369]  quantitatively  determined  the  sintering  rate  by  monitoring  the
evolution of the surface area of two sintering particles at various initial
sizes  by  MD  simulations.  When  particle  goes  to  nanoscale,  the
MD-obtained sintering rates were smaller than that predicted by theory

Fig.  18. Interaction  forces  between  two  co-oriented  3  nm  TiO2  nanoparticle
during the approaching process. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [375]. (A
colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

interaction is considered. Nevertheless, this enhancement drops quickly
with increasing temperature as the time-averaged permanent dipole is
weakened due to increased thermal fluctuations. In addition, this effect
is  more  dominant  for  smaller  particles  due  to  a  larger  ratio  of
dipole-dipole to van der Waals interaction. This long-range interaction
induced by particle permanent dipole effect, initially discovered in MD
simulations, has been indirectly validated by an experimental study of
nanoparticle  deposition,  in  which  the  thermophoretic  velocity  is
size-dependent and cannot be completely attributed to the vdW inter-
action [376].

5.2.3. Sintering dynamics

The  dynamic  sintering  process  is  influenced  by  viscous  diffusion,
surface diffusion, volume diffusion, evaporation, condensation, and so
on [377], which is strongly influenced by the sintering temperature and
the melting point of sintering particles. Moreover, the sintering mech-
anisms  of  nanoparticles  are  radically  different  from  large  particles,
exhibiting a strong size effect. Therefore, nanoparticles in the sintering

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108428

Q. Mao et al.

Mao et al. [90] found the formation of the brookite phase during the
sintering of two anatase nanoparticles and analysed the detailed phase
transformation process. By calculating the ratio of O–Ti–O bond angles,
a  bond-angle  distribution  criterion  was  proposed  to  identify  local  in-
formation  on  the  three  polymorphs  of  TiO2  nanoparticles.  As  seen  in
Fig. 20, a grain boundary is formed in the contact region where atoms
are amorphous without crystal structures, which agrees with the pro-
posed  phase  transformation  site  from  the  experiment  [378].  Phase
transformation begins at 40 ns and can be divided into three stages. In
the first stage from 40 to 50 ns, the size of the brookite nuclei reaches the
critical  value  in  the  grain  boundary  region  and  grows  rapidly.  In  the
second  stage  from  50  to  70  ns,  as  the  temperature  rises,  the  original
crystal  core  of  the  left  nanoparticle  melts  and  transforms  into  the
amorphous structure. Finally, in the third stage from 70 to 140 ns, the
new crystal phase engulfs the crystal core of the right nanoparticle. It
should
a
thermodynamic-favoured process as the potential energy of brookite is
lower  than  anatase.  However,  from  the  kinetic  perspective,  the  new
phase cannot appear if there is no nucleation site in the grain boundary
region.

transformation

phase

noted

that

the

be

is

Ren et al. [47] further discovered that the sintering process can also
generate  the  nascent  nanocrystal  when  two  amorphous  nanoparticles
coagulate. The crystallization is caused by the size-dependent particle
structure. For large nanoparticles with crystal structures, the transition
is  essentially  a  crystalline-melting  process.  For  small  nanoparticles,
there exists a size-dependent amorphous-crystalline transition line that
distinguishes  nanocrystals  and  amorphous  clusters.  The  crystalization
occurs after the nanoparticle has fully coalesced into a spherical particle.
The ordered atoms with low levels of the local Lindemann index first
occur occasionally on the surface of the coalesced nanoparticle. These
ordered atoms serve as the crystal nuclei, which quickly expands to the
whole region of the nanoparticle.

6. Fluid mechanics and energy application

Due  to  high  computational  costs,  MD  simulations  have  been  con-
ducted for relatively small systems in terms of the number of atoms and
molecules  within,  until  very  recently.  Applications are  first  found  for
liquid droplets and solid particles, which are highly concentrated. Many
more atoms and molecules are needed to simulate field quantities, like a
fluid flow. With the rapid expansion in supercomputing capabilities in
the past decade, it is now feasible to simulate flow, multiphase flow, heat
transfer and other complex phenomena related to energy systems using
the MD method. In this section, we look at such applications in energy
conversion systems and highlight important recent developments.

6.1. Fluid mechanics

In continuum fluid dynamics, the macroscopic conservation laws (e.

Fig.  19. Temporal  evolution  of
the  corresponding
morphology  changes  of  two  equal-sized  anatase  from  cross-sectional  views,
with Ti and O atoms initially (t = 0 ns) coloured green and red (core) or blue
and navy (surface), respectively. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [90]. (A
colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

temperature  and

developed for large particles. They additionally extracted an expression
for the sintering rate of rutile TiO2  nanoparticles, which facilitates the
fundamental development of phenomenological models.

5.2.4. Sintering-induced phase transformation and crystallization

The  phase  transformation  and  crystallization  take  place  accompa-
nied by the sintering. Koparde and Cummings [370] first reported this
phenomenon  of two nanoparticles with different crystals. They found
that  the  presence  of  a  rutile  seed  in  the  system  leads  to  the  phase
transformation into the rutile phase. However, the brookite phase forms
during  the  sintering  between  anatase  and  amorphous  nanoparticles.

Fig. 20. Simulation snapshots of the sintering process of the two equal-sized 2.5 nm nanoparticles at T0 = 1473 K. The local structure information of Ti and O atoms
are reflected through different colors on Ti atoms. Reprinted with permission from Refs. [90,379]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108429

Q. Mao et al.

g., Navier-Stokes equations) are solved to give flow properties such as
velocities and density on a grid, which represent ensemble averages of
millions to billions of molecules. In MD, velocities and positions of in-
dividual  atoms  and  molecules  are  directly  obtained,  from  which
macroscopic  properties  are  extracted.  Such  an  approach  allows  us  to
gain a deep understanding of the microscopic mechanisms behind the
macroscopic  manifestations.  Atomic  descriptions  enable  us  to  under-
stand continuous flow phenomena from a new point of view. In this part,
specific  MD  protocols  to  simulate  flow  dynamics  will  be  highlighted,
followed by examples showing how MD simulations are used to cope
with  flow  dynamics  problems.  As  an  important  branch  of  fluid  me-
chanics, studies on droplet dynamics, especially droplet collision, which
is intimately related to many natural and industrial processes, are also
summarized.

6.1.1. Nanoscale fluid dynamics

MD reveals dynamic behaviours of fluids at atomic and molecular
scales,  which  can  provide  valuable  insights  into  nanoscale  fluid  dy-
namics that are not accessible to other methods. In the following sub-
sections,  we  show  several  typical  applications  of  MD  in  nano-flow
research.

6.1.1.1. Near-wall flow. In the study of boundary layers and fluid-solid
interactions, a perennial question is whether or not the flow slips over
the  solid  wall.  In  the  continuum-based  CFD,  the  ‘no-slip’  boundary
condition is usually applied. While this is accurate enough for flow over
a smooth wall under normal conditions, it is a questionable treatment
for  flow  in  nano-channels,  over  complex  surfaces,  or  under  extreme
conditions.  In  MD  simulations,  both  the  fluid  and  the  wall  comprise
individual  molecules  in  motion,  without  the  need  for  a  ‘no-slip’
assumption. Previous MD studies have shown how the solid surface is
modelled critically affects the slip condition at the wall [380–382]. In
early studies, only two-body interactions (i.e., LJ potential) are consid-
ered,  each  wall  atom  is  attached  to  a  lattice  site  with  a  harmonic
constraint  from the  fixed  site,  so  that the  wall  atoms  could exchange
energy and momentum with the fluid. By changing the parameters of
solid  and  fluid  interactions  and  choosing  a  proper  spring  constant,  a
no-slip boundary condition [380], a stick-slip boundary condition [381]
and immobilised layers at the wall [382] can be realized, respectively.
As an alternative to a spring, one can assign a very heavy mass to the first
few layers of wall molecules, which allows the wall atoms to move in the
vicinity of the lattice and exchange momentum and energy with fluid
[383].

With more realistic force fields, the treatment of wall atoms can be

simpler and more straightforward. In the first report of a realistic force
field to fluid dynamics, the many-body bond-order Tersoff-Brenner po-
tential allowed the construction of an accurate structure of graphene and
thereby a slip length to be calculated [384]. Flow over more complex
surfaces, e.g., cell membrane, can also be tackled using large-scale MD
simulations.  In  recent  studies  [385–387],  a  CHARMM  force  field
together with the TIP3P water model was applied to investigate the flow
dynamics over a cell membrane decorated with soft and flexible struc-
tures. The complex bio-flow system is schematically shown in Fig. 21(a),
and  the  shear  stress  distributions  in  three  different  layers  above  the
membrane surface  are  compared in Fig. 21(b).  In this system,  a total
number of about six million atoms have been included.

6.1.1.2. Flow  in  nanochannels. A central question in nanofluidics con-
cerns the extent to which continuum theories describing fluid-wall in-
teractions  hold  at  the  nanoscale.  Nanochannels,  such  as  biological
channels  and  carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs),  feature  ultra-high  surface-to-
volume ratios and ultra-small channel pore sizes. Under the confinement
of nanochannels, fluid molecules are in close contact with channel wall
atoms. Such intensive contacts could lead to exceptionally different flow
behaviours  and  even  different  bulk  flow  properties.  MD  studies  have
revealed that water molecules form a single file when passing through
an aquaporin [388] (a water channel on the cell membrane) or a CNT
with a molecular-level diameter [389], as shown in Fig. 22. The one-file
continuous  transport  of  water  molecules  is  maintained  by  the
hydrogen-bonding  network  and  the  interactions  between  water  and
channel atoms. In the carbon nanotube study, the attraction between the
tube  wall  and  water  is  artificially  reduced,  and  the  pore  hydration
properties have been dramatically changed as seen in Fig. 21(b) [389].
MD results also suggest that flow in CNTs has some unique properties,
like inhomogeneous layout [390], modified effective viscosity [391] and
ultra-fast transport [392,393]. Specific features and unique phenomena
of nanoscale fluid dynamics in nanochannels are intensively reviewed in
Refs. [394,395].

The  challenges  of  using  MD  to  study  flow  problems  are  manifold:
first, to successfully predict the fluid behaviour, the molecular models of
the  channels  or  the  interfaces  are  required.  The  difficulty  in  model
construction  aggravates  when  the  flow  surface  or  flow-solid  interface
has  complex  chemical  composition;  second,  accurate  calculations  of
intermolecular  interplay  or  forces  are  determined  by  force  field  pa-
rameters,  and  the  availability  of  such  force  field  parameters  is  not
assured;  third,  to  cover  the  sheer  size  of  the  flow,  the  considerable
simulation  domain  and  the  number  of  atoms  require  significant
computational resources, and to the post-process of the unprecedented

Fig. 21. Flow over a complex cell surface decorated with soft and flexible structures. (a) The complex cell surfaces. Water molecules are partially shown. In this
research, external forces are imposed on water oxygen atoms to generate flow. (b) Hierarchical flow shear stresses in the three regions labelled wg, d, and f. Reprinted
with permission from Ref. [385]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108430

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 22. Water pass throw nanochannels in a single file. (a) Water molecules in aquaporin. (b) Water molecules in CNT. Reprinted with permission from Refs. [388,
389]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

Fig. 23. Nanoscale and macroscale droplet collision regime maps under different pressures. (a) Nanoscale droplet collision regime map with droplet images after
collision. (b) Macroscale droplet collision regime map. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [50]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

information generated from the MD data requires intelligent data pro-
cessing techniques [396,397].

6.1.2. Droplet dynamics

Droplet  collisions  have  been  extensively  investigated  via  experi-
ments and a variety of numerical simulations such as volume of fluid
[398], moving particle semi-implicit method [399] and LBM [22]. Ex-
periments have identified four distinct regimes for macroscale head-on
hydrocarbon  droplet  collisions:  bounce,  coalescence,  separation  and
shattering [400]. At the nanoscale, the approaching droplets are within
a  distance comparable to the molecular mean free  path, and head-on
droplet collisions  exhibit different collision regimes.  The coalescence,
bounce  and  shattering  regimes  of  the  macroscale  head-on  droplet

collisions  are  also  revealed  at  the  nanoscale  by  MD  studies  [50,398,
401–403]. A stretching separation regime [403] or a hole regime [50]
(whether it is a stretching separation or a hole regime depends on initial
setups)  at  the  nanoscale  is  substituted  for  the  macroscale  separation
regime. Whether the droplet collision follows a certain regime depends
on many factors, such as the existence of ambient gases, pressure, impact
velocities  and  so  on.  Fig.  23  shows  the  collision  regimes  classified  in
terms of pressure and Weber number [50]. Moreover, the collision re-
gimes as well as the regime boundaries at the nano- and macro-scales are
distinctively different with the holes regime separating coalescence and
shattering at nanoscale, which is the separation regime at macroscale.
Despite the above studies, our current understanding of nanoscale
droplet  collisions  is  still  very  limited.  Many  factors,  such  as  the  off-

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108431

Q. Mao et al.

centre  distance  between  the  approaching  droplets,  the  approaching
velocity, the property of the liquid droplets and the surrounding gases,
and the temperature and pressure, are influential and need to be studied
systematically. Current MD studies of droplet collisions have covered a
very small portion of this vast parameter space. A recent MD study has
revealed that droplet coalescence is initiated by thermal motion [404],
which adds the thermal effect to the already complicated problem. In a
very  different  configuration,  droplet  collisions  on  the  substrate  have
been  investigated  using  the  MD  method  [405].  Remarkably,  the
colliding droplets lift off from the substrate at high Reynolds number
conditions,  which can be attributed to the momentum transfer  to the
vertical direction after the collision due to the steric hindrance of the
substrate and the repelling force from the substrate.

6.2. Heat transfer, phase change and energy conversion

6.2.1. Heat transfer

The MD method can be classified in equilibrium MD (EMD) and non-
equilibrium MD (NEMD) in terms of the system state. As self-explained,
the system reaches thermodynamic equilibrium in the EMD simulation,
the  EMD  method  is  used  for  a  wide  spectrum  of  purposes,  e.g.,  to
determine  physical  properties  and  to  explore  system  stability.  In  an
NEMD simulation, the system is away from thermodynamic equilibrium,
such as in a fluid flow system, in heat transfer and mass transfer pro-
cesses. Both EMD and NEMD simulations have been applied to deter-
mine the thermal conductivity of materials. In EMD, the integral of a
time-correlation  function  of  microscopic  heat  flux  is  calculated  first,
and  thermal  conductivity  is  then  obtained  by  a  Green-Kubo  formula
[406]. In NEMD simulations, the calculation of thermal conductivity is
more straightforward and can be obtained via Fourier’s  law after the
temperature gradient is measured in the non-equilibrium states [407].
The thermal conductivity from these two methods should be consistent
and agree with experimental results, as proved by Schelling et al. [261]
in a comparative study for the of bulk silicon.

Fundamental  problems  in  heat  transfer  investigated  by  MD

Conditions

subcritical
conditions
subcritical
conditions
–

subcritical and
supercritical
conditions

Table 13
Droplet evaporation investigated by the MD method.

Fluid type

Force field

Argon [414,415]

LJ 12-6

Ethanol

LJ fluid

LJ 12-6 and
Coulombic
LJ 12-6

Xenon [419],

LJ 12-6

n-dodecane

OPLS-UA

United
Atom Model

n-heptane, n-dodecane,
and n-hexadecane

United
Atom Mode

multi-component fuel

TraPPE-UA

(isooctane, n-
dodecane and n-
hexadecane) droplet

multi-component fuel

TraPPE-UA

(toluene, n-decane, n-
dodecane, n-
tetradecane, n-
hexadecane and n-
octadecane) droplet

Computational
details

5768 - 51105
argon atoms [415]
8180 molecules
[416]
>106 atoms [417]
8000–14000 atoms
[418]
5662 molecules
[419]
4800 molecules
[420]
12,455 - 106,143
n-dodecane
molecules [4]
1200 n-dodecan
molecules
36,000 nitrogen
[421]
1830 isooctane,
5987 n-dodecane,
11,998 n-
hexadecane,
>2,000,000 N2
molecules [5]
~20,000 fuel
molecules
>2,600,000 N2
molecules [6]

simulations  include  liquid-solid  contact  phenomena  (such  as  wetting
[408]  and  nucleation  [409])  at  the  nanoscale  level,  heat  transfer  in
three-phase lines (e.g. evaporation [410]) and the effect of the surfac-
tant on the heat and mass transfer through liquid-vapor interface [411].
In a recent review [412], understandings of important processes in heat
transfer,  e.g.  liquid-vapor  interface,  solid-liquid-vapor  interactions,
nucleation and phase change, and coalescence at the nanoscales have
been systematically summarized.

6.2.2. Phase change

In  the  phase  diagram,  phase  changes  occurring  at  the  three-phase
boundary lines (evaporation, condensation and solidification) are sin-
gular  phenomena.  Among  the  three  types  of  phase  changes,  droplet
evaporation occurs in many liquid-fueled propulsion systems, such as
diesel engines, jet engines and rocket engines, and has a major influence
on  the  mixture  formation  and  the  subsequent  combustion  process.
Evaporation  of  different  fluids  has  been  extensively  explored  by  MD
simulations. Table 13 summarizes the existing studies on droplet evap-
oration in terms of fluid types. It is worthwhile to mention that MD is
particularly  powerful  and  convenient  to  study  evaporation  of  single-
component  fuels  [4,413]  and  multi-component  fuels  [5,6]  under
subcritical and supercritical conditions compared with continuum-based
methods. Fig. 24 displays a regime diagram for n-dodecane droplet, and
the curve defines a boundary between the subcritical and supercritical
evaporation regimes [4]. It indicates that the minimum ambient pres-
sure  needed  for  supercritical  transition  decreases  with  increasing
ambient temperature. For MD, subcritical and supercritical conditions
are just the results of changes in molecular/atomic velocities and rela-
tive positions; however, for continuum-based methods, different sets of
physical properties under sub- and supercritical conditions are required,
and theories about the transient process are still unclear.

6.2.3. Batteries and fuel cells

6.2.3.1. Batteries. Batteries  convert  chemical  energy  directly  to  elec-
trical  energy  or  vice  versa  through  electrochemical  reactions.  Each
battery cell basically consists of an anode and a cathode, with an elec-
trolyte  and  often  a  separator  in  between.  During  the  battery’s  use
(discharge), an oxidation reaction happens at the anode (the negative
electrode), which produces electrons and positive charged ions (called
cations).  The  electrons  flow  along  an  external  circuit  to  the  anode,
generating electrical currents. In the meantime, the cations flow through
the  electrolyte  to  recombine  with  the  electrons  at  the  cathode  (the
positive electrode) via a reduction reaction. For a rechargeable battery
cell, the above processes are reversed during charge, by means of which
electrical  energy  is  stored  as  chemical  energy  in  the  cell.  The  exact
electrochemical  reactions  depend  on  the  materials  used  for  the  elec-
trodes and electrolyte. The elctrolye may be a liquid, gel or solid (such as
metal). As the physical, chemical and electrical processes in a working
cell  are  dynamic  behaviors  happening  at  atomic  or  even  subatomic
scales,  direct  experimental  observations  would  be  difficult  or  incom-
plete. On the other hand, modeling and simulation methods offer unique
advantages as a research tool and complement experimental studies. Tan
et al. [422] provides an overview of atomistic, mesoscopic and macro-
scopic modeling approaches to lithium batteries, although they focused
on macroscopic modeling of lithium-air batteries. Multiscale modeling
approaches to rechargeable  batteries were comprehensively discussed
by Franco et al. [423] covering AIMD, ReaxFF and classical MD, CGMD
and kinetic MC (kMC). Recently, Shi et al. [424] provided a mini-review
of ReaxFF MD application in the study of lithium batteries. Sun et al.
[425] gave a comprehensive review of research on lithium metal bat-
teries using a variety of MD methods.

In  recent  years,  lithium-ion  batteries  (LIBs)  have  received  most
attention  as  power  sources  for  portable  electronic  devices  and  poten-
tially for electric vehicles. Significant progresses in the specific energy

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108432

Q. Mao et al.

Fig. 24. (a) The configuration of the nanodroplet evaporation. (b) supercritical and subcritical evaporation regimes for medium-size droplet on the p-T diagram. The
dots indicate the investigated cases with the ambient temperature and pressure combinations. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [4]. (A colour version of this
figure can be viewed online.)

density and lifespan have been achieved through advances in materials
for the anode and the cathode and in performances of the electrolyte.
Further  improvement  in  battery  performance,  safety  and  lifetime  de-
pends  on  thorough  understanding  and  manipulation  of  materials  and
processes at the atomic and molecular levels, which is greatly facilitated
by  atomistic  simulations.  The  demand  for  atomic-level  insights  is
equally high for other types of batteries such as metal-sulfur, metal-air
batteries, all-solid-state LIBs [426].

-  Cathodes and Anodes: The performance of LIBs crucially depends
on the material and structure of cathodes and anodes, especially the
cathodes. Ideal electrodes have high capacity, voltage, electronic and
ionic conductivity while providing mechanical and thermal stability.
The earliest and most widely used cathode material is the layered
lithium transition metal oxides such as LiCoO2 (LCO). Newer mate-
rials include LiNiCoAlO2  (NCA), LiNiCoMnO2  (NMC) and LiMn2O4
(LMO), which offer improved properties in one way or another. A
common  feature  of  these  materials  is  that  their  structure  remains
largely  unchanged  during  charge  and  discharge,  which  provides
good stability and cyclability. These are collectively called interca-
lation compounds. Intercalation is the process whereby Li ions are
inserted  into  the  cathode  structure  during  discharge,  while  dein-
tercalation is the reverse process during charge. These processes are
called lithiation and delithiation as far as Li-ion batteries are con-
cerned.  As  their  structure  provides  limited  sites  for  lithium  ions,
intercalation compounds suffer from low capacity and energy den-
sity. To improve capacity, conversion compounds such as transition
metal  oxides,  sulfides  and  fluorides  are  utilized,  which  undergo
substantial  structural  changes  during  charge  and  discharge.  Such
structural  changes  allow  far  more  lithium  ions  to  be  inserted  or
extracted, leading to potentially an order of magnitude increase in
capacity. However, the associated volume expansion or contraction
reduces mechanical stability and cyclability of electrodes, although
such  issues  may  be  addressed  through  the  use  of  functionalized
nanoparticles. It is clear that complex processes (e.g., electronic and
ionic  transport,  electrochemical  reactions,  structural  and  phase
changes) occur at the electronic, atomic and molecular levels that
call  for atomistic  simulation approaches.  The structural  properties
and electrochemical reactions of a small system, for example, can be
reliably  investigated  using  DFT  calculations,  which  determine  the
crystal structure (for solid electrodes) [427] charge distribution and
voltage profile, etc. [428]. AIMD can extend the simulations to a few
hundred atoms for sub-nanoseconds, which is sufficient to investi-
gate  mechanisms  of  ionic  conductivity  and  migration  such  as  ion

hops in fast ionic conductor materials [262]. ReaxFF MD, further-
more,  can  simulate  realistic  processes  such  as  the  electrochemical
behaviors in lithium-sulfur battery cathodes [429]. Moreover, elec-
tronic  conductivity,  ionic  diffusivity,  mechanical  stability,  phase
stability  and  thermal  stability,  which  happen  at  relatively  large
length and time scales, can be calculated by ReaxFF MD [194]. Ponce
and Seminario [430] conducted ReaxFF MD simulations of the lith-
iation  process  of  lithium-sulfur-graphene  compounds,  showing
structural and density differences between slow and fast charge. A
comprehensive review of atomistic approaches to cathode materials
of LIBs is given by Ma [431] and to anode materials by Wang et al.
[432]. These studies not only improve fundamental understanding of
the  complex  physicochemical  processes  but  also  provide  guidance
for the design of high-performance electrodes.

-  Electrolytes: An electrolyte is a central component of a battery cell
that  facilitates  ion  transport  while  providing  mechanical,  thermal
and electrochemical stability. A variety of materials have been used
for  electrolytes  in  liquid,  gel  or  solid  state  in  combination  with
different  types  of  salts  and  organic  solvents.  Atomistic  simulation
methods  are  suitable  for  investigating  ion-ion,  ion-solvent,  ion-
polymer  interactions;  and  predicting  thermal  stability  and  ionic
conductivity of electrolytes. DFT calculations have been conducted
to study cation-anion interactions for a variety of salts, showing that
electrolytes based on sodium salts, with appropriate matching sol-
vents,  should  have  higher  a  conductivity  than  those  based  on  the
corresponding lithium salts [433]. The mobility of Li-ions in lithium
hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) in ethylene carbonate has been quan-
tified  by  classic  MD  in  combination  with  many-body  polarizable
force fields, reaching good agreement with experimental data [434].
Classic  and ReaxFF  MD has been  applied by  Gao  and Lu  [435] to
predict  the  ionic  diffusivity  and  degradation  of  electrolytes
DMC-LiPF6, EMC-LiPF6 and DEC-LiPF6. The ReaxFF MD was able to
determine the reaction pathways as well as the electrolyte solvent
structures  [196].  Finally,  CGMD  has  been  deployed  to  study  the
structure  and  dynamics  of  coarse-grained  ionomer  melts  in  an
external  electrical  field  [436].  Recently,  MD  and  AIMD  have  also
been applied to investigate properties of gel [437] and solid [438]
electrolytes.

-  Electrode-electrolyte Interface: A solid electrolyte interphase (SEI)
is formed at the electrode-electrolyte interface due to reactions be-
tween  the  electrode  and  the  electrolyte  during  the  first  cycle  of
battery  operation.  The  structure  and  composition  of  the  SEI  have
significant effects on battery performances. When properly formed,
the SEI can inhibit lithium dendrites and enhance cycle stability. The

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108433

Q. Mao et al.

opposite could happen with poorly formed SEI. Even worse, the SEI
can cause increased battery internal resistance and reduced energy
density. MD methods can be used to gain detailed insights into the
SEI formation mechanisms, electrochemical reactions, SEI composi-
tion  and  ion  transport  across  the  SEI  [424,425].  Takenaka  et  al.
[439] developed a hybrid MC/MD reaction method to investigate the
SEI formation, and determine the density distribution and compo-
sition of the resulting SEI film in an LIB. They found considerable
atomic-level differences in SEI films due to different liquid electro-
lytes  used,  e.g.,  ethylene  carbonate  (EC)  and  propylene  carbonate
(PC). Using ReaxFF MD, Kim et al. [440] found that the SEI had a
multilayer  structure  of  a  few  nanometers,  consisting  mainly  of  an
inorganic inner later (closer to the anode) and an organic outer layer
(closer to the electrolyte). Moreover, Bertolini and Balbuena [441]
revealed the dynamic process of the initial SEI formation between
the Li-metal surface of the anode and various electrolytes (including
both highly reactive and less reactive solvents). Three phases were
observed within the SEI: a dense phase, a nest phase and a dispersed
phase, each having different structures and states of species. ReaxFF
MD and AIMD have also been used to study the SEI formed between
the  cathode  and  the  electrolyte.  For  a  cathode  made  of  lithium
manganese oxide (LMO), ReaxFF MD simulations shed light on the
reaction mechanisms between LiMn2O4  and a nonaqueous electro-
lyte, leading to an SEI due to manganese dissolution and the oxida-
tion  of  the  electrolyte  [442].  AIMD  simulations  [443]  further
revealed that the manganese dissolution at the cathode was closely
associated with surface structure change, solvent decomposition and
lithium salt. AIMD was also used to examine the SEI formation and
electrolyte  reduction  at  the  graphite  anode  of  an  LIB,  showing
inorganic products rather than organic components tend to migrate
to the anode [444].

- Whole-cell  Simulations:  With  access  to  increasing  power  super-
computers,  atomistic  simulations  of  a  whole  battery  cell  are  now
feasible. Ponce et al. [48] conducted classical MD simulations of the
dynamic charging process of a complete Li-ion nanobattery under an
external electric field as shown in Fig. 25. The nanobattery consisted
of a graphite anode, an electrolyte of LiPF6 salt dissolved in ethylene
carbonate (CO3C2H4) solvent, metal collectors, and insulator covers.
The transport of Li-ions between the cathode and the anode through
electrolyte solutions of various concentrations was demonstrated. A
SEI layer was also included to study the mechanism of the Li-ions
diffusion  through  the  SEI.  The  MD  simulations  revealed  the  dy-
namic changes of key parameters such as temperature, volume, po-
larization,  current,  resistance,  current  density,  conductivity,  and
resistivity as a function of charging voltage.

6.2.3.2. Fuel cells and power devices. Like batteries, fuel cells are elec-
trochemical devices that generate electricity. The basic configuration of
a fuel cell contains an anode, a cathode, and an electrolyte, just like a
battery.  Unlike  a  battery,  however,  a  fuel  cell  requires  a  continuous
supply of a fuel that undergoes oxidation reactions by a catalyst at the
anode to generate ions and electrons. The ions then travel through the
electrolyte  to  the  cathode  while  the  electrons  flow  to  the  cathode
through an external circuit, producing electricity. At the cathode, ions,
electrons and oxygen react, assisted by another catalyst, to form water
and possibly other products. There are many types of fuel cells such as
the proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) and solid oxide fuel
cells (SOFC). A common feature of all fuel cells is that multiscale pro-
cesses occur, in which molecular effects play important roles in energy
conversion and species diffusion. Shah et al. [445] provided a compre-
hensive description of PEMFC modeling and simulation, using DFT, MD,
LBM as well as macroscopic models. The focus of studies using atomistic

Fig. 25. MD simulation of the charging process of a Li-ion nanobattery. (a) Polarization due to the electric field effect, showing the Li-atom interstitial and centered
in a carbon ring at 7.5 ps; (b) An overcharged nanobattery at 10 ps. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [48]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108434

Q. Mao et al.

methods such as MD is on the structure/morphology and properties of
proton-exchange  membranes  in  PEMFC  [446]  and  proton-conducting
oxides  in  SOFC  [447,448].  A  comprehensive  review  of  modeling  and
experimental  research  on  perfluorinated  sulfonic-acid  (PFSA)  mem-
branes  is  provided  by  Kusoglu  and  Weber  [449],  featuring  DFT,  MD,
dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) and mesoscale modelling. For the
electrochemical reactions occurring within the micro-structure of cata-
lyst layers, particularly at the three-phase contact interfaces, CGMC, MD
and AIMD have proven to be useful research tools [450]. More recently,
atomistic simulations such as DFT and kMC have been applied to study
degradation as well as performance of PEMFC [451]. In the meantime,
recent developments in SOFC using DFT and classical MD are found in
the review by Savioli and Watson [452].

6.2.4. Enhanced shale gas recovery and carbon capture and storage

Carbon dioxide enhanced shale gas recovery (CO2-EGR) is a prom-
ising technique for sustainable energy usage. It is also a promising way
to alleviate CO2  emissions as the geological conditions of shale forma-
tions are optimal for CO2  storage [453]. In order to obtain better pre-
diction and optimize shale gas recovery and CO2 storage efficiency, it is
significant to understand the underlying mechanisms of these processes.
Effects of realistic geological conditions, such as temperature, pressure,
pore structure, and the subsurface water are all considered in previous
studies by MD and grand canonical MC simulations [49,122,454–466].
Compared  to  the  smooth  graphene  slit-pore  model  [459,460]  and
graphite  model  modified  with  functional  groups  [461,462],  kerogen
with  complex  pore  surface  roughness  and  surface-functionalized
chemistry  is  more  realistic  to  represent  the  shale  media.  Normally,
shale gas is predominantly methane and mainly reserved in the shale
formation [463]. Adsorption of longer n-alkanes is energetically more
favourable  [467].  For  the  adsorption  of  hydrocarbon  mixtures  in
kerogen slit pores, densities of methane and ethane in the first adsorp-
tion  layer  increase  as  pressure  increases,  while  an  opposite  trend  is
observed for propane [464]. The organic matter in shales is generally
considered  to  be  hydrocarbon-wetting  in  shales.  Zhao  et  al.  [454]
examined the influence of the moisture content on methane adsorption
on the kerogen model under pressures up to 20 MPa and found that the
amount of methane adsorption drops sharply in the presence of mois-
ture. Meanwhile, increasing moisture content results in a decrease of the
effective pore volumes and, thus, leads to a reduction in the adsorption
capacity  of  CH4  [455,456].  In  addition,  produced  water  generated
during shale oil and gas production is highly saline and possesses a much
higher salinity than injection water, and the salinity of subsurface water

commonly  increases  with  depth  below  the  surface  [457].  Zhou  et  al.
[122] investigated the adsorption properties of methane in dry-, mois-
ture-, salinity-equilibrated kerogens under a wide pressure range up to
40 MPa. Attributed to the reduced solubility of methane in water, the
further decrease the methane adsorption ca-
presence of Na
pacity in the kerogen matrix.

and Cl

+

(cid:0)

Another important topic is the recovery of shale gases from kerogen.
The  shale  gas  recovery  driven  by  pressure  difference  has  quite  a  low
efficiency  for  heavier  hydrocarbons  [458].  Compared  to  the  pressure
drawdown method, the CO2 injection method shows a higher efficiency
in the recovery of the multi-component shale gas. The pressure draw-
down  tends  to  extract  the  lighter  component  and  the  CO2  injection
method is efficient in the recovery of heavier hydrocarbons. It is even
significant for heavier components in smaller pores. On the contrary, the
recovery  efficiency  increases  with  the  pressure  drawdown  method  as
pore  width  increases  [464].  The  moisture  content  also  influences  the
shale gas recovery. It is found that the water in the kerogen slit pores
enhances  the  shale  gas  recovery  efficiency  with  the  CO2  injection
method, especially in the first stage of CO2 injection, while the recovery
ratio of the pressure drawdown declines [465].

Geological  CO2  storage  (GCS)  is  an  essential  strategy  to  alleviate
greenhouse  gas  emissions  and  mitigate  climate  change. Injecting  CO2
into the shale formations can not only reduce carbon emissions, but also
enhance oil recovery. Typically, shale nanopores are partially filled with
the subsurface water, and the rock wettability is important to the CO2
storage. Zhou et al. [49] performed both MD and DFT calculations, and
found  the  kerogen  wettability  transition  from  water-wet  to  CO2-wet
with CO2  injections. Attributed to the hydrogen bonding between H2O
and  kerogen,  the  water  droplet  resides  on  the  kerogen  surface.  Two
distinct H2O adsorption layers are observed on the kerogen surface at
low pressures as seen in Fig. 26. As pressure increases, the CO2 density at
the H2O-kerogen interface gradually increases and a distinct CO2  film
emerges  at  44.40  MPa,  which  separates  the  water  droplet  from  the
kerogen surface.

The  existing  studies  of  shale  gas  adsorption,  carbon  dioxide
displacement and storage have used simplified geometries and models to
represent  the  complex  geological  structure  and  stratum  conditions  in
realistic situations, which may leave some gaps in our understanding.
Meanwhile, the synergistic effect of multiple factors, such as tempera-
ture,  pressure,  shale  gas  composition,  pore  size,  moisture  need  to  be
considered in future.

Fig. 26. Water droplet on the kerogen surface at 330 K and at (a) 0 MPa; (b) 11.24 MPa; equilibrium snapshots (left) and 2-D water density contour plots (right). The
(cid:0) 3. The dashed lines denote the contour profiles of water: ρw(x, z) = 0.5ρb. (c) CO2–H2O-kerogen contact angle as a function of CO2
density is given in the unit of Å
pressure. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [49]. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108435

Q. Mao et al.

7. Conclusions

Remarkable  progresses  have  been  made  in  applying  first-principle
based atomistic simulation methods to engineering problems in recent
decades thanks to the rapid advancement of computing hardware and
software.  The  emergence  of  ReaxFF  MD,  in  particular,  has  enabled  a
wide  variety  of  problems  in  combustion  and  energy  systems  to  be
tackled, for the first time, in the last decade. The fundamental insights
gained are unprecedented, which complement and enhance our under-
standing obtained from experiments and macroscopic numerical simu-
lations. For molecule-dominated processes, like those in batteries and
flame  synthesis  of  nanoparticles,  classical  and  ReaxFF  MD  can  even
serve as a design and optimization tool. The present review has covered
the historical developments, the state of the art in MD methodologies,
force-field developments, numerical details, and applications.

The main findings are summarized as follows:

(1)  Atomistic simulations have become a powerful and, in some way,
indispensable  research  and  design  tool  for  combustion  and  en-
ergy  systems,  complementing  experiments  and  conventional
macroscopic  simulations.  Thanks  to  advances  in  computing
techniques, atomistic simulations can be implemented in a wide
range of computing platforms ranging from desktops, clusters up
to the fastest supercomputers. The classical MD can simulate a
very  large  system  with  up  to  a  billion  atoms  for  hundreds  of
nanoseconds  due  to  its  relatively  low  computational  cost,  and
scaling with the atom number N as O(NlogN to N2). The ReaxFF
MD has the same scaling with the system size with O(NlogN), so
that  it  can  potentially  simulate  a  very  large  system.  However,
ReaxFF  MD  is  generally  more  computationally  expensive  than
classical  MD,  due  to  more  force  terms  to  compute and  smaller
time  steps.  The  systems  accessible  by  ReaxFF  MD  so  far  are
typically  up  to  hundreds  of  thousands  of  atoms  for  tens  of
nanoseconds. Within such limits, a wide range of phenomena can
already  be  simulated.  These  limits  can  be  further  lifted  with
increasing computing power and decreasing unit computing costs
in  coming  years  to  allow  even  more  complex  systems  to  be
tackled.

(2)  MD  methods  are  most  suited  to  nano-sized  systems  with
concentrated atoms/molecules and highly dynamic processes (i.
e., short time duration). For classical MD, these include (but are
not confined to): nanodroplet dynamics, flow in nanochannels,
and  phase  change.  For  ReaxFF  MD,  examples  include:  nano-
particle combustion, soot formation and heterogeneous catalytic
combustion. For phenomena/processes that span a large volume
and/or are evolving slowly, MD simulations are not cost-effective
on current computing platforms.

(3) Classical MD has found numerous applications that are of rele-
vance to combustion and energy systems. As stated above, typical
applications  involve  nanodroplets,  nanoparticles  and  nano-
channels, yielding new insights. For example, MD has been used
to  simulate  the  dynamics  of  droplet-droplet  collision,  droplet-
wall  collision,  droplet  evaporation,  etc.  MD  has  revealed  the
dramatic change in the interfacial properties from subcritical to
supercritical  evaporation  of  droplets.  Moreover,  in  the  MD
simulation  of  nanoparticle  sintering,  phase  change  or  crystalli-
zation  has  been  found  following  the  merge  of  two  amorphous
nanoparticles. For flow in nanochannels, MD allows both slip and
no-slip wall conditions, as the physics of flow plays out naturally,
without prior assumptions. An example of advanced applications
is the MD simulation of shale gas recovery in geological forma-
tions, which is enhanced by injected carbon dioxide. The simu-
lation reveals intricate interactions among the gas species, and
between  the  gases  and  the  porous  matrices.  In  one  study,  the
hydrophobicity  of  the  substrate  is  changed  due  to  atomic  in-
teractions between water and carbon dioxide molecules. All these

findings  are  impossible  to  achieve  using  continuum-based
macroscopic  simulations.  Finally,  MD  simulations  can  also  be
extended  to  flow  through  membranes,  transport  of  charged
nanoparticles, bioflow over soft matters such as cells.

(4) The  ReaxFF  MD  has  become  a  vital  research  tool,  gaining  un-
precedented insights into the atomic and molecular behaviors of
combustion and energy systems. For gaseous fuels, ReaxFF MD
can  reveal  all  the  intermediate  species  and  detailed  chemical
pathways in pyrolysis and combustion processes. For fuels in the
form  of  nanodroplets  and  nanoparticles,  ReaxFF  MD  can  show
detailed dynamics of atomic diffusion, bond-breaking, bond for-
mation as well as energy conversion. Fruitful research based on
ReaxFF  MD  has  been  conducted  on  initial  soot  formation,  in
which  gaseous  PAHs  eventually  become  incipient  solid  soot
particles  after  going  through  a  series  of  physical  and  chemical
processes.  A  recent  extension  is  the  ReaxFF  MD  of  flame-
synthesized nanoparticles under simplified and controlled envi-
ronments.  Furthermore,  ReaxFF  MD  has  been  deployed  to  un-
derstand  the  mechanisms  of  catalytic  reactions,  in  which  the
nanoparticle catalysts, the substrates, and gaseous species form
multi-way interactions. Finally, both the classical and ReaxFF MD
to  multi-
extensively
methods  have  been
physicochemical  processes in  batteries  and  fuel cells.  It is  now
feasible  to  perform  MD  simulations  of  the  time-dependent
charging  and  discharging  of  a  complete  battery  cell  consisting
of electrodes, electrolytes and solid electrolyte interphase layers,
showing detailed transport of ions and electrons. Undoubtedly,
neither QM methods nor continuum-based numerical simulations
could  provide the  rich  details of  the  above  atomic  and/or  mo-
lecular behaviors over the same length and time scales.

employed

(5) Despite the first-principle nature of MD simulations, various un-
certainties  can  affect  MD  results.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
Newton’s  law  of  motion,  on  which  MD  methods  are  based,  is
deterministic. However, trajectories of atoms and molecules are
sensitive to initial conditions as well as random errors during the
simulation. Therefore, MD results are subject to statistical errors,
which must be minimized. To ensure accurate and reproducible
results,  each  MD  simulation  should  be  performed  long  enough
and a sufficient number of replica simulations should be carried
out. In theory, this means that an MD simulation should be car-
ried out until time tn  if no statistical difference is produced when
the simulation is carried on until tn+1, while m replicas should be
simulated  if  m + 1  replicas  do  not  lead  to  different  ensemble
averages. In practice, due to computational constraints, both the
simulation time and the number of replicas may not meet such
stringent requirements.  In  addition to  statistical errors, MD  re-
sults could have systematic errors due to simplifications and as-
sumptions, boundary conditions, and, above all, uncertainties in
the force fields. The force fields used in classical MD are strictly
empirical,  whose  limitations  should  be  noted.  The  quality  of  a
force field depends on the accuracy of experimental data and/or
QM  calculations used  for  the  force  field  training.  In  short,  MD
results should be interpreted and used with all the uncertainties
considered.

(6)  Whenever possible, MD results should be verified and validated
against experimental and theoretical data. This is, however, un-
realistic in many cases. On one hand, experimental measurements
of  dynamic  atomic  and  molecular  processes  are  difficult  and
expensive  even  if  the  spatial  and  temporal  resolutions  of  the
experimental techniques are sufficient. On the other hand, QM
calculations cannot be routinely conducted for the same system
size and conditions as used in MD simulations. A natural question
is: what are the values of MD simulations? First of all, it should be
realized  that  MD  alone,  like  all  the  other  methods,  is  not  a
panacea  for  all  (atomic/molecular)  problems  and  thus  can
answer all questions. MD methods should be used together with

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108436

Q. Mao et al.

other methods, with mutual validation whenever possible. This
review has shown that MD simulations are capable of providing
new  and  sometimes  unique  insights  into  the  intricate  physical
and/or  chemical  behaviors  at  the  atomic/molecular  scales.
Moreover, MD can be used to quantify fluids and materials as well
as parameters associated with dynamic processes, for example,
the  surface  tension  of  nanodroplets  and  activation  energy  of  a
chemical  reaction,  when  other  methods  may  find  challenging.
Furthermore,  despite  its  uncertainties,  MD  is  a  first-principle
method  based  on  universal  physical  law  (Newton’s  law)  that
has less dramatic assumptions/assumptions and generally lower
level of uncertainties than mesoscopic and macroscopic modeling
methods. Therefore, MD, if conducted properly, has better pre-
dictive power than mesoscopic and macroscopic methods, and its
results  can  be  used  as  benchmark  data  for  validation  of  meso-
scopic  and  macroscopic  simulation  results.  These  aspects  have
not been fully explored in this review and merit further studies.
Finally,  MD  simulations  have  already  been  demonstrated  to
predict correct trends in numerous parametric studies. As a result,
correlation  relations  and  empirical  laws  have  been  extracted,
which  can  provide  mutual  validation  against  results  from  ex-
periments or other simulations. Naturally, this capability can be
explored  in  molecular  system  design  and  optimization,  as  has
been  demonstrated  for  energetic  fuels,  catalytic  reactions,  and
flame-synthesized  functional  nanomaterials.  Undoubtedly,  MD
methods will play an ever more important role in the research
and  development  of  combustion  and  energy  systems,  as  their
potential is realized by the wider engineering community.

8. Future directions

To  meet  the  growing demands  of combustion  and  energy applica-
tions, MD simulations need to increase the accessible system size and the
range  of  length  and  time  scales  by  several  orders  of  magnitude.  As
described above, current MD simulations are constrained to systems in
confined space, e.g., nanodroplets, nanoparticles, nanopores and nano-
channels,  in  which  concentrated  matter  experiences  rapid  dynamic
processes. The typical boundary conditions applied are periodic, which
are  suitable  for  canonical  problems  but  too  restrictive.  On  the  other
hand,  combustion  applications  often  involve  flow,  convection,  and
complex  interactions  with  surroundings,  requiring  a  much  larger
computational box and realistic boundary conditions. Energy applica-
tions such as lithium-ion intercalation in batteries require simultaneous
simulation  of  dynamic  change  of  materials  as  well  as  multiphysics
processes within, increasing the system size (the number of atoms and
molecules) of MD simulations significantly. The Net Zero goals by 2050
introduce additional demands for new fuels (e.g., hydrogen/ammonia
mixtures,  biofuels,  e-fuels),  new  devices  (e.g.,  solid-state  batteries,
artificial photosynthesis), and new technologies (e.g., energy material
synthesis,  hydrogen  energy  storage,  carbon  capture  and  storage),  in
which molecular effects are important and poorly understood. To meet
these  challenges requires  significant  advancement in computing tech-
nologies, atomistic simulation methodologies, big data, artificial intel-
ligence  (AI)  and  ML  techniques,  and  multiscale  modeling  and
simulation.

8.1. Development of computing technologies

Traditionally,  computing  technologies  have  been  driven  by  the
desire to compute faster and faster. This has resulted in the dramatic
improvement  in  computing  power  in  the  past  six  decades,  generally
following the Moore’s law, which has given a boost to computationally
intensive  methods  such  as  MD.  Recent  improvements  in  computing
power, however, have come from an ever larger number of CPUs instead
of more advanced transistors. The current No. 1 supercomputer Frontier,
for example, has 8,730,112 cores, giving a sustained computing speed of

1.102  Exaflop/s.  Future  advances  in  supercomputing  may  have  to
exploit  accelerators  such  as  GPUs  and  domain-specific  architectures
such  as  TPUs  (tensor  processing  units).  The  speed  of  computation,
however, is not the only consideration; the ability to process, transfer
and store huge amounts of data efficiently is becoming critical. The I/O
performance of a supercomputer, for example, is crucial for large-scale
MD simulations. In addition, accessibility, flexibility, affordability, en-
ergy  consumption  and  sustainability  of  computing  are  assuming
increasing importance. Thanks to the advances in networking technol-
ogies  such  as  5G,  distributed  computing,  cloud  computing  and  edge
computing have emerged in the last decade to bring computation, data
storage, data visualization and virtualization together, often in the form
of  a  commercial  service.  In  addition,  the  specialized  hardware,  for
example, the domain-specific architectures or accelerators [468] have
become popular in fast-growing domains that involve processing a sig-
nificant amount of data or require low latency, such as deep learning,
graph  analytics,  self-driving  vehicles.  The  specialized  hardware  is
potentially  an  alternative  or  at  least  complement  to  general-purpose
processors of CPUs and GPUs. These developments have provided un-
precedented opportunities for computation-intensive and data-intensive
MD simulations, while also presenting considerable challenges. This is
because many established MD software suites were developed in the 60s,
70s or 80s, which are inefficient in massively many-core and heteroge-
neous architectures. Upgrading these legacy codes would take signifi-
cant efforts but may prove to be beneficial.

8.2. Advancement of MD methodologies

Further development of MD methodologies is needed to simulate a
system  beyond  the  nanoscale  in  length  and  time.  Fortunately,  many
important phenomena and processes in molecular systems occur infre-
quently. This property can be explored to develop a family of accelerated
MD methods to reach microseconds and even up to seconds [240]. The
idea is to shorten the waiting time between infrequent events by adding
a bias potential to the energy minima in the system, without requiring a
priori  knowledge  of  the  pathways  and  states  to  be  encountered.  An
extended implementation is a self-learning, on-the-fly construction of a
dynamic bias potential that does not require a priori knowledge of the
activation barriers that the system may encounter during its long-time
evolution. Similarly, enhanced sampling methods can be developed to
achieve sufficient sampling of barrier-crossing events in order to enable
MD simulations on the time scale of milliseconds. This is based on the
premise that enhanced sampling of phase or configuration space corre-
sponds to accelerated thermodynamics or kinetics. Alternatively, if the
rigour and generality of MD methods are not strictly required, a variety
of atomistic simulation techniques can be employed to reach larger time
and length scales, including kMC, time-stamped force-bias MC (tfMC)
[469], metadynamics and hyperdynamics methods.

Realistic systems are not only spatially expansive but also have open
boundaries,  that  is,  there  are  mass,  momentum,  and/or  energy  ex-
changes  with  its  surroundings.  Experimental  setups  such  as  micro-
combustors,  microbial  fuel  cells,  typically  have  open  boundaries,  re-
sults from which would be hard to compare with typical MD simulations.
As seen in this review, typical MD simulations are performed with pe-
riodic boundary conditions for a system of a constant number of atoms/
molecules.  Based  on  the  rigorous  theoretical  work  of  Lebowitz  and
Bergmann  [470],  and  Emch  and  Sewell  [471], it  is  possible  to  incor-
porate interactions between the system and the reservoir into MD sim-
ulations.  The  interactions  are  regarded  as  being  impulsive  or
instantaneous, which produces a stochastic discrete transition in num-
ber of particles for the system, causing the system to be in and out of
equilibrium  [470].  Emch  and  Sewell,  on  the  other  hand,  considered
coarse-grained interaction, where the reservoir enters into the dynamics
of  the  system  only  through  macroscopic  quantities  [471].  Thus,  the
Emch-Sewell interaction is time-independent but representative of the
underlying  microscopic  degrees  of  freedom  of  the  reservoir,  from  a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108437

Q. Mao et al.

statistical point of view. The historical developments and future outlook
of  open  systems  for  molecular  simulations  including  MD  have  been
comprehensively described by Site and Praprotnik [472].

Combustion  and  energy  systems  may  not  only  be  susceptible  to
surroundings, but also be affected by externally applied fields such as
electric and electromagnetic fields. For example, transport of charged
particles like proton exchange in PEMFCs would be affected by external
electric fields. For a chemical system, an imposed electrical field is ex-
pected to affect its chemical reactivity, chemical pathways, and reaction
rates  [156].  Moreover,  vibrational  modes  of  some  molecules  may  be
excited by external fields, leading to conformational changes. Therefore,
application of external fields at certain frequency and intensity offers a
promising method to control diffusion and reactivity of many combus-
tion  and  energy  systems.  MD  simulations  of  external  field  effects  on
molecular systems are challenging, requiring not only a larger compu-
tational box, a longer simulated physical time and modified boundary
conditions, but also suitably constructed force fields and thermostats.
Despite such difficulties, much theoretical work and MD simulations, e.
g. Ref. [156], have been conducted in this area [473]. Once established,
MD can serve as an in-silico design tool for testing ideas and optimizing
parameters  of  external  fields  in  control  of  combustion  and  energy
systems.

8.3. Incorporation of big data and machine learning

Machine  learning  is  penetrating  almost  every  area  of  science  and
technology. The coupling of ML and MD would bring about a revolution
to in silico experiments. In particular, deep learning (DL) has proved to
be a powerful tool in various fields in the last few years. It has become a
valuable tool in modeling potential energy surface (PES) of molecular
systems, and has achieved an accuracy comparable to that of DFT (or
other  fitted  data)  and  an  efficiency  competitive  with  the  force  field-
based  MD.  It  also  has  significant  advantage  and  potential  in  acceler-
ating  MD simulations,  training force  fields, and  performing  data ana-
lytics.  Several  computational  frames  have  been  developed  in  recent
years,  including  DeePMD  [474],  TorchMD  [475],  ænet  [476],  SNAP
[477]. These frames are interfaced with DL framesworks like PyTorch or
TensorFlow. Notably, ML models such as neural networks [478,479] are
applied  to  parameterize  inter-  and  intra-atomic  potentials  from
high-precision reference data obtained through costly electronic struc-
ture calculations. One particularly promising feature of neural networks
is  that  they  can  represent  many-body  interactions.  For  instance,  the
Schnet  architecture  is  built  from  continuous  filter  convolutions  to
represent  quantum-mechanical
interactions  for  atomistic  system
modeling  [475].  The  neural  network  approach  has  recently  been
extended to learn a potential that can be utilized in coarse-grained de-
grees  of  freedoms.  Considering  that  the  neural  networks  bridge  the
empirical  force  fields  (either  classical  or  reactive)  and  the  high-level
benchmark  ab  initio  modelling,  some  physics-informed  force-field
training  laws  like  energy  conservation,  physical  symmetries,  etc.,  are
still needed to be specified to improve the accuracy and robustness of the
neural network-generated force fields.

In addition, the ML-based force fields allow MD simulations with an
accuracy comparable to DFT and AIMD, and an efficiency competitive
with conventional MD simulations [72]. For example, it is shown that
DeePMD [474], the constructed NN potentials, can accurately reproduce
the AIMD trajectories from both classical and quantum (path integral)
perspectives  at  a  linear  cost  increase  with  the  system  size  while  the
computational cost is several orders of magnitude lower than equivalent
AIMD simulations.

Moreover, ML-enhanced sampling methods are developed with the
aim to achieve sufficient sampling of barrier-crossing events and enable
millisecond-scale MD simulations. The enhanced sampling of phase or
configuration space allows fast thermodynamics or kinetics calculations.
However, the existing sampling methods still have severe limitations as
the systems of interest become more and more complex. MD simulations

with  NN  potentials  and  interactive  virtual  techniques  accelerate  the
sampling  of  rare  reactive  process  and  the  build  of  complex  reaction
network [480]. New methods that have the merits of being multiscale
and  being  ‘intelligent’  is  a  direction  of  further  development.  To  deal
with both rigid and soft degrees of freedom in a complex system, com-
bination  of  the  local  and  global  sampling  methods  together  with
different degrees of acceleration is necessary.

Lastly,  big  data  analytics  and  AI  can  be  exploited  to  enhance  the
efficiency and effectiveness of data analysis, considering that MD sim-
ulations  produce  massive  amounts  of  data,  often  on  the  order  of  ter-
abytes or even petabytes per simulation. Given that it is impossible to
output and store MD simulation data at all the time steps and that post-
processing such data is very challenging, it is preferable to conduct at
least some essential data analysis on the fly without writing too many
output files during the simulation. Data analytics and AI are especially
important to the on-the-fly approach, in order to identify key dynamic
features under study.

8.4. Multiscale modeling and simulation

Fluid mechanics, heat transfer and energy conversion problems are
typically multiscale ranging from atomic to macroscales. At micro- and
nanoscales, some features of flow, for example, can deviate drastically
from  its  conventional  continuum  behaviors.  Therefore,  multiscale  ap-
proaches  via  the  coupling  of  MD  with  LBM  or/and  CFD  to  cover  a
realistic range of length and time are sometimes necessary. Generally,
the multiscale modeling is composed of two parts: the domain decom-
position scheme corresponds to hybrid continuum molecular models for
micro- and nanoscale fluid flow, and the averaged equation approach is
for multiscale turbulence modeling, respectively [481].

In  terms  of  coupling,  multiscale  modeling  can  be  classified  into
sequential  and  concurrent  methods  [482].  The  sequential  multiscale
approach  separates  modeling  at  each  scale  and  passes  the  results  be-
tween scales in a bottom-up manner. For example, thermodynamic and
statistical  properties,  such  as  thermal  conductivity,  specific  heat,
Young’s  modulus,  etc.,  are  obtained  from  MD  simulations,  which  are
then  used  in  continuum  scale  calculations.  To  reveal  the  multiple
transport mechanisms of gas flow behaviors in composite nanoporous
shale matrix, the coupling of MD and LBM is performed via a sequential
method. The gas adsorption characteristics are derived from MD simu-
lations, which are integrated in the LBM simulation as boundary con-
ditions  of  flow  in  multiple  porous  media  [483].  In  a  concurrent
simulation,  the  system  is  often  decomposed  into  several  sub-domains
characterized  by  different  scales  and  physics.  The  concurrent  multi-
scale approach is efficient but challenging as it integrates calculations at
different  length  and  time  scales  simultaneously.  Note  that  compared
with the sequential approach, the concurrent approach is more desirable
for  systems  in  which  the  behavior  at  each  scale  depends  strongly  on
what  happens  at  the  larger  or  smaller  scales.  In  a  hybrid  multiscale
modelling, such as the coupling of MD and LBM in solving the incom-
pressible flow of dense fluids, time and length scales are decoupled via
an iterative Schwarz domain decomposition algorithm, and the MD and
LBM formulations communicate via the exchange of velocities and ve-
locity gradients at the interface [484].

In fluid dynamics, near-wall behavior, liquid–vapor interfaces and
dynamics  of  complex  molecules  such  as  surfactants  are  important  in
numerous industrial, biological, and daily-life applications. A scalable
coupling of MD and CFD is developed to understand the behavior of the
system at the interfaces between the solid substrate and the liquid, and
model the interaction of the solid substrate and the air. It is performed
through  directly  linking  molecular  and  continuum  solvers  with  each
solving a portion of the same domain with mass, momentum and energy
exchanges at the interface. For two-phase flows, the mean velocity field
as  the  hydrodynamic  boundary  condition  in  CFD  modeling  is  set  ac-
cording to the averaged molecular velocity obtained from MD simula-
tions [485].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108438

Q. Mao et al.

CRediT author statement

Q. Mao. and K. H. Luo: Conceptualization, Data curation, Method-
ology; Q. Mao., M. Feng., X. Z. Jiang, Y. Ren., K.H. Luo, and A. C.T. van
Duin:  Writing-  Original  draft  preparation;  Q.  Mao.  and  K.  H.  Luo:
Writing- Reviewing and Editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

Acknowledgment

Support  from  the  UK  Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  Research
Council  under  Grant  Nos.  EP/L00030X/1,  EP/R029598/1,  EP/
S012559/1,  EP/T015233/1,  EP/V001531/1  and  EP/W026260/1  is
gratefully acknowledged. Qian Mao acknowledges the research fellow-
ship from Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. Muye Feng acknowl-
edges  the  National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  (Grant  No.
52106164). Xi Zhuo Jiang acknowledges the support from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52106132).

References

[1] Wang H. Formation of nascent soot and other condensed-phase materials in
flames. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:41–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2010.09.009.

[2] Schuetz CA, Frenklach M. Nucleation of soot: molecular dynamics simulations of
pyrene dimerization. Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:2307–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S1540-7489(02)80281-4.

[3] Mao Q, van Duin ACT, Luo KH. Formation of incipient soot particles from

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons : a ReaxFF molecular dynamics study. Carbon
2017;121:380–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2017.06.009.

[4] Xiao G, Luo KH, Ma X, Shuai S. A molecular dynamics study of fuel droplet

evaporation in sub- and supercritical conditions. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:
3219–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.09.020.

[5] Gong Y, Xiao G, Ma X, Luo KH, Shuai S, Xu H. Phase transitions of multi-

component fuel droplets under sub- and supercritical conditions. Fuel 2021;287:
119516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119516.

[6] Gong Y, Luo KH, Ma X, Shuai S, Xu H. Atomic-level insights into transition

mechanism of dominant mixing modes of multi-component fuel droplets: from
evaporation to diffusion. Fuel 2021;304:121464. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2021.121464.

[7] Gicquel LYM, Staffelbach G, Cuenot B, Poinsot T. Large eddy simulations of

turbulent reacting flows in real burners: the status and challenges. J Phys Conf
Ser 2008;125:012029. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/125/1/012029.
[8] Feng M, Jiang XZ, Luo KH. A reactive molecular dynamics simulation study of

methane oxidation assisted by platinum/graphene-based catalysts. Proc Combust
Inst 2019;37:5473–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.109.

[9] Westbrook CK, Mizobuchi Y, Poinsot TJ, Smith PJ, Warnatz J. Computational

combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:125–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2004.08.275.

[10] Patankar SV, Spalding DB. A calculation procedure for heat, mass and momentum

transfer in three-dimensional parabolic flows. Int J Heat Mass Tran 1972;15:
1787–806. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(72)90054-3.

[11] Jones WP, Launder BE. The prediction of laminarization with a two-equation
model of turbulence. Int J Heat Mass Tran 1972;15:301–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0017-9310(72)90076-2.

[12] Pope SB. Ten questions concerning the large-eddy simulation of turbulent flows.

New J Phys 2004;6:35. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/6/1/035.

[13] Pitsch H. Large-eddy simulation of turbulent combustion. Annu Rev Fluid Mech
2006;38:453–82. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fluid.38.050304.092133.
[14] Gicquel LYM, Staffelbach G, Poinsot T. Large eddy simulations of gaseous flames
in gas turbine combustion chambers. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2012;38:782–817.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2012.04.004.

[15] Poinsot T, Candel S, Trouv ́e A. Applications of direct numerical simulation to

premixed turbulent combustion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1995;21:531–76.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(95)00011-9.

[16] Vervisch L, Poinsot T. Direct numerical simulation of non-premixed turbulent
flames. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 1998;30:655–91. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.2824306.

[17] Chen JH. Petascale direct numerical simulation of turbulent combustion -

fundamental insights towards predictive models. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:
99–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.09.012.

[18] Mao Q, van Duin ACT, Luo KH. Investigation of methane oxidation by palladium-

based catalyst via ReaxFF Molecular Dynamics simulation. Proc Combust Inst
2017;36:4339–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.08.037.

[19] Ren Y, Zhang Y, Li S. Simultaneous single-shot two-dimensional imaging of

nanoparticles and radicals in turbulent reactive flows. Phys Rev Appl 2020;13:
044002. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.13.044002.

[20] Ren Y, Zhang Y, Li S. Single-shot two-dimensional measurement of nanoparticles
in turbulent jet-diffusion flames using phase-selective laser-induced breakdown
spectroscopy. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:1373–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2018.06.227.

[21] Jin T, Luo KH, Wang X, Luo K, Fan J. Dynamics of triple-flames in ignition of

turbulent dual fuel mixture: a direct numerical simulation study. Proc Combust
Inst 2019;37:4625–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.09.018.

[22] Lycett-Brown D, Luo KH, Liu R, Lv P. Binary droplet collision simulations by a

multiphase cascaded lattice Boltzmann method. Phys Fluids 2014;26:023303.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4866146.

[23] Li Q, Kang QJ, Francois MM, He YL, Luo KH. Lattice Boltzmann modeling of

boiling heat transfer: the boiling curve and the effects of wettability. Int J Heat
Mass Tran 2015;85:787–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2015.01.136.

[24] Chen S, Doolen GD. Lattice Boltzmann method for fluid flows. Annu Rev Fluid
Mech 1998;30:329–64. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fluid.30.1.329.
[25] Aidun CK, Clausen JR. Lattice-Boltzmann method for complex flows. Annu Rev

Fluid Mech 2010;42:439–72. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-121108-
145519.

[26] Li Q, Luo KH, Kang QJ, He YL, Chen Q, Liu Q. Lattice Boltzmann methods for

multiphase flow and phase-change heat transfer. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2016;
52:62–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2015.10.001.

[27] Lei T, Wang Z, Luo KH. Study of pore-scale coke combustion in porous media

using lattice Boltzmann method. Combust Flame 2021;225:104–19. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.10.036.

[28] Lin C, Luo KH, Fei L, Succi S. A multi-component discrete Boltzmann model for
nonequilibrium reactive flows. Sci Rep 2017;7:14580. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-017-14824-9.

[29] Lin C, Luo KH. Discrete Boltzmann modeling of unsteady reactive flows with

nonequilibrium effects. Phys Rev E 2019;99:012142. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevE.99.012142.

[30] Chiavazzo E, Karlin IV, Gorban AN, Boulouchos K. Coupling of the model

reduction technique with the lattice Boltzmann method for combustion
simulations. Combust Flame 2010;157:1833–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2010.06.009.

[31] Lin C, Luo KH. Mesoscopic simulation of nonequilibrium detonation with discrete
Boltzmann method. Combust Flame 2018;198:356–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.combustflame.2018.09.027.

[32] Swift MR, Orlandini E, Osborn WR, Yeomans JM. Lattice Boltzmann simulations
of liquid-gas and binary fluid systems. Phys Rev E 1996;54:5041–52. https://doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevE.54.5041.

[33] Luo KH, Fei L, Wang G. A unified lattice Boltzmann model and application to
multiphase flows. Philos Trans R Soc A 2021;379:20200397. https://doi.org/
10.1098/rsta.2020.0397.

[34] Chen H, Kandasamy S, Orszag S, Shock R, Succi S, Yakhot V. Extended Boltzmann

kinetic equation for turbulent flows. Science 2003;301:633–6. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1085048.

[35] Computer simulation of molecular dynamics: methodology, applications, and
perspectives in chemistryvan Gunsteren WF, Berendsen HJC, editors. Angew
Chem Int Engl 1990;29:992–1023. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.199009921.

[36] Heinecke A, Eckhardt W, Horsch M, Bungartz HJ. Molecular Dynamics

Simulation. In: Supercomputing for Molecular Dynamics Simulations.
SpringerBriefs in Computer Science. Springer, Cham. 2015. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-17148-7_2.

[37] O’Connell ST, Thompson PA. Molecular dynamics-continuum hybrid

computations: a tool for studying complex fluid flows. Phys Rev E 1995;52:
R5792–5795. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.52.R5792.

[38] Frenkel D, Smit B. Understanding molecular simulation: from algorithms to

applications. Academic Press; 1996. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012267351-
1/50006-7.

[39] Jensen F. Introduction to computational chemistry. John Wiley & Sons; 2016.
[40] Rapaport DC. The art of molecular dynamics simulation. Cambridge university

press; 2004. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426919808935287.

[41] Senftle T, Hong S, Islam MM, Kylasa SB, Zheng Y, Shin YK, et al. The ReaxFF
reactive force-field: development, applications, and future directions. Npj
Comput Mater 2016;2:15011. https://doi.org/10.1038/npjcompumats.2015.11.

[42] Voter AF, Montalenti F, Germann TC. Extending the time scale in atomistic

simulation of materials. Annu Rev Mater Res 2002;32:321–46. https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev.matsci.32.112601.141541.

[43] Li X, Zheng M, Ren C, Guo L. ReaxFF molecular dynamics simulations of thermal

reactivity of various fuels in pyrolysis and combustion. Energy Fuel 2021;35:
11707–39. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c01266.

[44] AlAreeqi S, Bahamon D, Polychronopoulou K, Vega LF. Insights into the thermal
stability and conversion of carbon-based materials by using ReaxFF reactive force
field: recent advances and future directions. Carbon 2022;196:840–66. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2022.05.035.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108439

Q. Mao et al.

[45] Chenoweth K, van Duin ACT, Dasgupta S, Goddard III WA. Initiation mechanisms

[73] Verlet L. Computer “experiments” on classical fluids. I. Thermodynamical

and kinetics of pyrolysis and combustion of JP-10 hydrocarbon jet fuel. J Phys
Chem A 2009;113:1740–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp8081479.

properties of Lennard-Jones molecules. Phys Rev 1967;159:98.

[74] Weinberger CR, Tucker GJ. Multiscale Materials modeling fornanomechanics.

[46] Hou D, Mao Q, Ren Y, Luo KH. Atomic insights into mechanisms of carbon

Springer; 2016. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-33480-6.

coating on titania nanoparticle during flame synthesis. Carbon 2023;201:189–99.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2022.09.002.

[47] Ren Y, Zhang Y, Mao Q, Pitsch H. Amorphous-to-crystalline transition during

sintering of nascent TiO2 nanoparticles in gas-phase synthesis: a molecular
dynamics study. J Phys Chem C 2020;124:27763–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.jpcc.0c07961.

[48] Ponce V, Galvez-Aranda DE, Seminario JM. Analysis of a Li-ion nanobattery with
graphite anode using molecular dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem C 2017;121:
12959–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b04190.

[49] Zhou J, Zhang J, Yang J, Jin Z, Luo KH. Mechanisms for kerogen wettability

transition from water-wet to CO2-wet: implications for CO2  sequestration. Chem
Eng J 2022;428:132020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.132020.

[50] Zhang YR, Luo KH. Regimes of head-on collisions of equal-sized binary droplets.

Langmuir 2019;35:8896–902. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.8b04277.

[51] Fern ́andez-Ramos A, Miller JA, Klippenstein SJ, Truhlar DG. Modeling the

kinetics of bimolecular reactions. Chem Rev 2006;106:4518–84. https://doi.org/
10.1021/cr050205w.

[52] Klippenstein SJ. From theoretical reaction dynamics to chemical modeling of
combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:77–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.07.100.

[53] Z ́ador J, Taatjes CA, Fernandes RX. Kinetics of elementary reactions in low-

temperature autoignition chemistry. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:371–421.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2010.06.006.

[54] Hohenberg P, Kohn W. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys Rev 1964;136:

B864–71. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864.

[55] Kohn W, Sham LJ. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation
effects. Phys Rev 1965;140:A1133. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.140.
A1133.

[56] Parr RG, Yang W. Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules. New York:

Oxford Academic; 1995. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/
9780195092769.001.0001.

[57] Koch W, Holthausen MC. A chemist’s guide to density functional theory. Wiley-

VCH; 2015. https://doi.org/10.1002/3527600043.

[58] Allinger NL. Molecular mechanics. Molecular Mechanics. In: Formosinho SJ,
Csizmadia IG, Arnaut LG, editors. Theoretical and Computational Models for
Organic Chemistry. NATO ASI Series, 339. Dordrecht: Springer; 1991. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-3584-9_8.

[59] Warshel A, Levitt M. Theoretical studies of enzymic reactions: dielectric,

electrostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of
lysozyme. J Mol Biol 1976;103:227–49. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s002149900077.

[60] Marx D, Hutter J. Ab initio molecular dynamics: basic theory and advanced

methods. Cambridge University Press; 2009.

[61] Brenner DW. Empirical potential for hydrocarbons for use in simulating the
chemical vapor deposition of diamond films. Phys Rev B 1990;42:9458–71.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.42.9458.

[62] Tersoff J. New empirical approach for the structure and energy of covalent
systems. Phys Rev B 1988;37:6991–7000. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.37.6991.

[63] Tersoff J. Empirical interatomic potential for carbon, with applications to

amorphous carbon. Phys Rev Lett 1988;61:2879–82. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.61.2879.

[64] Tersoff J. Modeling solid-state chemistry: interatomic potentials for

multicomponent systems. Phys Rev B 1989;39:5566–8. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.39.5566.

[65] Chenoweth K, van Duin ACT, Persson P, Cheng MJ, Oxgaard J, Goddard WA.

Development and application of a ReaxFF reactive force field for oxidative
dehydrogenation on vanadium oxide catalysts. J Phys Chem C 2008;112:
14645–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp802134x.

[66] van Duin ACT, Dasgupta S, Lorant F, Goddard WA. ReaxFF: a reactive force field
for hydrocarbons. J Phys Chem A 2001;105:9396–409. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp004368u.

[67] Merchant BA, Madura JD. A review of coarse-grained molecular dynamics
techniques to access extended spatial and temporal scales in biomolecular
simulations. Annu Rep Comput Chem 2011;7:67–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-53835-2.00003-1.

[68] Scott KA, Bond PJ, Ivetac A, Chetwynd AP, Khalid S, Sansom MSP. Coarse-grained

MD simulations of membrane protein-bilayer self-assembly. Structure 2008;16:
621–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2008.01.014.

[69] Leuchter JD, Green AT, Gilyard J, Rambarat CG, Cho SS. Coarse-Grained and

atomistic MD simulations of RNA and DNA folding. Isr J Chem 2014;54:1152–64.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ijch.201400022.

[70] Arkhipov A, Yin Y, Schulten K. Membrane-bending mechanism of amphiphysin N-

BAR domains. Biophys J 2009;97:2727–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bpj.2009.08.051.

[71] Alder BJ, Wainwright TE. Phase transition for a hard sphere system. J Chem Phys

1957;27:1208–9. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1743957.

[72] Jia W, Wang H, Chen M, Lu D, Lin L, Car R, et al. Pushing the limit of molecular

dynamics with ab initio accuracy to 100 million atoms with machine learning.
Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Networking, Storage Anal. IEEE 2020:1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SC41405.2020.00009.

[75] Cheng Z, Xu W, Tang L. Theory and practice of molecular modeling. Beijing:

Chemical Industry Press; 2007.

[76] Watanabe M, Karplus M. Dynamics of molecules with internal degrees of freedom
by multiple time-step methods. J Chem Phys 1993;99:8063–74. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.465633.

[77] Morse PM. Diatomic molecules according to the wave mechanics. II. vibrational

levels. Phys Rev 1929;34:57–64.

[78] Brooks BR, Bruccoleri RE, Olafson BD, States DJ, Swaminathan S, Karplus M.

CHARMM: a program for macromolecular energy, minimization, and dynamics
calculations. J Comput Chem 1983;4:187–217. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcc.540040211.

[79] Abraham MJ, Murtola T, Schulz R, P ́all S, Smith JC, Hess B, et al. Gromacs: high
performance molecular simulations through multi-level parallelism from laptops
to supercomputers. SoftwareX 2015;1–2:19–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
softx.2015.06.001.

[80] Sakae Y, Okamoto Y. Optimisation of OPLS-UA force-field parameters for protein
systems using protein data bank. Mol Simulat 2010;36:1148–56. https://doi.org/
10.1080/08927022.2010.507247.

[81] Heyes DM. Self-diffusion and shear viscosity of simple fluids. A molecular-

dynamics study. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1983;79:1741–58. https://doi.org/
10.1039/f29837901741.

[82] Lange E, Caballero JB, Puertas AM, Fuchs M. Comparison of structure and

transport properties of concentrated hard and soft sphere fluids. J Chem Phys
2009;130:174903. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3124182.

[83] Heyes DM, Dini D, Bra ́nka AC. Scaling of Lennard-Jones liquid elastic moduli,
viscoelasticity and other properties along fluid-solid coexistence. Phys Status
Solidi 2015;252:1514–25. https://doi.org/10.1002/pssb.201451695.
[84] Mecke M, Winkelmann J, Fischer J. Molecular dynamics simulation of the

liquid–vapor interface: the Lennard-Jones fluid. J Chem Phys 1997;107:9264–70.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.475217.

[85] Lorentz HA. Ueber die Anwendung des Satzes vom Virial in der kinetischen

Theorie der Gase. Ann Phys 1881;248:127–36.

[86] Berthelot D. Sur le m ́elange des gaz. Compt Rendus 1898;126:1703–6.
[87] Sun H. COMPASS: an ab initio force-field optimized for condensed-phase

applications overview with details on alkane and benzene compounds. J Phys
Chem B 1998;102:7338–64. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp980939v.

[88] Williams DE. Improved intermolecular force field for molecules containing H, C,
N, and O atoms, with application to nucleoside and peptide crystals. J Comput
Chem 2001;22:1154–66. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.1074.abs.

[89] Buesser B, Pratsinis SE. Design of nanomaterial synthesis by aerosol processes.
Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng 2012;3:103–27. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
chembioeng-062011-080930.

[90] Mao Q, Ren Y, Luo KH, Li S. Sintering-induced phase transformation of

nanoparticles: a molecular dynamics study. J Phys Chem C 2015;119:28631–9.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b08625.

[91] Mao Q, Luo KH. Molecular dynamics simulation of sintering dynamics of many
TiO2 nanoparticles. J Stat Phys 2015;160:1696–708. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10955-015-1304-z.

[92] Mayer JE. Dispersion and polarizability and the van der waals potential in the
alkali halides. J Chem Phys 1933;1:270–9. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1749283.
[93] Saxena SC, Gambhir RS. Second virial coefficient of gases and gaseous mixtures
on the morse potential. Mol Phys 1963;6:577–83. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00268976300100671.

[94] Rapp ́e AK, Goddard III WA. Charge equilibration for molecular dynamics
simulations. J Phys Chem 1991;95:3358–63. https://doi.org/10.1021/
j100161a070.

[95] Gilson MK, Gilson HSR, Potter MJ. Fast assignment of accurate partial atomic
charges: an electronegativity equalization method that accounts for alternate
resonance forms. J Chem Inf Comput Sci 2003;43:1982–97. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ci034148o.

[96] Berendsen HJC, Grigera JR, Straatsma TP. The missing term in effective pair
potentials. J Phys Chem 1987;91:6269–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/
j100308a038.

[97] Jorgensen WL, Chandrasekhar J, Madura JD, Impey RW, Klein ML. Comparison of

simple potential functions for simulating liquid water. J Chem Phys 1983;79:
926–35. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.445869.

[98] Naserifar S, Goddard WA. The quantum mechanics-based polarizable force field
for water simulations. J Chem Phys 2018;149:174502. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.5042658.

[99] Jedlovszky P, Richardi J. Comparison of different water models from ambient to
supercritical conditions: a Monte Carlo simulation and molecular Ornstein-
Zernike study. J Chem Phys 1999;110:8019–31. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.478704.

[100] Sorenson JM, Hura G, Glaeser RM, Head-Gordon T. What can X-ray scattering tell

us about the radial distribution functions of water? J Chem Phys 2000;113:
9149–61. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1319615.

[101] York DM, Darden TA, Pedersen LG. The effect of long-range electrostatic

interactions in simulations of macromolecular crystals: a comparison of the Ewald
and truncated list methods. J Chem Phys 1993;99:8345–8. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.465608.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108440

Q. Mao et al.

[102] Deserno M, Holm C. How to mesh up Ewald sums. II. An accurate error estimate
for the particle-particle-particle-mesh algorithm. J Chem Phys 1998;109:
7694–701. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.477415.

[130] Daw MS, Baskes MI. Embedded-atom method: derivation and application to

impurities, surfaces, and other defects in metals. Phys Rev B 1984;29:6443–53.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.29.6443.

[103] Isele-Holder RE, Mitchell W, Hammond JR, Kohlmeyer A, Ismail AE.

Reconsidering dispersion potentials: reduced cutoffs in mesh-based ewald solvers
can be faster than truncation. J Chem Theor Comput 2013;9:5412–20. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ct4004614.

[104] Hockney RW, Eastwood JW. Computer simulation using particles. CRC Press;

1988. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780367806934.

[131] Baskes MI. Application of the embedded-atom method to covalent materials: a
semiempirical potential for silicon. Phys Rev Lett 1987;59:2666–9. https://doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.59.2666.

[132] Yu J, Sinnott SB, Phillpot SR. Charge optimized many-body potential for the Si/

SiO2 system. Phys Rev B 2007;75:085311. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.75.085311.

[105] Hardy DJ, Stone JE, Schulten K. Multilevel summation of electrostatic potentials

[133] Stillinger FH, Weber TA. Computer simulation of local order in condensed phases

using graphics processing units. Parallel Comput 2009;35:164–77. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.parco.2008.12.005.

of silicon. Phys Rev B 1985;31:5262–71. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.31.5262.

[106] Rahman A. Correlations in the motion of atoms in liquid argon. Phys Rev 1964;

[134] Violi A. Modeling of soot particle inception in aromatic and aliphatic premixed

136:A405. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.136.A405.

[107] Miller JH, Mallard WG, Smyth KC. Intermolecular potential calculations for

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. J Phys Chem 1984;88:4963–70. https://doi.
org/10.1021/j150665a034.

[108] Rubio M, Ortí E, S ́anchez-Marín J. A study of coronene-coronene association

using atom-atom pair potentials. Int J Quant Chem 1996;57:567–73. https://doi.
org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-461X (1996)57:4<567::AID-QUA5>3.0.CO;2-W.
[109] Jasper AW, Miller JA. Collisional energy transfer in unimolecular reactions: direct
classical trajectories for CH 4 ↔ CH 3 + H in helium. J Phys Chem A 2009;113:
5612–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp900802f.

[110] Jasper AW, Miller JA. Theoretical unimolecular kinetics for CH4 + M ⇄ CH3 + H
+ M in eight baths, M = He, Ne, Ar, Kr, H2 , N2 , CO, and CH4. J Phys Chem A
2011;115:6438–55. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp200048n.

[111] Jasper AW, Oana CM, Miller JA. “Third-Body” collision efficiencies for

combustion modeling: hydrocarbons in atomic and diatomic baths. Proc Combust
Inst 2015;35:197–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.105.
[112] Wang H, Wen K, You X, Mao Q, Luo KH, Pilling MJ, et al. Energy transfer in

intermolecular collisions of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with bath gases He
and Ar. J Chem Phys 2019;151:044301. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5094104.

flames. Combust Flame 2004;139:279–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2004.08.013.

[135] Violi A, Venkatnathan A. Combustion-generated nanoparticles produced in a

benzene flame: a multiscale approach. J Chem Phys 2006;125:054302. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.2234481.

[136] Su JT, Goddard III WA. Excited electron dynamics modeling of warm dense

matter. Phys Rev Lett 2007;99:185003. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.99.185003.

[137] Jaramillo-Botero A, Su J, Qi A, Goddard III WA. Large-scale, long-term

nonadiabatic electron molecular dynamics for describing material properties and
phenomena in extreme environments. J Comput Chem 2011;32:497–512. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21637.

[138] Chenoweth K, van Duin ACT. Goddard W.A. ReaxFF reactive force field for

molecular dynamics simulations of hydrocarbon oxidation WA. ReaxFF reactive
force field for molecular dynamics simulations of hydrocarbon oxidation. J Phys
Chem A 2008;112:1040–53. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp709896w.

[139] Daw MS, Foiles SM, Baskes MI. The embedded-atom method: a review of theory
and applications. Mater Sci Rep 1993;9:251–310. https://doi.org/10.1016/0920-
2307(93)90001-U.

[113] Lii JH, Allinger NL. Molecular Mechanics. The MM3 force field for hydrocarbons.

[140] Tersoff J. New empirical model for the structural properties of silicon. Phys Rev

3. The van der Waals’ potentials and crystal data for aliphatic and aromatic
hydrocarbons. J Am Chem Soc 1989;111:8576–82. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja00205a003.

[114] Allinger NL. Conformational Analysis. 130. MM2. A hydrocarbon force field

utilizing V1 and V2 Torsional Terms. J Am Chem Soc 1977;99:8127–34. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ja00467a001.

[115] Allinger NL, Yuh YH, Lii JH. Molecular mechanics. The MM3 force field for

hydrocarbons. 1. J Am Chem Soc 1989;111:8551–66. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja00205a001.

[116] Allinger NL, Chen K, Lii JH. An improved force field (MM4) for saturated

hydrocarbons. J Comput Chem 1996;17:642–68. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)
1096-987X(199604)17. :5/6<642::AID-JCC6>3.0.CO;2-U.

[117] Weiner SJ, Kollman PA, Singh UC, Case DA, Ghio C, Alagona G, et al. A new force

field for molecular mechanical simulation of nucleic acids and proteins. J Am
Chem Soc 1984;106:765–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00315a051.

[118] Elvati P, Dillstrom VT, Violi A. Oxygen driven soot formation. Proc Combust Inst

2017;36:825–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.09.019.

[119] Chung SH, Violi A. Peri-condensed aromatics with aliphatic chains as key

intermediates for the nucleation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Proc Combust Inst
2011;33:693–700. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.06.038.

[120] Maple JR, Hwang M-J, Stockfisch TP, Dinur U, Waldman M, Ewig CS, et al.

Derivation of class II force fields. I. Methodology and quantum force field for the
alkyl functional group and alkane molecules. J Comput Chem 1994;15:162–82.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.540150207.

[121] Rapp ́e AK, Casewit CJ, Colwell KS, Goddard III WA, Skiff WM. UFF, a full periodic
table force field for molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics simulations.
J Am Chem Soc 1992;114:10024–35. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00051a040.

[122] Zhou J, Mao Q, Luo KH. Effects of moisture and salinity on methane adsorption in
kerogen: a molecular simulation study. Energy Fuel 2019;33:5368–76. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b00392.

[123] Mayo SL, Olafson BD, Goddard WA III. DREIDING: a generic force field for

molecular simulations. J Phys Chem 1990;94:8897–909. https://doi.org/
10.1021/j100389a010.

[124] Johansson KO, Dillstrom T, Elvati P, Campbell MF, Schrader PE, Popolan-

Vaida DM, et al. Radical-radical reactions, pyrene nucleation, and incipient soot
formation in combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:799–806. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.130.

[125] Jasper AW, Pelzer KM, Miller JA, Kamarchik E, Harding LB, Klippenstein SJ.

Predictive a priori pressure-dependent kinetics. Science 2014;346:1212–5.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1260856.

[126] Li Z, Wang H. Gas-nanoparticle scattering: a molecular view of momentum
accommodation function. Phys Rev Lett 2005;95:014502. https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.014502.

[127] Jorgensen WL, Maxwell DS, Tirado-Rives J. Development and testing of the OPLS
all-atom force field on conformational energetics and properties of organic
liquids. J Am Chem Soc 1996;118:11225–36. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ja9621760.

[128] Siu SWI, Pluhackova K, B ̈ockmann RA. Optimization of the OPLS-AA force field
for long hydrocarbons. J Chem Theor Comput 2012;8:1459–70. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ct200908r.

[129] Daw MS, Baskes MI. Semiempirical, quantum mechanical calculation of hydrogen
embrittlement in metals. Phys Rev Lett 1983;50:1285–8. https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevLett.50.1285.

Lett 1986;56:632–5. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.56.632.
[141] Tersoff J. Empirical interatomic potential for silicon with improved elastic
properties. Phys Rev B 1988;38:9902–5. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.38.9902.

[142] Stillinger FH, Weber TA, LaViolette RA. Chemical reactions in liquids: molecular
dynamics simulation for sulfur. J Chem Phys 1986;85:6460–9. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.451426.

[143] Stillinger FH, Weber TA. Molecular dynamics simulation for chemically reactive
substances. Fluorine. J Chem Phys 1988;88:5123–33. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.454665.

[144] Stillinger FH, Weber TA. Fluorination of the dimerized Si(100) surface studied by
molecular-dynamics simulation. Phys Rev Lett 1989;62:2144–7. https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevLett.62.2144.

[145] Watanabe T, Fujiwara H, Noguchi H, Hoshino T, Ohdomari I. Novel interatomic

potential energy function for Si, O mixed systems. Jpn J Appl Phys 1999;38:
L366–9. https://doi.org/10.1143/jjap.38.l366.

[146] Zachariah MR, Carrier MJ. Molecular dynamics computation of gas-phase

nanoparticle sintering: a comparison with phenomenological models. J Aerosol
Sci 1999;30:1139–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-8502(98)00782-4.

[147] Hawa T, Zachariah MR. Coalescence kinetics of unequal sized nanoparticles.
J Aerosol Sci 2006;37:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2005.02.007.

[148] Hawa T, Zachariah MR. Molecular dynamics study of particle-particle collisions
between hydrogen-passivated silicon nanoparticles. Phys Rev B 2004;69:035417.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.69.035417.

[149] Henz BJ, Hawa T, Zachariah MR. On the role of built-in electric fields on the
ignition of oxide coated nanoaluminum: ion mobility versus fickian diffusion.
J Appl Phys 2010;107. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3247579.

[150] Brenner DW, Shenderova OA, Harrison JA, Stuart SJ, Ni B, Sinnott SB. A second-
generation reactive empirical bond order (REBO) potential energy expression for
hydrocarbons. J Phys Condens Matter 2002;14:783–802. https://doi.org/
10.1088/0953-8984/14/4/312.

[151] Stuart SJ, Tutein AB, Harrison JA. A reactive potential for hydrocarbons with
intermolecular interactions. J Chem Phys 2000;112:6472–86. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.481208.

[152] Shan T-R, Devine BD, Hawkins JM, Asthagiri A, Phillpot SR, Sinnott SB. Second-

generation charge-optimized many-body potential for Si/SiO2 and amorphous
silica. Phys Rev B 2010;82:235302. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.82.235302.

[153] Liang T, Shin YK, Cheng YT, Yilmaz DE, Vishnu KG, Verners O, et al. Reactive

potentials for advanced atomistic simulations. Annu Rev Mater Res 2013;43:
109–29. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-matsci-071312-121610.

[154] Martinez J, Liang T, Sinnott SB, Phillpot SR. A third-generation charge optimized
many body (COMB3) potential for nitrogen-containing organic molecules.
Comput Mater Sci 2017;139:153–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
commatsci.2017.07.019.

[155] Su JT, Goddard III WA. The dynamics of highly excited electronic systems:

applications of the electron force field. J Chem Phys 2009;131:244501. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.3272671.

[156] Jiang XZ, Luo KH. Reactive and electron force field molecular dynamics

simulations of electric field assisted ethanol oxidation reactions. Proc Combust
Inst 2021;38:6605–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.318.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108441

Q. Mao et al.

[157] de Vos Burchart E, Verheij VA, van Bekkum H, van de Graaf B. A consistent

[182] Ojwang JGO, van Santen RA, Kramer GJ, van Duin ACT, Goddard III WA.

molecular mechanics force field for all-silica zeolites. Zeolites 1992;12:183–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0144-2449(92)90082-Z.

[158] Mortier WJ, Ghosh SK, Shankar S. Electronegativity-equalization method for the
calculation of atomic charges in molecules. J Am Chem Soc 1986;108:4315–20.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00275a013.

[159] Senftle TP, van Duin ACT, Janik MJ. Methane activation at the Pd/CeO2

interface. ACS Catal 2017;7:327–32. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.6b02447.

[160] Senftle TP, Meyer RJ, Janik MJ, van Duin ACT. Development of a ReaxFF

potential for Pd/O and application to palladium oxide formation. J Chem Phys
2013;139:044109. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4815820.

[161] Nomura KI, Kalia RK, Nakano A, Vashishta P, van Duin ACT, Goddard WA. III

Dynamic transition in the structure of an energetic crystal during chemical
reactions at shock front prior to detonation. Phys Rev Lett 2007;99:148303.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.148303.

[162] Neyts EC, van Duin ACT, Bogaerts A. Changing chirality during single-walled

carbon nanotube growth: a reactive molecular dynamics/monte carlo study. J Am
Chem Soc 2011;133:17225–31. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja204023c.

[163] Khalilov U, Bogaerts A, Neyts EC. Atomic scale simulation of carbon nanotube
nucleation from hydrocarbon precursors. Nat Commun 2015;6:10306. https://
doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10306.

[164] Senftle TP, van Duin ACT, Janik MJ. Determining in situ phases of a nanoparticle
catalyst via grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations with the ReaxFF potential.
Catal Commun 2014;52:72–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catcom.2013.12.001.

[165] Nielson KD, van Duin ACT, Oxgaard J, Deng WQ, Goddard WA. Development of
the ReaxFF reactive force field for describing transition metal catalyzed reactions,
with application to the initial stages of the catalytic formation of carbon
nanotubes. J Phys Chem A 2005;109:493–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp046244d.
[166] Islam MM, Bryantsev VS, van Duin ACT. ReaxFF reactive force field simulations
on the influence of teflon on electrolyte decomposition during Li/SWCNT anode
discharge in lithium-sulfur batteries. J Electrochem Soc 2014;161:E3009–14.
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.005408jes.

[167] Yun KS, Pai SJ, Yeo BC, Lee KR, Kim SJ, Han SS. Simulation protocol for

prediction of a solid-electrolyte interphase on the silicon-based anodes of a
lithium-ion battery: ReaxFF reactive force field. J Phys Chem Lett 2017;8:2812–8.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b00898.

[168] Zhang W, van Duin ACT. Second-generation ReaxFF water force field:

improvements in the description of water density and OH-anion diffusion. J Phys
Chem B 2017;121:6021–32. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b02548.
[169] Goverapet Srinivasan S, van Duin ACT, Ganesh P. Development of a ReaxFF

potential for carbon condensed phases and its application to the thermal
fragmentation of a large fullerene. J Phys Chem A 2015;119:571–80. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp510274e.

[170] Mao Q, Ren Y, Luo KH, Van Duin ACT. Dynamics and kinetics of reversible homo-
molecular dimerization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. J Chem Phys 2017;
147:244305. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5000534.

Parametrization of a reactive force field for aluminum hydride. J Chem Phys
2009;131:044501. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3182853.

[183] Nayir N, van Duin ACT, Erkoc S. Development of a ReaxFF reactive force field for

interstitial oxygen in germanium and its application to GeO2/Ge interfaces.
J Phys Chem C 2019;123:1208–18. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b08862.

[184] Manzano H, Pellenq RJM, Ulm FJ, Buehler MJ, van Duin ACT. Hydration of
calcium oxide surface predicted by reactive force field molecular dynamics.
Langmuir 2012;28:4187–97. https://doi.org/10.1021/la204338m.
[185] Ostadhossein A, Rahnamoun A, Wang Y, Zhao P, Zhang S, Crespi VH, et al.

ReaxFF reactive force-field study of molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). J Phys Chem
Lett 2017;8:631–40. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b02902.

[186] Shin YK, Kwak H, Vasenkov AV, Sengupta D, van Duin ACT. Development of a

ReaxFF reactive force field for Fe/Cr/O/S and application to oxidation of butane
over a pyrite-covered Cr2O3 catalyst. ACS Catal 2015;5:7226–36. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acscatal.5b01766.

[187] Mueller JE, van Duin ACT, Goddard III WA. Development and validation of Reaxff
reactive force field for hydrocarbon chemistry catalyzed by nickel. J Phys Chem C
2010;114:4939–49. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9035056.

[188] Shin YK, Gai L, Raman S, van Duin ACT. Development of a ReaxFF reactive force
field for the Pt-Ni alloy catalyst. J Phys Chem A 2016;120:8044–55. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.jpca.6b06770.

[189] Islam MM, Zou C, van Duin ACT, Raman S. Interactions of hydrogen with the iron

and iron carbide interfaces: a ReaxFF molecular dynamics study. Phys Chem
Chem Phys 2016;18:761–71. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CP06108C.

[190] Zou C, van Duin A. Investigation of complex iron surface catalytic chemistry using
the ReaxFF reactive force field method. JOM 2012;64:1426–37. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11837-012-0463-5.

[191] Zhu W, Gong H, Han Y, Zhang M, van Duin ACT. Development of a Reactive force
field for simulations on the catalytic conversion of C/H/O molecules on Cu-metal
and Cu-oxide surfaces and application to Cu/CuO-based chemical looping. J Phys
Chem C 2020;124:12512–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c02573.
[192] Huang HS, Ai LQ, van Duin ACT, Chen M, Lü YJ. ReaxFF reactive force field for
molecular dynamics simulations of liquid Cu and Zr metals. J Chem Phys 2019;
151:094503. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5112794.

[193] Ostadhossein A, Cubuk ED, Tritsaris GA, Kaxiras E, Zhang S, van Duin ACT. Stress
effects on the initial lithiation of crystalline silicon nanowires: reactive molecular
dynamics simulations using ReaxFF. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:3832–40.
https://doi.org/10.1039/c4cp05198j.

[194] Islam MM, Ostadhossein A, Borodin O, Yeates AT, Tipton WW, Hennig RG, et al.

ReaxFF molecular dynamics simulations on lithiated sulfur cathode materials.
Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:3383–93. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4cp04532g.

[195] Narayanan B, van Duin ACT, Kappes BB, Reimanis IE, Ciobanu CV. A reactive

force field for lithium-aluminum silicates with applications to eucryptite phases.
Model Simulat Mater Sci Eng 2012;20:015002. https://doi.org/10.1088/0965-
0393/20/1/015002.

[171] Ashraf C, van Duin ACT. Extension of the ReaxFF combustion force field toward

[196] Bedrov D, Smith GD, van Duin ACT. Reactions of singly-reduced ethylene

syngas combustion and initial oxidation kinetics. J Phys Chem A 2017;121:
1051–68. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.6b12429.

[172] Zhang W, van Duin ACT. Improvement of the ReaxFF description for

functionalized hydrocarbon/water weak interactions in the condensed phase.
J Phys Chem B 2018;122:4083–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.8b01127.

[173] Yoon K, Rahnamoun A, Swett JL, Iberi V, Cullen DA, Vlassiouk IV, et al.

Atomistic-scale simulations of defect formation in graphene under noble gas ion
irradiation. ACS Nano 2016;10:8376–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsnano.6b03036.

[174] Kamat AM, van Duin ACT, Yakovlev A. Molecular dynamics simulations of laser-

induced incandescence of soot using an extended ReaxFF reactive force field.
J Phys Chem A 2010;114:12561–72. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp1080302.
[175] Zhang L, van Duin ACT, Zybin SV, Goddard III WA. Thermal decomposition of

hydrazines from reactive dynamics using the ReaxFF reactive force field. J Phys
Chem B 2009;113:10770–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp900194d.

[176] Zhang L, Zybin SV, van Duin ACT, Dasgupta S, Goddard III WA, Kober EM. Carbon
cluster formation during thermal decomposition of octahydro-l,3,5,7-tetranitro-
l,3,5,7-tetrazocine and l,3,5-triamino-2,4,6- trinitrobenzene high explosives from
ReaxFF reactive molecular dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem A 2009;113:
10619–40. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp901353a.

[177] Liu L, Liu Y, Zybin SV, Sun H, Goddard III WA. ReaxFF-lg: correction of the

carbonate in lithium battery electrolytes: a molecular dynamics simulation study
using the ReaxFF. J Phys Chem A 2012;116:2978–85. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp210345b.

[197] Ostadhossein A, Kim SY, Cubuk ED, Qi Y, van Duin ACT. Atomic insight into the
lithium storage and diffusion mechanism of SiO2/Al2O3 electrodes of lithium ion
batteries: ReaxFF reactive force field modeling. J Phys Chem A 2016;120:
2114–27. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.5b11908.

[198] Merinov BV, Mueller JE, van Duin ACT, An Q, Goddard III WA. ReaxFF reactive
force-field modeling of the triple-phase boundary in a solid oxide fuel cell. J Phys
Chem Lett 2014;5:4039–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/jz501891y.
[199] Fedkin MV, Shin YK, Dasgupta N, Yeon J, Zhang W, van Duin D, et al.

Development of the ReaxFF methodology for electrolyte-water systems. J Phys
Chem A 2019;123:2125–41. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b10453.
[200] Ganeshan K, Shin YK, Osti NC, Sun Y, Prenger K, Naguib M, et al. Structure and
dynamics of aqueous electrolytes confined in 2D-TiO2/Ti3C2T2 MXene
heterostructures. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:58378–89. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.0c17536.

[201] Huang L, Bandosz T, Joshi KL, van Duin ACT, Gubbins KE. Reactive adsorption of

ammonia and ammonia/water on CuBTC metal-organic framework: a ReaxFF
molecular dynamics simulation. J Chem Phys 2013;138:34102. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.4774332.

ReaxFF reactive force field for London dispersion, with applications to the
equations of state for energetic materials. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:11016–22.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp201599t.

[202] Bai C, Liu L, Sun H. Molecular dynamics simulations of methanol to olefin

reactions in HZSM-5 zeolite using a ReaxFF force field. J Phys Chem C 2012;116:
7029–39. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp300221j.

[178] Weismiller MR, van Duin ACT, Lee J, Yetter RA. ReaxFF reactive force field

[203] Zheng Y, Hong S, Psofogiannakis G, Rayner GB, Datta S, van Duin ACT, et al.

development and applications for molecular dynamics simulations of ammonia
borane dehydrogenation and combustion. J Phys Chem A 2010;114:5485–92.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp100136c.

Modeling and in situ probing of surface reactions in atomic layer deposition. ACS
Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9:15848–56. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.7b01618.

[179] Pai SJ, Yeo BC, Han SS. Development of the ReaxFFCBN reactive force field for the

[204] Dasgupta N, Shin YK, Fedkin MV, van Duin ACT. ReaxFF molecular dynamics

improved design of liquid CBN hydrogen storage materials. Phys Chem Chem
Phys 2016;18:1818–27. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CP05486A.

[180] Russo MF, Li R, Mench M, van Duin ACT. Molecular dynamic simulation of

aluminum-water reactions using the ReaxFF reactive force field. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2011;36:5828–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.02.035.
[181] Hong S, van Duin ACT. Atomistic-scale analysis of carbon coating and its effect on
the oxidation of aluminum nanoparticles by ReaxFF-molecular dynamics
simulations. J Phys Chem C 2016;120:9464–74. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpcc.6b00786.

simulations on the structure and dynamics of electrolyte water systems at ambient
temperature. Comput Mater Sci 2020;172:109349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
commatsci.2019.109349.

[205] Shin YK, Gao Y, Shin D, van Duin ACT. Impact of three-body interactions in a
ReaxFF force field for Ni and Cr transition metals and their alloys on the
prediction of thermal and mechanical properties. Comput Mater Sci 2021;197:
110602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2021.110602.

[206] van Duin ACT, Baas JMA, van de Graaf B. Delft molecular mechanics: a new

approach to hydrocarbon force fields. Inclusion of a geometry-dependent charge

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108442

Q. Mao et al.

calculation. J Chem Soc Faraday Trans 1994;90:2881–95. https://doi.org/
10.1039/FT9949002881.

[207] Rice BM, Larentzos JP, Byrd EFC, Weingarten NS. Parameterizing complex

reactive force fields using multiple objective evolutionary strategies (MOES): Part
2: transferability of ReaxFF models to C-H-N-O energetic materials. J Chem Theor
Comput 2015;11:392–405. https://doi.org/10.1021/ct5007899.

[208] Dittner M, Müller J, Aktulga HM, Hartke B. Efficient global optimization of

reactive force-field parameters. J Comput Chem 2015;36:1550–61. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcc.23966.

[209] Larsson HR, van Duin ACT, Hartke B. Global optimization of parameters in the
reactive force field ReaxFF for SiOH. J Comput Chem 2015;36:1550–61. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcc.23966.

[210] Jaramillo-Botero A, Naserifar S, Goddard III WA. General multiobjective force

field optimization framework, with application to reactive force fields for silicon
carbide. J Chem Theor Comput 2014;10:1426–39. https://doi.org/10.1021/
ct5001044.

[211] Shchygol G, Yakovlev A, Trnka T, van Duin ACT, Verstraelen T. ReaxFF parameter

optimization with Monte-Carlo and evolutionary algorithms: Guidelines and
insights. J Chem Theor Comput 2019;15:6799–812. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jctc.9b00769.

[212] Sengul M, Song Y, Nayir N, Gao Y, Hung Y, Dasgupta T, et al. An initial design-
enhanced deep learning-based optimization framework to parameterize
multicomponent ReaxFF force fields. ChemRxiv 2020. https://doi.org/10.26434/
chemrxiv.12323909.v2.

[213] Plimpton SJ, Thompson AP. Computational aspects of many-body potentials. MRS

Bull 2012;37:513–21. https://doi.org/10.1557/mrs.2012.96.

[214] Zuo Y, Chen C, Li X, Deng Z, Chen Y, Behler J, et al. Performance and cost

assessment of machine learning interatomic potentials. J Phys Chem A 2020;124:
731–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b08723.

[215] Plimpton S. Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics.
J Comput Phys 1995;117:1–19. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1995.1039.

[216] Materials Studio V 4.0. Accelrys Inc; 2005.
[217] Martínez L, Andrade R, Birgin EG, Martínez JM. Packmol: a package for building
initial configurations for molecular dynamics simulations. J Comput Chem 2009;
30:2157–64. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21224. 10.1002/jcc.
[218] Mao Q, Luo KH. Trace metal assisted polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons

fragmentation, growth and soot nucleation. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:1023–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.06.106.

[219] Zhang Y, Li S, Yan W, Tse SD. Effect of size-dependent grain structures on the

dynamics of nanoparticle coalescence. J Appl Phys 2012;111:124321. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.4730773.

[220] Basconi JE, Shirts MR. Effects of temperature control algorithms on transport

[237] Pal S, Fichthorn KA. Accelerated molecular dynamics of infrequent events. Chem
Eng J 1999;74:77–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1385-8947(99)00055-8.

[238] Sørensen MR, Voter AF. Temperature-accelerated dynamics for simulation of

infrequent events. J Chem Phys 2000;112:9599–606. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.481576.

[239] Uberuaga BP, Stuart SJ, Voter AF. Parallel replica dynamics for driven systems:
derivation and application to strained nanotubes. Phys Rev B 2007;75:014301.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.75.014301.

[240] Bal KM, Neyts EC. Merging metadynamics into hyperdynamics: accelerated

molecular simulations reaching time scales from microseconds to seconds. J Chem
Theor Comput 2015;11:4545–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00597.

[241] Stone JE, Hardy DJ, Ufimtsev IS, Schulten K. GPU-accelerated molecular

modeling coming of age. J Mol Graph Model 2010;29:116–25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmgm.2010.06.010.

[242] Case DA, Darden TA, Cheatham I TE, Simmerling CL, Wang J, Duke RE, et al.

Amber 2008;10:1–304.

[243] Nelson MT, Humphrey W, Gursoy A, Dalke A, Kal ́e LV, Skeel RD, et al. NAMD: a
parallel, object-oriented molecular dynamics program. Int J Supercomput Appl
High Perform Comput 1996;10:251–68. https://doi.org/10.1177/
109434209601000401.

[244] Zheng M, Li X, Guo L. Algorithms of GPU-enabled reactive force field (ReaxFF)
molecular dynamics. J Mol Graph Model 2013;41:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jmgm.2013.02.001.

[245] Kylasa SB, Aktulga HM, Grama AY. PuReMD-GPU: a reactive molecular dynamics
simulation package for GPUs. J Comput Phys 2014;272:343–59. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcp.2014.04.035.

[246] Smith W, Yong CW, Rodger PM. DL_POLY: application to molecular simulation.
Mol Simulat 2002;28:385–471. https://doi.org/10.1080/08927020290018769.

[247] Harger M, Li D, Wang Z, Dalby K, Lagard`ere L, Piquemal JP, et al. Tinker-

OpenMM: absolute and relative alchemical free energies using AMOEBA on GPUs.
J Comput Chem 2017;38:2047–55. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.24853.
[248] van Duin ACT, Goddard WA, Islam MM, van Schoot H, Trnka Aly T. ADF2021.1,

SCM, theoretical chemistry. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Vrije Universiteit;
2021. http://www.scm.com.

[249] Humphrey W, Dalke A, Schulten K. VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J Mol Graph

1996;14:33–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/0263-7855(96)00018-5.

[250] Li J. AtomEye: an efficient atomistic configuration viewer. Model Simulat Mater
Sci Eng 2003;11:173–7. https://doi.org/10.1088/0965-0393/11/2/305.

[251] Schr ̈odinger LLC, DeLano W. PyMOL. n.d, http://www.pymol.org/pymol.
[252] Merritt EA, Murphy MEP. Raster3D version 2.0 A program for photorealistic
molecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr Sect D Biol Crystallogr 1994;50:869–73.
https://doi.org/10.1107/S0907444994006396.

properties and kinetics in molecular dynamics simulations. J Chem Theor Comput
2013;9:2887–99. https://doi.org/10.1021/ct400109a.

[253] Sayle RA, Milner-White EJ. RASMOL: biomolecular graphics for all. Trends

Biochem Sci 1995;20:374–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-0004(00)89080-5.

[221] Jiang XZ, Feng M, Luo KH, Ventikos Y. Large-scale molecular dynamics

[254] Stukowski A. Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with

simulation of flow under complex structure of endothelial glycocalyx. Comput
Fluids 2018;173:140–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2018.03.014.
[222] Allen MP, Tildesley DJ. Computer simulation of liquids. Physics Today 1989;42:

105–6. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2810937.

[223] Cieplak M, Koplik J, Banavar JR. Boundary conditions at a fluid-solid interface.

Phys Rev Lett 2001;86:803–6. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.803.

[224] Hoover WG. Canonical dynamics: equilibrium phase-space distributions. Phys
Rev A 1985;31:1695–7. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.31.1695.

[225] Berendsen HJC, Postma JPM, van Gunsteren WF, Dinola A, Haak JR. Molecular

dynamics with coupling to an external bath. J Chem Phys 1984;81:3684–90.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.448118.

[226] Kotsalis EM, Walther JH, Koumoutsakos P. Multiphase water flow inside carbon
nanotubes. Int J Multiphas Flow 2004;30:995–1010. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmultiphaseflow.2004.03.009.

[227] Pikoula M, Tessier MB, Woods RJ, Ventikos Y. Oligosaccharide model of the

vascular endothelial glycocalyx in physiological flow. Microfluid Nanofluid 2018;
22:21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10404-018-2037-5.

[228] Andersen HC. Molecular dynamics simulations at constant pressure and/or

temperature. J Chem Phys 1980;72:2384–93. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.439486.
[229] Tanaka H, Nakanishi K, Watanabe N. Constant temperature molecular dynamics

calculation on Lennard-Jones fluid and its application to water. J Chem Phys
1983;78:2626–34. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.445020.

OVITO–the Open Visualization Tool. Model Simulat Mater Sci Eng 2010;18:
015012. https://doi.org/10.1088/0965-0393/18/1/015012.

[255] D ̈ontgen M, Przybylski-Freund MD, Kr ̈oger LC, Kopp WA, Ismail A, Leonhard K.
Automated discovery of reaction pathways, rate constants and transition states
using reactive molecular dynamics simulations. J Chem Theor Comput 2015:11:
2517–2524. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00201.

[256] Liu J, Li X, Guo L, Zheng M, Han J, Yuan X, et al. Reaction analysis and

visualization of ReaxFF molecular dynamics simulations. J Mol Graph Model
2014;53:13–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmgm.2014.07.002.

[257] Wan S, Sinclair RC, Coveney PV. Uncertainty quantification in classical molecular

dynamics. Philos Trans R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci 2021:379. https://doi.org/
10.1098/rsta.2020.0082. 20200082.

[258] Rizzi F, Najm HN, Debusschere BJ, Sargsyan K, Salloum M, Adalsteinsson H, et al.
Uncertainty quantification in MD simulations. Part I: forward propagation.
Multiscale Model Simul 2012;10:1428–59. https://doi.org/10.1137/110853169.

[259] Wright DW, Richardson RA, Edeling W, Lakhlili J, Sinclair RC, Jancauskas V,

et al. Building confidence in simulation: applications of EasyVVUQ. Adv Theory
Simulations 2020;3:1900246. https://doi.org/10.1002/adts.201900246.

[260] Matsui M, Akaogi M. Molecular dynamics simulation of the structural and

physical properties of the four polymorphs of TiO2. Mol Simulat 1991;6:239–44.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08927029108022432.

[261] Schelling PK, Phillpot SR, Keblinski P. Comparison of atomic-level simulation

[230] Lowe CP. An alternative approach to dissipative particle dynamics. Europhys Lett

1999;47:145–51. https://doi.org/10.1209/epl/i1999-00365-x.

methods for computing thermal conductivity. Phys Rev B 2002;65:144306.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.65.144306.

[231] Cruz-Chu ER, Malafeev A, Pajarskas T, Pivkin IV, Koumoutsakos P. Structure and
response to flow of the glycocalyx layer. Biophys J 2014;106:232–43. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bpj.2013.09.060.

[262] He X, Zhu Y, Epstein A, Mo Y. Statistical variances of diffusional properties from
ab initio molecular dynamics simulations. Npj Comput Mater 2018;4:18. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41524-018-0074-y.

[232] Krzywinski M, Altman N. Points of significance: error bars. Nat Methods 2013;10:

[263] Sundaram DS, Puri P, Yang V. Thermochemical behavior of nickel-coated

921–2. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2659.

[233] Ewald PP. Die Berechnung optischer und elektrostatischer Gitterpotentiale. Ann

Phys 1921;369:253–87. https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.19213690304.

[234] Steinbach PJ, Brooks BR. New spherical-cutoff methods for long-range forces in
macromolecular simulation. J Comput Chem 1994;15:667–83. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jcc.540150702.

[235] Ryckaert JP, Ciccotti G, Berendsen HJC. Numerical integration of the cartesian

equations of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics of n-
alkanes. J Comput Phys 1977;23:327–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991
(77)90098-5.

[236] Nielsen SO, Lopez CF, Srinivas G, Klein ML. Coarse grain models and the

computer simulation of soft materials. J Phys Condens Matter 2004;16:R481.
https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/16/15/R03.

nanoaluminum particles. J Phys Chem C 2013;117:7858–69. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp312436j.

[264] Thomas M, Brehm M, Fligg R, V ̈ohringer P, Kirchner B. Computing vibrational

spectra from ab initio molecular dynamics. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2013;15:
6608–22. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cp44302g.

[265] W ̈ohl J, Kopp WA, Yevlakhovych I, Bahr L, Koß HJ, Leonhard K. Completely

computational model setup for spectroscopic techniques: the ab initio molecular
dynamics indirect hard modeling approach. J Phys Chem A 2022;126:2845–53.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.2c01061.

[266] Skyner RE, McDonagh JL, Groom CR, van Mourik T, Mitchell JBO. A review of
methods for the calculation of solution free energies and the modelling of systems
in solution. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:6174–91. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c5cp00288e.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108443

Q. Mao et al.

[267] Lümmen N. ReaxFF-molecular dynamics simulations of non-oxidative and non-
catalyzed thermal decomposition of methane at high temperatures. Phys Chem
Chem Phys 2010;12:7883–93. https://doi.org/10.1039/C003367G.

[268] Ding J, Zhang L, Zhang Y, Han KL. A reactive molecular dynamics study of n-

heptane pyrolysis at high temperature. J Phys Chem A 2013;117:3266–78.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp311498u.

[269] Wang QD, Wang JB, Li JQ, Tan NX, Li XY. Reactive molecular dynamics

simulation and chemical kinetic modeling of pyrolysis and combustion of n-
dodecane. Combust Flame 2011;158:217–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2010.08.010.

[270] Chen Z, Sun W, Zhao L. High-temperature and high-pressure pyrolysis of
hexadecane: molecular dynamic simulation based on reactive force field
(ReaxFF). J Phys Chem A 2017;121:2069–78. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpca.6b12367.

[271] Liu H, Liang J, He R, Li X, Zheng M, Ren C, et al. Overall mechanism of JP-10

pyrolysis unraveled by large-scale reactive molecular dynamics simulation.
Combust Flame 2022;237:111865. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
combustflame.2021.111865.

[272] Ashraf C, Shabnam S, Jain A, Xuan Y, van Duin ACT. Pyrolysis of binary fuel
mixtures at supercritical conditions: a ReaxFF molecular dynamics study. Fuel
2019;235:194–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.07.077.

[273] D ̈ontgen M, Schmalz F, Kopp WA, Kr ̈oger LC, Leonhard K. Automated chemical
kinetic modeling via hybrid reactive molecular dynamics and quantum chemistry
simulations. J Chem Inf Model 2018;58:1343–55. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jcim.8b00078.

[274] Kr ̈oger LC, Kopp WA, D ̈ontgen M, Leonhard K. Assessing statistical uncertainties
of rare events in reactive molecular dynamics simulations. J Chem Theor Comput
2017;13:3955–60. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00524.

[275] Mao Q, Hou D, Luo KH, You X. Dimerization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
molecules and radicals under flame conditions. J Phys Chem A 2018;122:8701–8.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b07102.

[276] Zeng J, Cao L, Xu M, Zhu T, Zhang JZH. Complex reaction processes in

combustion unraveled by neural network-based molecular dynamics simulation.
Nat Commun 2020;11:5713. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19497-z.

[277] Mebel AM, Georgievskii Y, Jasper AW, Klippenstein SJ. Temperature- and

pressure-dependent rate coefficients for the HACA pathways from benzene to
naphthalene. Proc Combust Inst 2017;36:919–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2016.07.013.

[278] Kucuk A, Kadioglu Y, Gulaboglu MS. A study of spontaneous, combustion

[294] Castro-Marcano F, Russo MF, van Duin ACT, Mathews JP. Pyrolysis of a large-

scale molecular model for Illinois no. 6 coal using the ReaxFF reactive force field.
J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 2014;109:79–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jaap.2014.07.011.

[295] Menon V, Rao M. Trends in bioconversion of lignocellulose: biofuels, platform

chemicals & biorefinery concept. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2012;38:522–50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2012.02.002.

[296] Tuck CO, P ́erez E, Horv ́ath IT, Sheldon RA, Poliakoff M. Valorization of biomass:
deriving more value from waste. Science 2012;337:695–9. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1218930.

[297] Kirubakaran V, Sivaramakrishnan V, Nalini R, Sekar T, Premalatha M,

Subramanian P. A review on gasification of biomass. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2009;13:179–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2007.07.001.
[298] Chen WH, Kuo PC. Torrefaction and co-torrefaction characterization of
hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin as well as torrefaction of some basic
constituents in biomass. Energy 2011;36:803–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2010.12.036.

[299] Beste A. ReaxFF study of the oxidation of lignin model compounds for the most
common linkages in softwood in view of carbon fiber production. J Phys Chem A
2014;118:803–14. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp410454q.

[300] Beste A. ReaxFF study of the oxidation of softwood lignin in view of carbon fiber
production. Energy Fuel 2014;28:7007–13. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef501901p.
[301] Zhang T, Li X, Qiao X, Zheng M, Guo L, Song W, et al. Initial mechanisms for an
overall behavior of Lignin pyrolysis through large-scale ReaxFF molecular
dynamics simulations. Energy Fuel 2016;30:3140–50. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.energyfuels.6b00247.

[302] Zhang T, Li X, Guo L. Initial reactivity of linkages and monomer rings in Lignin
pyrolysis revealed by ReaxFF molecular dynamics. Langmuir 2017;33:11646–57.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b02053.

[303] Zhang T, Li X, Guo L, Guo X. Reaction mechanisms in pyrolysis of hardwood,
softwood, and kraft lignin revealed by ReaxFF MD simulations. Energy Fuels
2019;33:11210–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b02843.

[304] Han S, Li X, Zheng M, Guo L. Initial reactivity differences between a 3-component
surrogate model and a 24-component model for RP-1 fuel pyrolysis evaluated by
ReaxFF MD. Fuel 2018;222:753–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.02.112.
[305] Zhao P, Han S, Li X, Zhu T, Tao X, Guo L. Comparison of RP-3 pyrolysis reactions

between surrogates and 45-component model by ReaxFF molecular dynamics
simulations. Energy \& Fuels 2019;33:7176–87. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.9b01321.

characteristics of a Turkish lignite: particle size, moisture of coal, humidity of air.
Combust Flame 2003;133:255–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)
00553-9.

[306] Zheng M, Wang Z, Li X, Qiao X, Song W, Guo L. Initial reaction mechanisms of

cellulose pyrolysis revealed by ReaxFF molecular dynamics. Fuel 2016;177:
130–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.03.008.

[279] Solomon PR, Beer JM, Longwell JP. Chapter 12: fundamentals of coal conversion
and relation to coal properties. Energy 1987;12:837–83. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0360-5442(87)80014-2.

[307] Paajanen A, Vaari J. High-temperature decomposition of the cellulose molecule: a

stochastic molecular dynamics study. Cellulose 2017;24:2713–25. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10570-017-1325-7.

[280] Solomon PR, Fletcher TH, Pugmire RJ. Progress in coal pyrolysis. Fuel 1993;72:

[308] Chen C, Zhao L, Wang J, Lin S. Reactive molecular dynamics simulations of

587–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-2361(93)90570-R.

[281] Solomon PR, Serio MA, Suuberg EM. Coal pyrolysis: experiments, kinetic rates
and mechanisms. Prog Energy Combust Sci 1992;18:133–220. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0360-1285(92)90021-R.

[282] Mathews JP, Chaffee AL. The molecular representations of coal - a review. Fuel

2012;96:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2011.11.025.

[283] Salmon E, van Duin ACT, Lorant F, Marquaire PM, Goddard WA. Early maturation
processes in coal. Part 2: reactive dynamics simulations using the ReaxFF reactive
force field on Morwell Brown coal structures. Org Geochem 2009;40:1195–209.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orggeochem.2009.09.001.

[284] Zhou ZJ, Guo LZ, Chen LP, Shan SQ, Wang ZH. Study of pyrolysis of brown coal
and gasification of coal-water slurry using the ReaxFF reactive force field. Int J
Energy Res 2018;42:2465–80. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.4029.

[285] Bhoi S, Banerjee T, Mohanty K. Molecular dynamic simulation of spontaneous
combustion and pyrolysis of brown coal using ReaxFF. Fuel 2014;136:326–33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.07.058.

[286] Zhan JH, Wu RC, Liu XX, Gao SQ, Xu GW. Preliminary understanding of initial

reaction process for subbituminous coal pyrolysis with molecular dynamics
simulation. Fuel 2014;134:283–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.06.005.

[287] Hong DK, Guo X. Molecular dynamics simulations of Zhundong coal pyrolysis

using reactive force field. Fuel 2017;210:58–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2017.08.061.

[288] Gao MJ, Li XX, Guo L. Pyrolysis simulations of Fugu coal by large-scale ReaxFF
molecular dynamics. Fuel Process Technol 2018;178:197–205. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuproc.2018.05.011.

[289] Zheng M, Li X, Liu J, Guo L. Initial chemical reaction simulation of coal pyrolysis
via ReaxFF molecular dynamics. Energy Fuel 2013;27:2942–51. https://doi.org/
10.1021/ef400143z.

biomass pyrolysis and combustion under various oxidative and humidity
environments. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017;56:12276–88. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.iecr.7b01714.

[309] Wang S, Xia Z, Hu Y, He Z, Uzoejinwa BB, Wang Q, et al. Co-pyrolysis mechanism
of seaweed polysaccharides and cellulose based on macroscopic experiments and
molecular simulations. Bioresour Technol 2017;228:305–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2016.12.004.

[310] Han SP, Van Duin ACT, Goddard WA, Strachan A. Thermal decomposition of

condensed-phase nitromethane from molecular dynamics from ReaxFF reactive
dynamics. J Phys Chem B 2011;115:6534–40. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp1104054.

[311] Rom N, Zybin SV, van Duin ACT, Goddard III WA, Zeiri Y, Katz G, et al. Density-
dependent liquid nitromethane decomposition: molecular dynamics simulations
based on ReaxFF. J Phys Chem A 2011;115:10181–202. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp202059v.

[312] Joshi KL, Chaudhuri S. Reactive simulation of the chemistry behind the

condensed-phase ignition of RDX from hot spots. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:
18790–801. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CP00950B.

[313] Zheng K, Wen Y, Huang B, Wang J, Chen J, Xie G, et al. The solid phase thermal

decomposition and nanocrystal effect of hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine
(RDX) via ReaxFF large-scale molecular dynamics simulation. Phys Chem Chem
Phys 2019;21:17240–52. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9CP01482A.

[314] Wang N, Peng J, Pang A, He T, Du F, Jaramillo-Botero A. Thermodynamic

simulation of the RDX-aluminum interface using ReaxFF molecular dynamics.
J Phys Chem C 2017;121:14597–610. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b03108.
[315] Li CF, Mei Z, Zhao FQ, Xu SY, Ju XH. Molecular dynamic simulation for thermal
decomposition of RDX with nano-AlH3 particles. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;20:
14192–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8CP01621F.

[290] Zheng M, Li X, Liu J, Wang Z, Gong X, Guo L, et al. Pyrolysis of liulin coal

[316] Zhou TT, Huang FL. Effects of defects on thermal decomposition of HMX via

simulated by GPU-based ReaxFF MD with cheminformatics analysis. Energy Fuel
2014;28:522–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef402140n.

ReaxFF molecular dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem B 2011;115:278–87.
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp105805w.

[291] Zheng M, Li X, Nie F, Guo L. Investigation of overall pyrolysis stages for Liulin

[317] Long Y, Chen J. Systematic study of the reaction kinetics for HMX. J Phys Chem A

Bituminous coal by large-scale ReaxFF molecular dynamics. Energy Fuel 2017;31:
3675–83. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b03243.

[292] Li X, Zheng M, Liu J, Guo L. Revealing chemical reactions of coal pyrolysis with

GPU-enabled ReaxFF molecular dynamics and cheminformatics analysis. Mol
Simulat 2015;41:13–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/08927022.2014.913789.

2015;119:4073–82. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp509144v.

[318] Rom N, Hirshberg B, Zeiri Y, Furman D, Zybin SV, Goddard WA, et al. First-
principles-based reaction kinetics for decomposition of hot, dense liquid TNT
from ReaxFF multiscale reactive dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem C 2013;117:
21043–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp404907b.

[293] Zheng M, Li XX, Nie FG, Guo L. Investigation of model scale effects on coal

[319] Wang F, Chen L, Geng D, Lu J, Wu J. Effect of density on the thermal

pyrolysis using ReaxFF MD simulation. Mol Simulat 2017;43:1081–8. https://doi.
org/10.1080/08927022.2017.1356456.

decomposition mechanism of ε-CL-20: a ReaxFF reactive molecular dynamics

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108444

Q. Mao et al.

simulation study. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018;20:22600–9. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C8CP03010C.

[320] Wang F, Chen L, Geng D, Wu J, Lu J, Wang C. Thermal decomposition mechanism
of CL-20 at different temperatures by ReaxFF reactive molecular dynamics
simulations. J Phys Chem A 2018;122:3971–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpca.8b01256.

[321] Xue X, Ma Y, Zeng Q, Zhang C. Initial decay mechanism of the heated CL-20/HMX
cocrystal: a case of the cocrystal mediating the thermal stability of the two pure
components. J Phys Chem C 2017;121:4899–908. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpcc.7b00698.

[322] Ren C, Liu H, Li X, Guo L. Decomposition mechanism scenarios of CL-20 co-
crystals revealed by ReaxFF molecular dynamics: similarities and differences.
Phys Chem Chem Phys 2020;22:2827–40. https://doi.org/10.1039/
C9CP06102A.

[323] Hong S, van Duin ACT. Molecular dynamics simulations of the oxidation of

aluminum nanoparticles using the ReaxFF reactive force field. J Phys Chem C
2015;119:17876–86. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b04650.

[324] Chu Q, Shi B, Liao L, Luo KH, Wang N, Huang C. Ignition and oxidation of core-
shell Al/Al2O3 nanoparticles in an oxygen atmosphere: insights from molecular
dynamics simulation. J Phys Chem C 2018;122:29620–7. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b09858.

[325] Chu Q, Shi B, Liao L, Zhou Y, Luo KH, Wang N. Size-derived reaction mechanism
of core-shell aluminum nanoparticle. Appl Phys Lett 2020;117. https://doi.org/
10.1063/5.0015367.

[326] Chu Q, Shi B, Liao L, Zou X, Luo KH, Wang N. Reaction mechanism of the

aluminum nanoparticle: physicochemical reaction and heat/mass transfer. J Phys
Chem C 2020;124:3886–94. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b11410.
[327] Liu P, Liu J, Wang M. Ignition and combustion of nano-sized aluminum particles:
a reactive molecular dynamics study. Combust Flame 2019;201:276–89. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.12.033.

[328] Zhang X, Fu C, Xia Y, Duan Y, Li Y, Wang Z, et al. Atomistic origin of the complex

morphological evolution of aluminum nanoparticles during oxidation: a chain-
like oxide nucleation and growth mechanism. ACS Nano 2019;13:3005–14.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.8b07633.

[329] Li G, Niu L, Hao W, Liu Y, Zhang C. Atomistic insight into the microexplosion-

accelerated oxidation process of molten aluminum nanoparticles. Combust Flame
2020;214:238–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.12.027.
[330] Feng M, Li H, Mao Q, Luo KH, Hellier P. Fundamental study on mechanisms of
thermal decomposition and oxidation of aluminum hydride. J Phys Chem C 2019;
123:24436–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b07118.

[331] Feng M, Li H, Luo KH. A molecular dynamics study on oxidation of aluminum

hydride (AlH3)/hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) solid fuel. Proc
Combust Inst 2021;38:4469–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.09.023.

[332] Mueller JE, van Duin ACT, Goddard III WA. Application of the ReaxFF reactive

force field to reactive dynamics of hydrocarbon chemisorption and
decomposition. J Phys Chem C 2010;114:5675–85. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp9089003.

[333] Gai L, Shin YK, Raju M, van Duin ACT, Raman S. Atomistic adsorption of oxygen

[343] Chen Z, Zhao P, Zhao L, Sun W. Molecular simulation of the catalytic cracking of

hexadecane on ZSM-5 catalysts based on reactive force field (ReaxFF). Energy
Fuels 2017;31:10515–24. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b01519.

[344] Wang Y, Chung SH. Soot formation in laminar counterflow flames. Prog Energy

Combust Sci 2019;74:152–238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.05.003.

[345] Li S, Ren Y, Biswas P, Tse SD. Flame aerosol synthesis of nanostructured materials
and functional devices: processing, modeling, and diagnostics. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 2016;55:1–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2016.04.002.

[346] Totton TS, Misquitta AJ, Kraft M. A quantitative study of the clustering of

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons at high temperatures. Phys Chem Chem Phys
2012;14:4081–94. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2cp23008a.

[347] Chen D, Totton TS, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, Kraft M. Phase change of polycyclic

aromatic hydrocarbon clusters by mass addition. Carbon 2014;77:25–35. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2014.04.089.

[348] Fiedler SL, Izvekov S, Violi A. The effect of temperature on nanoparticle
clustering. Carbon 2007;45:1786–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbon.2007.05.001.

[349] Totton TS, Misquitta AJ, Kraft M. A first principles development of a general

anisotropic potential for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. J Chem Theory
Comput 2010;6:683–95. https://doi.org/10.1021/ct9004883.

[350] Chen D, Totton TS, Akroyd JWJ, Mosbach S, Kraft M. Size-dependent melting of

polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon nano-clusters: a molecular dynamics study.
Carbon 2014;67:79–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2013.09.058.

[351] White CM. Prediction of the boiling point, heat of vaporization, and vapor

pressure at various temperatures. J Chem Eng Data 1986;31:198–203. https://
doi.org/10.1021/je00044a020.

[352] Martin JW, Pascazio L, Menon A, Akroyd J, Kaiser K, Schulz F, et al. π-Diradical
aromatic soot precursors in flames. J Am Chem Soc 2021;143:12212–9. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c05030.

[353] Menon A, Martin JW, Leon G, Hou D, Pascazio L, You X, et al. Reactive localized
π-radicals on rim-based pentagonal rings: properties and concentration in flames.
Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:565–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2020.07.042.

[354] Yuan H, Kong W, Liu F, Chen D. Study on soot nucleation and growth from PAHs
and some reactive species at flame temperatures by ReaxFF molecular dynamics.
Chem Eng Sci 2019;195:748–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2018.10.020.

[355] Howard JB, Kausch WJ. Soot control by fuel additives. Prog Energy Combust Sci

1980;6:263–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-1285(80)90018-0.

[356] Feitelberg AS, Longwell JP, Sarofim AF. Metal enhanced soot and PAH formation.
Combust Flame 1993;92:241–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(93)90036-
3.

[357] Herring MP, Potter PM, Wu H, Lomnicki S, Dellinger B. Fe2O3 nanoparticle

mediated molecular growth and soot inception from the oxidative pyrolysis of 1-
methylnaphthalene. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:1749–57. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.proci.2012.07.057.

[358] Sabbah H, Biennier L, Klippenstein SJ, Sims IR, Rowe BR. Exploring the role of
PAHs in the formation of soot: pyrene dimerization. J Phys Chem Lett 2010;1:
2962–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jz101033t.

and hydrogen on platinum catalysts by hybrid grand canonical monte carlo/
reactive molecular dynamics. J Phys Chem C 2016;120:9780–93. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b01064.

[359] Martin JW, Bowal K, Menon A, Slavchov RI, Akroyd J, Mosbach S, et al. Polar
curved polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in soot formation. Proc Combust Inst
2019;37:1117–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.046.

[334] Goddard III WA, Chenoweth K, Pudar S, van Duin ACT, Cheng MJ. Structures,
mechanisms, and kinetics of selective ammoxidation and oxidation of propane
over multi-metal oxide catalysts. Top Catal 2008;50:2–18. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11244-008-9096-x.

[335] Goddard III WA, Liu L, Mueller JE, Pudar S, Nielsen RJ. Structures, mechanisms,

and kinetics of ammoxidation and selective oxidation of propane over the M2
phase of MoVNbTeO catalysts. Top Catal 2011;54:659–68. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11244-011-9688-8.

[336] Somers W, Bogaerts A, van Duin ACT, Neyts EC. Interactions of plasma species on
nickel catalysts: a reactive molecular dynamics study on the influence of
temperature and surface structure. Appl Catal B Environ 2014;154–155:1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2014.01.061.

[337] Zhang YR, van Duin ACT, Luo KH. Investigation of ethanol oxidation over

aluminum nanoparticle using ReaxFF molecular dynamics simulation. Fuel 2018;
234:94–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.06.119.

[338] Sabourin JL, Dabbs DM, Yetter RA, Dryer FL, Aksay IA. Functionalized graphene
sheet colloids for enhanced fuel/propellant combustion. ACS Nano 2009;3:
3945–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn901006w.

[339] Liu LM, Car R, Selloni A, Dabbs DM, Aksay IA, Yetter RA. Enhanced thermal

decomposition of nitromethane on functionalized graphene sheets: ab initio
molecular dynamics simulations. J Am Chem Soc 2012;134:19011–6. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ja3058277.

[340] Zhang C, Wen Y, Xue X. Self-enhanced catalytic activities of functionalized

[360] Hou D, Chu Q, Chen D, Pascazio L, Kraft M, You X. Atomic insights into the

sintering process of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon clusters. Proc Combust Inst
2021;38:1181–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.368.

[361] Violi A, Izvekov S. Soot primary particle formation from multiscale coarse-

grained molecular dynamics simulation. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31:529–37.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.240.

[362] Blanquart G, Pitsch H. A joint volume-surface-hydrogen multi-variate model for
soot formation. Combust. Gener. Fine Carbonaceous Part. Villa Orlandi, Anacapri:
Karlsruhe University Press; 2007. p. 437–63. 978-3-86644-441-6.

[363] Celnik MS, Sander M, Raj A, West RH, Kraft M. Modelling soot formation in a
premixed flame using an aromatic-site soot model and an improved oxidation
rate. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32:639–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proci.2008.06.062.

[364] Meierhofer F, Fritsching U. Synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles in flame sprays:
review on process technology, modeling, and diagnostics. Energy Fuels 2021;35:
5495–537. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c04054.

[365] Wei J, Ostadhossein A, Li S, Ihme M. Kinetics for the hydrolysis of Ti(OC3H7)4: a
molecular dynamics simulation study. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:1433–40.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.345.

[366] Zhang Y, Li S, Yan W, Yao Q, Tse SD. Role of dipole-dipole interaction on

enhancing Brownian coagulation of charge-neutral nanoparticles in the free
molecular regime. J Chem Phys 2011;134:084501. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.3555633.

graphene sheets in the combustion of nitromethane: molecular dynamic
simulations by molecular reactive force field. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2014;6:
12235–44. https://doi.org/10.1021/am501562m.

[367] Koparde VN, Cummings PT. Molecular dynamics simulation of titanium dioxide
nanoparticle sintering. J Phys Chem B 2005;109:24280–7. https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp054667p.

[341] Feng M, Jiang XZ, Mao Q, Luo KH, Hellier P. Initiation mechanisms of enhanced

pyrolysis and oxidation of JP-10 (exo-tetrahydrodicyclopentadiene) on
functionalized graphene sheets: insights from ReaxFF molecular dynamics
simulations. Fuel 2019;254:115643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2019.115643.

[342] Feng M, Wang Y, Luo KH. Atomistic insight into enhanced thermal decomposition

of energetic material on graphene oxide. Proc Combust Inst 2022:1–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.047.

[368] Koparde VN, Cummings PT. Sintering of titanium dioxide nanoparticles: a
comparison between molecular dynamics and phenomenological modeling.
J Nanoparticle Res 2008;10:1169–82. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-007-
9342-3.

[369] Buesser B, Gr ̈ohn AJ, Pratsinis SE. Sintering rate and mechanism of TiO2

nanoparticles by molecular dynamics. J Phys Chem C 2011;115:11030–5. https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp2032302.

[370] Koparde VN, Cummings PT. Phase transformations during sintering of titania

nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2008;2:1620–4. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn800092m.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108445

Q. Mao et al.

[371] Seto T, Shimada M, Okuyama K. Evaluation of sintering of nanometer-sized

[401] Zhang YR, Jiang XZ, Luo KH. Bounce regime of droplet collisions: a molecular

titania using aerosol method. Aerosol Sci Technol 1995;23:183–200. https://doi.
org/10.1080/02786829508965303.

dynamics study. J Comput Sci 2016;17:457–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jocs.2016.03.011.

[372] Shmakov AG, Korobeinichev OP, Knyazkov DA, Paletsky AA, Maksutov RA,

[402] Murad S, Law CK. Molecular simulation of droplet collision in the presence of

Gerasimov IE, et al. Combustion chemistry of Ti(OC3H7)4in premixed flat burner-
stabilized H2/O2/Ar flame at 1 atm. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:1143–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.05.081.

[373] Hou D, Feng M, Wei J, Wang Y, van Duin ACT, Luo KH. A reactive force field

molecular dynamics study on the inception mechanism of titanium
tetraisopropoxide (TTIP) conversion to titanium clusters. Chem Eng Sci 2022;252:
117496. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2022.117496.

[374] Marlow WH. Derivation of aerosol collision rates for singular attractive contact

potentials. J Chem Phys 1980;73:6284–7. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.440126.

[375] Yan W, Li S, Zhang Y, Yao Q, Tse SD. Effects of dipole moment and temperature
on the interaction dynamics of titania nanoparticles during agglomeration. J Phys
Chem C 2010;114:10755–60. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp102750k.

[376] Zhang Y, Li S, Yan W, Yao Q. Nanoparticle transport and deposition in boundary

layer of stagnation-point premixed flames. Powder Technol 2012;227:24–34.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2011.12.035.

[377] German RM. Sintering theory and practice. New York: Wiley; 1996.
[378] Zhang H, Banfield JF. Understanding polymorphic phase transformation behavior
during growth of nanocrystalline aggregates: insights from TiO2. J Phys Chem B
2000;104:3481–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp000499j.

[379] Penn RL, Banfield JF, Oriented attachment, growth, twinning polytypism. and

formation of metastable phases : insights from nanocrystalline TiO2. Am Mineral
1998;83:1077–82. https://doi.org/10.2138/am-1998-9-1016.

[380] Koplik J, Banavar JR. No-slip condition for a mixture of two liquids. Phys Rev Lett

1998;80:5125–8. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.5125.

[381] Thompson PA, Robbins MO. Origin of stick-slip motion in boundary lubrication.
Science 1990;250:792–4. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.250.4982.792.

[382] Thompson PA, Robbins MO. Shear flow near solids: epitaxial order and flow
boundary conditions. Phys Rev A 1990;41:6830–7. https://doi.org/10.1103/
physreva.41.6830.

[383] Koplik J, Banavar JR, Willemsen JF. Molecular dynamics of fluid flow at solid

surfaces. Phys Fluids AFluid Dyn 1989;1:781–94. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.857376.

[384] Sokhan VP, Nicholson D, Quirke N. Fluid flow in nanopores: an examination of
hydrodynamic boundary conditions. J Chem Phys 2001;115:3878–87. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.1387976.

ambient gas. Mol Phys 1999;96:81–5. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00268979909482940.

[403] Svanberg M, Ming L, Markovi ́c N, Pettersson JBC. Collision dynamics of large

water clusters. J Chem Phys 1998;108:5888–97. https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.475999.

[404] Perumanath S, Borg MK, Chubynsky MV, Sprittles JE, Reese JM. Droplet

coalescence is initiated by thermal motion. Phys Rev Lett 2019;122:104501.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.104501.

[405] Zhang YR, Jiang XZ, Chen YR, Luo KH. Self-propelled jump regime in nanoscale
droplet collisions: a molecular dynamics study. Commun Comput Phys 2018;23:
1191–201. https://doi.org/10.4208/CICP.OA-2016-0253.

[406] Lu WQ, Fan QM. Study for the particle’s scale effect on some thermophysical

properties of nanofluids by a simplified molecular dynamics method. Eng Anal
Bound Elem 2008;32:282–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enganabound.2007.10.006.

[407] Liang Z, Tsai HL. Thermal conductivity of interfacial layers in nanofluids. Phys

Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2011;83:41602. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevE.83.041602.

[408] Surblys D, Yamaguchi Y, Kuroda K, Kagawa M, Nakajima T, Fujimura H.

Molecular dynamics analysis on wetting and interfacial properties of water-
alcohol mixture droplets on a solid surface. J Chem Phys 2014;140:34505.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4861039.

[409] Ayuba S, Suh D, Nomura K, Ebisuzaki T, Yasuoka K. Kinetic analysis of
homogeneous droplet nucleation using large-scale molecular dynamics
simulations. J Chem Phys 2018;149:44504. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5037647.
[410] Yu JJ, Tang R, Li YR, Zhang L, Wu CM. Molecular dynamics simulation of heat

transport through solid-liquid interface during argon droplet evaporation on
heated substrates. Langmuir 2019;35:2164–71. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
langmuir.8b04047.

[411] Tomassone MS, Couzis A, Maldarelli C, Banavar JR, Koplik J. Phase transitions of
soluble surfactants at a liquid-vapor interface. Langmuir 2001;17:6037–40.
https://doi.org/10.1021/la0103113.

[412] Poulikakos D, Arcidiacono S, Maruyama S. Molecular dynamics simulation in

nanoscale heat transfer: a review. Microscale Thermophys Eng 2003;7:181–206.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10893950390219047.

[385] Jiang XZ, Gong H, Luo KH, Ventikos Y. Large-scale molecular dynamics

[413] Xiao G, Luo KH, Ma X, Shuai S. Liquid fuel evaporation under supercritical

simulation of coupled dynamics of flow and glycocalyx: towards understanding
atomic events on an endothelial cell surface. J R Soc Interface 2017;14:20170780.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0780.

[386] Jiang XZ, Guo L, Luo KH, Ventikos Y. Membrane deformation of endothelial
surface layer interspersed with syndecan-4: a molecular dynamics study. Ann
Biomed Eng 2020;48:357–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439-019-02353-7.

[387] Jiang XZ, Luo KH, Ventikos Y. Principal mode of Syndecan-4

mechanotransduction for the endothelial glycocalyx is a scissor-like dimer
motion. Acta Physiol 2020;228:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1111/apha.13376.

[388] Hub JS, De Groot BL. Mechanism of selectivity in aquaporins and

aquaglyceroporins. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2008;105:1198–203. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.0707662104.

[389] Hummer G, Rasaiah JC, Noworyta JP. Water conduction through the hydrophobic
channel of a carbon nanotube. Nature 2001;414:188–90. https://doi.org/
10.1038/35102535.

[390] Chen X, Cao G, Han A, Punyamurtula VK, Liu L, Culligan PJ, et al. Nanoscale fluid
transport: size and rate effects. Nano Lett 2008;8:2988–92. https://doi.org/
10.1021/nl802046b.

[391] Cao G, Qiao Y, Zhou Q, Chen X. Water infiltration behaviours in carbon nanotubes
under quasi-static and dynamic loading conditions. Mol Simul 2008;34:1267–74.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08927020802175225.

[392] Sokhan VP, Nicholson D, Quirke N. Fluid flow in nanopores: accurate boundary
conditions for carbon nanotubes. J Chem Phys 2002;117:8531–9. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.1512643.

[393] Skoulidas AI, Ackerman DM, Johnson JK, Sholl DS. Rapid transport of gases in

carbon nanotubes. Phys Rev Lett 2002;89:185901. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.89.185901.

[394] Chen X, Xu B, Liu L. Nanoscale fluid mechanics and energy conversion. Appl Mech

Rev 2014;66:050803. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4026913.

conditions. Commun Comput Phys 2018;23:1241–62. https://doi.org/10.4208/
cicp.OA-2016-0252.

[414] Long LN, Micci MM, Wong BC. Molecular dynamics simulations of droplet

evaporation. Comput Phys Commun 1996;96:167–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0010-4655(96)00050-1.

[415] Walther JH, Koumoutsakos P. Molecular dynamics simulation on nanodroplet
evaporation. J Heat Transfer 2001;123:741–8. https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.1370517.

[416] Zhang J, Müller-Plathe F, Yahia-Ouahmed M, Leroy F. A steady-state non-

equilibrium molecular dynamics approach for the study of evaporation processes.
J Chem Phys 2013;139:134701. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4822098.
[417] Holyst R, Litniewski M. Heat transfer at the nanoscale: evaporation of

nanodroplets. Phys Rev Lett 2008;100:55701. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.100.055701.

[418] Zhang J, Leroy F, Müller-Plathe F. Influence of contact-line curvature on the

evaporation of nanodroplets from solid substrates. Phys Rev Lett 2014;113:
046101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.046101.

[419] Consolini L, Aggarwal SK, Murad S. A molecular dynamics simulation of droplet
evaporation. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2003;46:3179–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0017-9310(03)00101-7.

[420] Cao BY, Xie JF, Sazhin SS. Molecular dynamics study on evaporation and

condensation of n-dodecane at liquid-vapor phase equilibria. J Chem Phys 2011;
134:164309. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3579457.

[421] Mo G, Qiao L. A molecular dynamics investigation of n-alkanes vaporizing into
nitrogen: transition from subcritical to supercritical. Combust Flame 2017;176:
60–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.09.028.

[422] Tan P, Kong W, Shao Z, Liu M, Ni M. Advances in modeling and simulation of

Li–air batteries. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2017;62:155–89. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2017.06.001.

[395] Whitby M, Quirke N. Fluid flow in carbon nanotubes and nanopipes. Nat

[423] Franco AA, Rucci A, Brandell D, Frayret C, Gaberscek M, Jankowski P, et al.

Nanotechnol 2007;2:87–94. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2006.175.

[396] Jiang XZ, Ventikos Y. Molecular dynamics simulation: a new way to understand

the functionality of the endothelial glycocalyx. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2022;73:
102330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2022.102330.

[397] Jiang XZ, Luo KH, Ventikos Y. Understanding the role of endothelial glycocalyx in

mechanotransduction via computational simulation: a mini review. Front Cell
Dev Bio 2021;9:732815. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2021.732815.

[398] Bardia R, Liang Z, Keblinski P, Trujillo MF. Continuum and molecular-dynamics

simulation of nanodroplet collisions. Phys Rev E 2016;93:053104. https://doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevE.93.053104.

[399] Sun Z, Xi G, Chen X. Mechanism study of deformation and mass transfer for
binary droplet collisions with particle method. Phys Fluids 2009;21:032106.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3089587.

[400] Qian J, Law CK. Regimes of coalescence and separation in droplet collision.

J Fluid Mech 1997;331:59–80. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112096003722.

Boosting rechargeable batteries R&D by multiscale modeling: myth or reality?
Chem Rev 2019;119:4569–627. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00239.

[424] Shi Z, Zhou J, Li R. Application of reaction force field molecular dynamics in
lithium batteries. Front Chem 2021;8:1–5. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fchem.2020.634379.

[425] Sun Y, Yang T, Ji H, Zhou J, Wang Z, Qian T, et al. Boosting the optimization of

lithium metal batteries by molecular dynamics simulations: a perspective. Adv
Energy Mater 2020;10:2002373. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202002373.

[426] Nolan AM, Zhu Y, He X, Bai Q, Mo Y. Computation-accelerated design of

materials and interfaces for all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries. Joule 2018;2:
2016–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2018.08.017.

[427] Woodley SM, Catlow R. Crystal structure prediction from first principles. Nat

Mater 2008;7:937–46. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2321.

[428] Eames C, Armstrong AR, Bruce PG, Islam MS. Insights into changes in voltage and
structure of Li2FeSiO4 polymorphs for lithium-ion batteries. Chem Mater 2012;
24:2155–61. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm300749w.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108446

Q. Mao et al.

[429] Perez Beltran S, Balbuena PB. Formation of multilayer graphene domains with
strong sulfur–carbon interaction and enhanced sulfur reduction zones for
lithium–sulfur battery cathodes. ChemSusChem 2018;11:1970–80. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cssc.201702446.

[430] Ponce V, Seminario JM. Lithiation of sulfur-graphene compounds using reactive
force-field molecular dynamics simulations. J Electrochem Soc 2020;167:100555.
https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/ab9ccf.

[431] Ma Y. Computer simulation of cathode materials for lithium ion and lithium

batteries: a review. Energy Environ Mater 2018;1:148–73. https://doi.org/
10.1002/eem2.12017.

for CO2 sequestration and enhanced CH4 recovery. Appl Energy 2018;210:28–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.10.122.

[456] Huang L, Ning Z, Wang Q, Qi R, Zeng Y, Qin H, et al. Molecular simulation of

adsorption behaviors of methane, carbon dioxide and their mixtures on kerogen:
effect of kerogen maturity and moisture content. Fuel 2018;211:159–72. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2017.09.060.

[457] Shrestha N, Chilkoor G, Wilder J, Gadhamshetty V, Stone JJ. Potential water

resource impacts of hydraulic fracturing from unconventional oil production in
the Bakken shale. Water Res 2017;108:1–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2016.11.006.

[432] Wang H, Lu SH, Wang X, Xia S, Beng Chew H. A review of the multiscale

[458] Bui K, Akkutlu IY. Hydrocarbons recovery from model-kerogen nanopores. SPE J

mechanics of silicon electrodes in high-capacity lithium-ion batteries. J Phys D
Appl Phys 2022;55:063001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6463/ac2d64.
[433] J ́onsson E, Johansson P. Modern battery electrolytes: ion-ion interactions in Li +/
Na + conductors from DFT calculations. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2012;14:
10774–9. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2cp40612h.

[434] Kumar N, Seminario JM. Lithium-ion model behavior in an ethylene carbonate

electrolyte using molecular dynamics. J Phys Chem C 2016;120:16322–32.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b03709.

[435] Gao T, Lu W. Mechanism and effect of thermal degradation on electrolyte ionic

diffusivity in Li-ion batteries: a molecular dynamics study. Electrochim Acta
2019;323:134791. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2019.134791.

[436] Ting CL, Stevens MJ, Frischknecht AL. Structure and dynamics of coarse-grained

ionomer melts in an external electric field. Macromolecules 2015;48:809–18.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ma501916z.

[437] Zhou J, Ji H, Liu J, Qian T, Yan C. A new high ionic conductive gel polymer

electrolyte enables highly stable quasi-solid-state lithium sulfur battery. Energy
Storage Mater 2019;22:256–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2019.01.024.

[438] Miara LJ, Suzuki N, Richards WD, Wang Y, Kim JC, Ceder G. Li-ion conductivity
in Li9S3N. J Mater Chem A 2015;3:20338–44. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c5ta05432j.

[439] Takenaka N, Suzuki Y, Sakai H, Nagaoka M. On electrolyte-dependent formation
of solid electrolyte interphase film in lithium-ion batteries: strong sensitivity to
small structural difference of electrolyte molecules. J Phys Chem C 2014;118:
10874–82. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp5018696.

[440] Kim SP, van Duin ACT, Shenoy VB. Effect of electrolytes on the structure and

2017;22:854–62. https://doi.org/10.2118/185162-PA.

[459] Wu H, Chen J, Liu H. Molecular dynamics simulations about adsorption and
displacement of methane in carbon nanochannels. J Phys Chem C 2015;119:
13652–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b02436.

[460] Lin K, Yuan Q, Zhao YP. Using graphene to simplify the adsorption of methane on
shale in MD simulations. Comput Mater Sci 2017;133:99–107. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.commatsci.2017.03.010.

[461] Hu Y, Devegowda D, Sigal R. A microscopic characterization of wettability in

shale kerogen with varying maturity levels. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 2016;33:1078–86.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2016.06.014.

[462] Liu Y, Wilcox J. Molecular simulation studies of CO2 adsorption by carbon model
compounds for carbon capture and sequestration applications. Environ Sci
Technol 2013;47:95–101. https://doi.org/10.1021/es3012029.

[463] Vandenbroucke M, Largeau C. Kerogen origin, evolution and structure. Org

Geochem 2007;38:719–833. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
orggeochem.2007.01.001.

[464] Zhou J, Jin Z, Luo KH. Insights into recovery of multi-component shale gas by

CO2 injection: a molecular perspective. Fuel 2020;267:117247. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117247.

[465] Zhou J, Jin Z, Luo KH. Effects of moisture contents on shale gas recovery and CO2
sequestration. Langmuir 2019;35:8716–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
langmuir.9b00862.

[466] Zhou J, Jin Z, Luo KH. The role of brine in gas adsorption and dissolution in

kerogen nanopores for enhanced gas recovery and CO2 sequestration. Chem Eng J
2020;399:125704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125704.

evolution of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) in Li-ion batteries: a molecular
dynamics study. J Power Sources 2011;196:8590–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2011.05.061.

[467] Falk K, Pellenq R, Ulm FJ, Coasne B. Effect of chain length and pore accessibility
on alkane adsorption in kerogen. Energy and Fuels 2015;29:7889–96. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b02015.

[441] Bertolini S, Balbuena PB. Buildup of the solid electrolyte interphase on lithium-

metal anodes: reactive molecular dynamics study. J Phys Chem C 2018;122:
10783–91. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b03046.

[442] Reddivari S, Lastoskie C, Wu R, Zhang J. Chemical composition and formation

mechanisms in the cathode-electrolyte interface layer of lithium manganese oxide
batteries from reactive force field (ReaxFF) based molecular dynamics. Front
Energy 2017;11:365–73. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11708-017-0500-8.
[443] Zhou G, Sun X, Li QH, Wang X, Zhang JN, Yang W, et al. Mn ion dissolution
mechanism for lithium-ion battery with LiMn2O4 cathode: in situ ultraviolet-
visible spectroscopy and ab Initio molecular dynamics simulations. J Phys Chem
Lett 2020;11:3051–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c00936.
[444] Ganesh P, Kent PRC, Jiang D. Solid–electrolyte interphase formation and
electrolyte reduction at Li-ion battery graphite anodes: insights from first-
principles molecular dynamics. J Phys Chem C 2012;116:24476–81. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp3086304.

[445] Shah AA, Luo KH, Ralph TR, Walsh FC. Recent trends and developments in

polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell modelling. Electrochim Acta 2011;56:
3731–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2010.10.046.

[446] Jang SS, Molinero V, Çaǧin T, Goddard WA. Nanophase-segregation and transport
in nafion 117 from molecular dynamics simulations: effect of monomeric
sequence. J Phys Chem B 2004;108:3149–57. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jp036842c.

[447] Kreuer KD. Proton-conducting oxides. Annu Rev Mater Res 2003;33:333–59.

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.matsci.33.022802.091825.

[448] Fabbri E, Pergolesi D, Traversa E. Materials challenges toward proton-conducting
oxide fuel cells: a critical review. Chem Soc Rev 2010;39:4355–69. https://doi.
org/10.1039/b902343g.

[449] Kusoglu A, Weber AZ. New insights into perfluorinated sulfonic-acid ionomers.
Chem Rev 2017;117:987–1104. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00159.
[450] Jiao K, Li X. Water transport in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Prog

Energy Combust Sci 2011;37:221–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2010.06.002.

[451] Jahnke T, Futter G, Latz A, Malkow T, Papakonstantinou G, Tsotridis G, et al.

Performance and degradation of proton exchange membrane fuel cells: state of
the art in modeling from atomistic to system scale. J Power Sources 2016;304:
207–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.11.041.

[452] Savioli J, Watson GW. Computational modelling of solid oxide fuel cells. Curr

Opin Electrochem 2020;21:14–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
coelec.2019.12.007.

[468] Hennessy J, Patterson D. A new golden age for computer architecture: domain-
Specific hardware/Software Co-Design, enhanced security, open instruction sets,
and agile chip development. In: ACM/IEEE 45th Annu. Int. Symp. Comput.
Archit.; 2018. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2018.00011. Los Angeles, CA, USA.

[469] Mees MJ, Pourtois G, Neyts EC, Thijsse BJ, Stesmans A. Uniform-acceptance

force-bias Monte Carlo method with time scale to study solid-state diffusion. Phys
Rev B 2012;85:134301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.134301.
[470] Lebowitz JL, Bergmann PG. Irreversible gibbsian ensembles. Ann Phys (N Y)

1957;1:1–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-4916(57)90002-7.

[471] Emch GG, Sewell GL. Nonequilibrium statistical mechanics of open systems.

J Math Phys 1968;9:946–58. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1664664.

[472] Site DL, Praprotnik M. Molecular systems with open boundaries: theory and

simulation. Phys Rep 2017;693:1–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
physrep.2017.05.007.

[473] English NJ, Waldron CJ. Perspectives on external electric fields in molecular

simulation: progress, prospects and challenges. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015;17:
12407–40. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5cp00629e.

[474] Wang H, Zhang L, Han J, E W. DeePMD-kit: a deep learning package for many-

body potential energy representation and molecular dynamics. Comput Phys
Commun 2018;228:178–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2018.03.016.
[475] Doerr S, Majewski M, P ́erez A, Kr ̈amer A, Clementi C, Noe F, et al. TorchMD: a

deep learning framework for molecular simulations. J Chem Theory Comput
2021;17:2355–63. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.0c01343.

[476] Artrith N, Urban A. An implementation of artificial neural-network potentials for
atomistic materials simulations: performance for TiO2. Comput Mater Sci 2016;
114:135–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2015.11.047.

[477] Thompson AP, Swiler LP, Trott CR, Foiles SM, Tucker GJ. Spectral neighbor
analysis method for automated generation of quantum-accurate interatomic
potentials. J Comput Phys 2015;285:316–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcp.2014.12.018.

[478] Schütt KT, Sauceda HE, Kindermans PJ, Tkatchenko A, Müller KR. SchNet - a deep
learning architecture for molecules and materials. J Chem Phys 2018;148:
241722. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5019779.

[479] Behler J, Parrinello M. Generalized neural-network representation of high-

dimensional potential-energy surfaces. Phys Rev Lett 2007;98:146401. https://
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.146401.

[480] Chu Q, Luo KH, Chen D. Exploring complex reaction networks using neural
network-based molecular dynamics simulation. J Phys Chem Lett 2022;13:
4052–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.2c00647.

[453] Aminu MD, Nabavi SA, Rochelle CA, Manovic V. A review of developments in

[481] Chen S, Wang M, Xia Z. Multiscale fluid mechanics and modeling. Procedia

carbon dioxide storage. Appl Energy 2017;208:1389–419. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.09.015.

[454] Zhao T, Li X, Zhao H, Li M. Molecular simulation of adsorption and

thermodynamic properties on type II kerogen: influence of maturity and moisture
content. Fuel 2017;190:198–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.11.027.

[455] Huang L, Ning Z, Wang Q, Zhang W, Cheng Z, Wu X, et al. Effect of organic type
and moisture on CO2/CH4 competitive adsorption in kerogen with implications

IUTAM 2014;10:100–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.piutam.2014.01.012.
[482] Lee JD, Li J, Zhang Z, Wang L. Sequential and concurrent multiscale modeling of
multiphysics: from atoms to continuum. In: Meguid SA, Weng GJ, editors.
Micromechanics nanomechanics compos. Solids. Cham: Springer International
Publishing; 2017. p. 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-52794-9_1.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108447

Q. Mao et al.

[483] Zhou W, Yang X, Liu X. Multiscale modeling of gas flow behaviors in nanoporous
shale matrix considering multiple transport mechanisms. Phys Rev E 2022;105:
055308. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.105.055308.

[484] Dupuis A, Kotsalis EM, Koumoutsakos P. Coupling lattice Boltzmann and

molecular dynamics models for dense fluids. Phys Rev E 2007;75:046704.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.75.046704.

[485] Smith ER, Theodorakis PE, Craster RV, Matar OK. Moving contact lines: linking
molecular dynamics and continuum-scale modeling. Langmuir 2018;34:
12501–18. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.8b00466.

Table of symbols

: force on atom

: acceleration of atom

→
a
De: well depth
→
F
̂H: Hamiltonian operator
i: imaginary number
KUB: constant for Urey-Bradley term
m: mass of atom
pbd: parameters to model the bonds
pval: fitting parameters to the angle
rUB: equilibrium bond length between 2nd and 3rd atoms
→
r
: position of atom
U: potential energy
→
v
: velocity of atom
〈ΔEdown〉: phase-space average energy transferred per deactivating collisions
AIMD: ab initio molecular dynamics
AIREBO: adaptive intermolecular reactive empirical bond order
ANPs: Aluminum nanoparticles
AMBER: assisted model building with energy refinement
AI: artificial intelligence
BO: bond order
C: constant, energy-conversion constant
CCS: carbon capture storage
CCSDT: coupled cluster single-double-triple
CFD: computational fluid dynamics
CFF: consistent force field
CG: coarse-grained, conjugate gradient
CGMD: coarse-grained
CHARMM: Chemistry at Harvard macromolecular mechanics
CL-20: hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane
CNTs: carbon nanotubes
CO2-EGR: carbon dioxide enhanced shale gas recovery
COM: centre of mass
COMB: charge optimized many body
cPAHs: curved polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
D: constant, Debye
DFT: density functional theory
DL: deep learning
DNS: direct numerical simulation
DPD: dissipative particle dynamics
EAM: embedded atom model
EC: ethylene carbonate
EEM: electronegativity equalization method
eFF: electron force field
EMD: equilibrium molecular dynamics
FFs: force fileds
FGS: functionalized graphene sheet
GCS: Geological CO2 storage
GO: graphene oxide
GUI: Graphical User Interface
HACA: hydrogen abstraction carbon addition
HF: Hartree-Fock
HMX: cyclotetramethylene-tetranitramine
K: kinetic energy, spring constant, bending constant, energy constant
kMC: kinetic Monte Carlo
LBM: lattice Boltzmann method
LES: large eddy simulation
LIBs: lithium-ion batteries
exp/6: exponential Buckingham repulsive expression
LJ: Lennard-Jones
LMO: lithium manganese oxide
LiPF6: lithium hexafluorophosphate
MC: Monte Carlo
MD: molecular dynamics
ME: master equation
MEAOM: microexplosion-accelerated oxidation mechanism
ML: machine learning
ML-FFs: machine learning force fields

MM: molecular mechanics
MMO: multi-metal oxide
MP2: second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation
MSM: multi-level summation method
n: multiplicity, representing the periodicity
NEMD: non-equilibrium molecular dynamics
NN: neural network
NM: nitromethane
NVE: Microcanonical ensemble
NVT: canonical ensemble
NPT: isothermal-isobaric ensemble
NPH: isoenthalpic-isobaric ensemble
PAHs: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
PC: propylene carbonate
PEMFC: proton-exchange membrane fuel cells
PETN: pentaerythritol tetranitrate
PFSA: perfluorinated sulfonic-acid
PM3: parametric method 3
ppm: parts per million
PPPM: particle-particle particle-mesh
q: partial charges on the atom
QM: quantum mechanics
r: bond distance
RANS: Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes
RDX: cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine
ReaxFF: reactive force field
REBO: reactive empirical bond order
RMD: reactive molecular dynamics
SD: steepest descent
SEI: solid electrolyte interphase
SEMD: semi-empirical molecular dynamics
SOFC: solid oxide fuel cells
SW: Stillinger-Weber
t: time
Tap: Taper correction
TATB: triaminotrinitrobenzene
TB: tight-binding
tfMC: time-stamped force-bias Monte Carlo
TNT: trinitrotoluene
AlH3: aluminium hydride
TTIP: titanium tetraisopropoxides
U: potential energy
UFF: universal force field
V: torsional rotational barriers
val: valence angle
vdW: van der Waals
XRD: X-ray diffraction

Table of Greeks, subscript and superscriptGreeks
Ψ: wave function
τs: characteristic sintering time
α: ‘width’ of the potential
δt: time step
ε: well depth in LJ potential dielectric constant in Coulombic potential
θ: bond angle
ρ: ionic-pair dependent length
σ: distance when U(r) = 0, interaction-dependent length
φ: dihedral angle
χ: improper angle
ω: angle between the il axi and the ijk plane for improper angle

subscript
0: initial value
E: equilibrium state
I: general index of atoms
J: general index of atoms
Lp: lone pair
Tor: torsion
Val: valence angle
vdW: van der Waals

superscript
Bo: bond order
Π: π bond
ππ: double-π bond
σ: σ bond

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108448

Q. Mao et al.

Professor. Qian Mao received a PhD in Engineering Thermo-
physics from Tsinghua University in2018. She was a visiting
scholar at Penn State University in 2015–2016. She conducted
postdoctoral  work  at  the  RWTH  Aachen University  and  Uni-
versity of Duisburg-Essen, respectively, from 2019 to 2023.She
joined Beijing Institute of Technology in 2023 and became a
full professor. She has comprehensively investigated multiscale
chemically-reacting systems including fuel chemistry kinetics,
particulates formation, propulsion and catalytic reaction. She
has expertise in both classical and reactive molecular dynamics
simulations for energy and combustion . She was awarded an
‘Humboldt Research Fellowship’ for Postdoctoral Researchers
(2019),  and  recognized  via  ‘Outstanding  Contribution  in
Reviewing’  by  the  journal  Carbon  of  the  American  Carbon  Society  (2018)  and
‘Outstanding Paper Award’ by China National Symposium on Combustion (2017). She has
more than 20 peer-reviewed papers in high-quality journals.

Institute in 2020.

Professor Muye Feng obtained his PhD from University College
London  in  2019.  Under  the  support  of  “Shuimu  Tsinghua
Scholar”  program, he then joined Center for Combustion En-
ergy, Department of Energy and Power Engineering, Tsinghua
University  as  a  postdoctoral  researcher.  Professor  Feng’s
research  focuses on  atomistic modelling of combustion,  bulk
nanobubbles,  and  lithium–sulfur  battery.  He  is  the  principal
investigator  of  one  project  of  the  National  Natural  Science
Foundation of China and one project of the China Postdoctoral
Science Foundation.

Associate Professor Yihua Ren received his PhD from Tsinghua
University in 2018. He then joined the Institute for Combustion
Technology,  RWTH  Aachen  University  as  a  postdoctoral
researcher.  He  was  appointed  an  associate  Professor  in  the
University  of  Chinese  Academy  of  Science  since  2023.  His
research  focuses  on  the  experimental  and  numerical  investi-
gation  of  multiphase  chemically  reacting  flows  including
advanced laser diagnostics, flame synthesis of nanomaterials,
and  electric-field/plasma  assisted  combustion.  He  has  pub-
lished 20+ research papers in top journals including Phys. Rev.
Lett., Phys. Rev. Appl., Combust. Flame, Proc. Combust. Inst.,
and Carbon. He received the Humboldt fellowship in 2018 and
was awarded the Bernard-Lewis Fellowship by the Combustion

Professor Kai Luo is a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engi-
neering, a Member  of Academia Europaea, and an Inaugural
Fellow  of  the  Combustion  Institute.  He  is  renowned  for  his
expertise in multiphysics multiscale modelling and simulation
across scales from atomic via meso-to macroscales. He led the
UK Consortium on Computational Combustion for Engineering
Applications for 10 years. Since 2013, he has created and led
the  UK  Consortium  on  Mesoscale  Engineering  Sciences
(UKCOMES),  which  is  devoted  to  advancing  mesoscale  and
multiscale modelling and simulation with the aid of high-end
computing. He is the sole recipient of the 2021 AIAA Energy
Systems Award and the 2022 ASME James Harry Potter Gold
Medal.

Professor Xi Zhuo Jiang has BEng and MEng degrees from the
Department  of  Thermal  Engineering,  Tsinghua  University  in
2010 and 2014, respectively. She obtained her PhD from the
Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering,  University  College
London (UCL) in 2018. She worked in UCL Mechanical Engi-
neering  as  a  research  fellow  from  2018  to  2021.  She  joined
Northeastern University in 2021 and became a full professor.
Her  research  interest  includes  micro-/nano-scale  fluid  dy-
namics, mass and heat transfer, and reaction mechanisms for
clean/advanced combustion. The methodology includes multi-
scale numerical methods (e.g., molecular dynamics, dissipative
particle  dynamics,  quantum  chemistry,  etc.)  and  theoretical
analysis. Professor Jiang also has two-year working experience
in industry. She has published 30+ research papers in a wide range of high-quality jour-
nals, 20+ of which have her as the first/corresponding author. She is the winner of the
Osborne Reynolds Prize (2019), a finalist of Leonardo da Vinci Prize Competition and the
winner  of  ARCHER  Image  Competition  (Early  Career,  2020).  Her  interdisciplinary
research has also been nominated for Acta Physiologica Award 2022 (the highest award of
its  kind).  She  is  a  member  of  the  American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers  and  the
Combustion Institute.

Professor van Duin received his PhD from Delft University of
Technology in 1996, and worked as postdoctoral researcher in
University  of  Newcastle  from  1996  to  2002.  He  joined  Cali-
fornia  Institute  of  Technology  as  postdoctoral  researcher
(2003–2005),  research  faculty  (2005–2007)  and  senior
research  staff  (2007–2008).  He  was  appointed  as  associate
Professor  (2008–2015),  professor  (since  2015)  and  distin-
guished university professor (2021) in the Pennsylvania State
University. Prof. van Duin is the main inventor of the ReaxFF
force  field,  which  is  a  powerful  computational  tool  for
exploring,  developing  and  optimizing  systems  in  microscale.
His  research  focuses  on  development  and  application  of  the
ReaxFF force field to systems including combustion, catalysis,
material failure, etc. He has a total of more than 500 high impact publications (h-index 95,
38,070 citations [Google Scholar Sept. 2022]).

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience97(2023)10108449
