Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs

Advances and challenges of ammonia delivery by urea-water sprays in
SCR systems

M. B ̈ornhorst a, c, O. Deutschmann a,b,c, *
a Institute for Chemical Technology and Polymer Chemistry, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
b Institute for Catalysis Research and Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
c Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Kaiserstr. 12, Karlsruhe 76128, Germany

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Urea
Selective catalytic reduction
Spray/wall interaction
Deposits

Over the past decades, selective catalytic reduction (SCR) using aqueous urea sprays as ammonia precursor has
become the prevalent technique for NOx  emission control in mobile applications. Preparation of ammonia from
urea  water  sprays  still  represents  a challenge  in  aftertreatment  engineering  as  complex  interactions  of  multi-
phase physics and chemical reactions have to be handled. Increasingly stringent emission legislations and the
ongoing development of fuel-efficient engines and close-coupled aftertreatment systems raise high demands to
SCR  systems.  Due  to  highly  transient  conditions  and  short  mixing  lengths,  incomplete  spray  evaporation  can
result in liquid/wall contact and formation of solid urea deposits lowering ammonia selectivity and homogeneity.
This  article  reviews  the  ongoing  development  of  SCR  systems  with  focus  on  the  efficient  evaporation  and
decomposition of the injected spray for a homogeneous ammonia distribution in front of the SCR catalyst. Critical
aspects of spray evaporation and impingement, liquid film and deposit formation are pointed out and potentials
for system optimization are discussed.

1. Controlling NOx  emissions of internal combustion engines

Internal  combustion  engines  always  produce  nitrogen  oxides  to  a
certain extent due to the use of air as oxidizing agent. Many primary, on
the  engine  operation  side,  and  secondary  measures,  on  the  emission
aftertreatment side, have been developed and applied over the last de-
cades to reduce the amount of NOx  emitted from internal combustion
(IC) engines. In the last decade, the challenge of NOx  emission control
has gained a worldwide public attention in particular for Diesel operated
passenger  cars.  While the  after-treatment of  nitrogen oxide  emissions
seemed to be solved at stoichiometric operating conditions applying the
conventional three-way catalytic converter as aftertreatment device, the
problem became obvious for lean operation, which otherwise helps to
reduce fuel consumption and, consequently, reduces the emission of the
greenhouse gas (GHG) CO2 .

Hence,  NOx  raw  emissions  have  to  be  treated  not  only  in  Diesel
operated  passenger  cars  but  also  in  lean-operated  engines  using  any
other  fuel  including  hydrogen  as  long  as  air  is  the  oxidizing  agent.
Substitution  of  Diesel  operated  passenger  cars  by  hybrid  (battery/IC
engine)  vehicles  may  be  even  counter-productive  in  terms  of  GHG
emissions if these vehicles are equipped with a rather strong gasoline

fueled engine and taking into account the current sources of electricity
in  most  countries  of  the  world.  Even  the  fast  substitution  of  efficient
Diesel operated vehicles by huge fleets of battery electric vehicles may
not lead to the desired reduction of GHG emissions, because the addi-
tionally needed electricity is often provided by the combustion of fossil
fuels [1].

In order to reduce GHG emissions, natural gas fueled IC engines have
gained significant interest and a certain market share in some countries
and  sectors.  In  some  regions  of  the  world,  liquefied  and  compressed
natural gas are popular fuels for cars, light and heavy duty vehicles, even
though their main application is expected to be in ships, combined heat
and  power  plants,  and  power  generators.  Natural  gas  engines  may
become even more attractive when fueled with green methane produced
by methanation, a reaction of green hydrogen and CO and/or CO2, or
biogas. The most efficient operation mode again is the lean one, which
however  results  not  only  in  a  significant  amount  of  NOx  in  the  raw
emissions  but  also  in  slip  of  the  strong  GHG  methane,  even  though
beneficial primary measures are applied such as advanced direct injec-
tion strategies [2]. There is still no reliable catalyst technology available
for the low-temperature aftertreatment of CH4  [3].

In the future, the availability of green hydrogen, produced by elec-
trolyzers  using  solar  and  wind  power  may  boost the  use of  hydrogen

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: deutschmann@kit.edu (O. Deutschmann).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2021.100949
Received 14 December 2020; Received in revised form 12 July 2021; Accepted 21 July 2021

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)100949Availableonline7August20210360-1285/©2021TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Nomenclature

Greek Symbols
β
η
ρ
σ
θ

Spreading factor
Dynamic viscosity
Density
Surface tension
Contact angle

Latin Symbols
 ̇m
A
d
d32
G
K
L
La
Oh
q
r
Ra

Mass flow
Area
Diameter
Sauter mean diameter
Spray mass flux
Splashing parameter
Characteristic length scale
Lapace number
Ohnesorge number
Heat flux
Radius
Mean roughness

Re
T
t
T*
u
We

Reynolds number
Temperature
Time
Dimensionless temperature
Velocity
Weber number

Subscripts
0
B
CHF
cr
d
LF
l
max
N
sp
v
w

Initial
Boiling
Critical heat flux
Critical
Droplet
Leidenfrost
Liquid
Maximum
Nukiyama
Spray
Vapor
Wall

fueled engines, in particular in the transportation sector [4]. The GHG
free  exhaust  of  these  engines  will  still  contain  NOx.  Here,  the  use  of
hydrogen as reducing agent for NOx  conversion seems attractive but no
reliable technology is available. State-of-the art catalysts do not work
over sufficiently wide temperature, produce rather high amounts of the
GHG N2O and are not very selective, i.e., the catalysts simply burns most
of the reducing agent H2  [5]. Hence, the control of NOx  emissions of
internal combustion engines has to be taken care of even in the light of
the transitions we are expected to see in the transportation and energy
sectors in the next decades.

The concentration of pollutants in the raw exhaust mainly depends
on  fuel  and  combustion  mode.  As  primary  measure,  the  raw  exhaust
emissions can be affected by the motor operation mode. For example,
controlling  the  air/fuel  ratio  according  to  motor  operation  or  a  re-
circulation of the exhaust gas can bring benefits with respect to emis-
sion concentrations. Regarding particulate matter (PM) and NOx  emis-
sions from diesel engines, a trade-off occurs, which can be managed by
motor operation. Another trade-off, in particular for NOx  emissions, has
often  to  be  considered  in  terms  of  fuel  consumption  and  exhaust
pollutant concentration. As secondary measure, exhaust gas aftertreat-
ment systems are designed to reduce pollutant emissions. System con-
figurations  do  not  only  need  to  fit  the  requirements  resulting  from
operation  range  and  motor  control  but  also  the  installation  space  re-
strictions arising from various vehicle geometries. Modern exhaust gas
aftertreatment systems represent a combination of different components
responsible for the removal of one or more pollutants. Due to consecu-
tive or combined arrangements, thermal and chemical interactions be-
tween the aftertreatment components have to be considered. Therefore,
the following paragraphs give an overview on the different components
of  the  exhaust  gas  aftertreatment  system  for  lean-operated  engines,
today mainly fueled by diesel.

Selective Catalytic Reduction Selective catalytic reduction (SCR) cat-
alysts using ammonia as reductant have been commercialized for NOx
removal in the stationary sector for decades. Selective catalytic reduc-
tion of nitrogen oxide emissions describes the conversion of NOx  to ni-
trogen (N2) and water on a catalyst using ammonia as reducing agent.
Commonly  applied  SCR  catalysts  are  vanadia,  Cu-zeolites  and  Fe-
zeolites prepared on a monolithic support. Depending on the NO2:NOx
ratio and temperature, different reactions occur on the catalyst. Eq. (1.1)
shows the standard SCR reaction. The fastest and preferred reaction is
presented in Eq. (1.2), the fast SCR reaction. This is commonly promoted

by a diesel oxidation catalyst (DOC) converting NO to NO2. An excess of
NO2  results in the slow SCR reaction, (1.3), which is undesirable since it
may yield N2O as by-product.

4NH3 + 4NO + O2→4N2 + 6H2O

4NH3 + 2NO + 2NO2→4N2 + 6H2O

8NH3 + 6NO2→7N2 + 12H2O

(1.1)

(1.2)

(1.3)

The  catalyst  performance  is  mainly  dependent  on  the  catalyst
composition  and  aging  condition.  NOx  conversion  efficiency  strongly
depends on the gas temperature. The light-off region for commonly used
SCR catalysts is 200–300

C.

◦

Due  to its toxic properties  and  resulting safety issues,  ammonia is
supplied by an aqueous urea solution. The majority of mobile SCR ap-
plications  carry  a  32.5wt.–%  urea  solution  commercially  named
AdBlue® in Europe and Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF) in the USA. The urea
concentration of 32.5wt.–% was chosen because it marks the eutectic
mixture  of  urea  and  water  resulting  in  the  lowest  possible  melting/
◦
freezing point of –11
C. The precursor liquid is sprayed into the tailpipe
in front of the SCR catalyst, as shown in Fig. 1.

In the mixing section the spray droplets evaporate and ammonia is
generated by two-step thermal decomposition of urea. Urea melts at a

Fig.  1. Close-coupled  exhaust  gas  aftertreatment  system  including  a  diesel
oxidation catalyst (DOC) and an SCR coated diesel particle filter (DPF) [6].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009492

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

◦

temperature of 133
C and simultaneously starts to decompose in two
steps.  By  thermolysis,  urea  reacts  to  isocyanic  acid  (HNCO)  and
ammonia  (NH3).  In  a  second  step  isocyanic  acid  is  hydrolyzed  to
ammonia and carbon dioxide (CO2):

(NH2)2CO→HNCO + NH3

HNCO + H2O→NH3 + CO2

(1.4)

(1.5)

Complete conversion of urea to ammonia and a homogeneous dis-
tribution of ammonia over the tailpipe cross-section in front of the SCR
catalyst  is  necessary  for  efficient  NOx  removal.  In  case  of  a  non-
homogeneous  distribution  or  excess  of  ammonia  due  to  highly  tran-
sient operating conditions, it may exit the SCR catalyst referred to as
ammonia  slip.  To  support  spray  preparation,  mixing  devices  are
commonly  placed  between  the  injection  position  and  SCR  catalyst
(Fig.  1)  maintaining  multiple  functions,  which  will  be  discussed  in
Section 7. However, spray preparation and urea decomposition is not
trivial and has remained a challenging task, which will be adressed in
Section 2 [7].

Mobile SCR systems are an efficient tool for NOx  abatement and are
commonly installed in heavy duty vehicles and large size passenger cars.
However, the additional efforts for AdBlue® fill-up and carriage, spray
injection and urea decomposition raise recurring discussions about po-
tential  alternatives.  Great  effort  has  been  put  in  finding  alternative
sources for ammonia in order to decrease size and cost of the system and
to enable SCR application at low ambient temperatures. Approaches for
alternative ammonia precursors are given by ammonium formate [8],
methanamide  [9]  solid  ammonium  carbamate  [10,11]  and  metal
ammine chloride salts [12] representing only few examples. All these
approaches  offer  advantages  and  disadvantages  in  terms  of  melting
point,  ammonia  storage  capacity  and  ammonia  yield.  However,  until
now their qualities have remained insufficient for a substitution of urea
as commercial SCR reducing agent.

In order to remove excess ammonia an ammonia slip catalyst (ASC)
can be installed downstream the SCR catalyst to oxidize ammonia to N2
and water. Besides oxidation of unreacted ammonia, undesired forma-
tion of nitrous oxide may occur if NO is still present in the exhaust gas as
a  consequence  of  poor  urea  conversion  and  mixing  or  an  insufficient
urea dosing amount [7].
NOx  Storage Catalyst
A NOx  storage catalyst (NSC) or lean NOx  trap (LNT) can be applied
for reduction of nitrogen oxide emissions in lean combustion processes
with excess air. Alkaline or alkaline earth metals like BaCO3  are used as
storage material. Platinum and rhodium are the commonly used cata-
lytically  active  materials.  During lean  operation,  NO2  is  continuously
stored as nitrate, e. g. Ba(NO3)2. Since NO is not stored in an NSC, an
efficient  DOC  has  to  be  installed  upstream  or  integrated  to  the  NSC.
When a high catalyst loading is reached, the catalyst is regenerated by a
short period of rich operation (lack of oxygen). Stored nitrogen oxide is
then oxidized by reducing agents from the rich exhaust gas, such as CO
and  HC.  Oxidation  reaction  can  result  in  undesired  production  of
ammonia (NH3) or nitrous oxide N2O, which is a strong greenhouse gas.
Although selective catalytic reduction (SCR) shows a better efficiency
for NOx  removal, the NSC is characterized by its simplicity and does not
require an additional tank for the reducing agent [13].

Diesel Oxidation Catalyst
A DOC is used for oxidation of CO, HC (hydrocarbons) and NO under
excess of oxygen. Depending on exhaust gas composition, flow velocity
and catalyst material an almost complete oxidation of CO to CO2 and HC
to CO2  and water vapor is found above a certain temperature, the light-
C).  For  oxidation  of  NO  to  NO2,  a
off  temperature  (170  -  200
temperature-dependent equilibrium is reached, which leads to high NO2
concentrations  below  450
C  and  high  NO  concentrations  at  higher
temperatures. The DOC is placed upstream the SCR catalyst to adjust the
NO2:NOx  ratio for optimal performance of the SCR catalytic converter.
In addition to the oxidation of emissions, the DOC is used as a catalytic

◦

◦

burner in the active regeneration of the diesel particle filter. Here, un-
burned fuel is oxidized releasing heat to achieve the regeneration tem-
◦
C. A DOC consists of a ceramic monolith support
peratures of above 550
with porous oxide-washcoat providing a large surface area. Catalytically
active materials used in DOCs are platinum, palladium and rhodium [7].
Diesel  Particle  Filter  Ash  and  soot  particles  produced  during  com-
bustion  in  the  diesel  engine  are  separated  from  the  exhaust  gas  by  a
diesel particle filter (DPF). Ceramics such as silicon carbide or cordierite
in  the  form  of  a  honeycomb  body  with  a  large  number  of  parallel
channels are commonly used as filter material. The adjacent channels
are  closed  alternately  forcing  the  exhaust  gas  to  diffuse  through  the
porous walls.  Fig. 2  shows the structure of a DPF in  comparison to a
monolith catalyst.

The soot particles contained in the exhaust gas may adhere on the
surface  of  the  DPF  channel walls  in  the  form  of  a  soot  layer  (surface
filtration)  or  on  the  pore  surface  (depth  filtration).  The  gradual
increasing soot load leads to an increase of the exhaust gas back pres-
sure,  hence  requiring  a  regeneration.  A  distinction  is  made  between
passive  and  active  regeneration.  Passive  regeneration  describes  the
continuous soot oxidation by a catalytic coating or  by NO2. In active
regeneration, fuel is added and the temperature is increased to 600
C
for a controlled soot oxidation. To achieve lower regeneration temper-
atures, NO2  is used as oxidant enabling soot oxidation at 250
C. This
requires sufficient conversion of NO by the DOC [14].

◦

◦

Arrangement of Aftertreatment Systems
Arrangement of the different aftertreatment devices is significant, as
each  part  is  dedicated  for  removal  of  specific  pollutants,  while  the
remaining  pollutants  may  have  a  promoting  or  inhibiting  effect.  For
example, HC and CO deplete NO2  storage at the NSC by reducing rele-
vant NO2 to NO. For a DPF arranged upstream the NSC or SCR, as shown
in Fig. 3(a) and (b), the DPF regeneration is strongly influenced by NO2
present in the exhaust. Further, this arrangement facilitates heat-up of
the  DPF  for  regeneration  and  prevents  heat  losses  by  NSC  or  SCR.
However, due to the high heat capacity of the DPF the SCR operation
temperature is reached late after cold start. Therefore, additional heaters
may  be  required  for  operating  SCR  systems.  A  positive  effect  can  be
observed when placing a catalytically coated DPF downstream the SCR,
since it additionally functions as ammonia slip catalyst (ASC) and oxi-
dizes  ammonia.  Fig. 3  shows  different  arrangements  of  the  presented
aftertreatment components with and without usage of urea water solu-
tion (UWS) for ammonia generation.

In Fig. 3(a), an arrangement with combined NSC and SCR catalyst
without  injection  of  aqueous  urea  solution  is  shown.  In  comparison,
Fig. 3(b) displays an arrangement with a DeNOx system consisting of the
UWS dosing and SCR catalyst. Fig. 3(c) shows a configuration with an
SCR coated DPF for arrangement in the vicinity of the engine. An SCR
coated DPF is an effective measure to reduce total system size. Multi-
functional aftertreatment devices gain advantage in cost and sizing of
the overall system. For example, a combination of NSC and SCR catalyst
reduces installation space and brings advantages of both systems. Under
rich conditions, ammonia can be produced on the NSC, which is stored
in the SCR catalyst to be released again under lean conditions for NOx
reduction. Another approach is the usage of two consecutive SCR cata-
lysts as described by Balland et al. [15]. Here, the first catalyst is loaded
with ammonia by generous ammonia supply. This improves SCR effi-
ciency and cold start management [7,13].

Recent developments intend to arrange the exhaust  gas aftertreat-
ment in the vicinity of the engine, as shown in Fig. 3(c). With regard to
SCR  systems,  higher  temperatures  in  this  region  promote  UWS  spray
conversion and increase the catalytic activity for NOx  removal. Fig. 1
shows an exemplary, closed-coupled system containing a DOC and a SCR
coated  DPF  in  a  tight  arrangement  with  the  engine.  The  system  is
characterized  by  a  short  mixing  length.  The  advantages  of  the  near-
engine  position  are  further  utilized  for  double  dosing  SCR  strategies.
Here, a second SCR catalyst and UWS dosing is installed in the vehicle
underbody  in  addition  to  a  close-coupled  SCR  coated  DPF.  By  this

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009493

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 2. Monolithic structure of DPF with alternately closed channels in comparison to a catalyst monolith.

◦
C in mobile applications in order to ensure
below temperatures of 180
efficient spray evaporation and urea conversion. Therefore, enhancing
evaporation and diminishing spray/wall contact is a major objective, in
order to decrease this injection threshold and reach sufficient conversion
of NOx  over the total operating range.

Spray dispersion and deflection is mainly dependent on the complex
interaction  of  system  geometry  and  resulting  flow  field,  injector
mounting  and  its  characteristics,  such  as  injector  type,  spray  angle,
droplet size and velocity distribution. When spray impinges on a solid
surface in the tailpipe, the exhaust conditions, such as flow velocity and
temperature, and the impact conditions such as droplet inertia and wall
temperature decide on the outcome of impingement. High thermal and
kinetic  energies  dominating spray  impingement  lead  to  secondary at-
omization, which is beneficial in terms of ammonia generation. For low
thermal and kinetic energies, spray impact may result in partial wetting
of the surface. Consequently, the surface temperature is decreased by
evaporative cooling enhancing further liquid deposition. By accumula-
tion, liquid films are formed on the mixing elements and tailpipe walls
[17–19]. Detachment of the liquid film on mixer blade edges can result
in formation of large secondary droplets, which are at risk to hit the front
face of the catalyst before complete evaporation.

In dependence on temperature distribution and residence time, the
urea  content of the  film  can thermally decompose  into  ammonia and
isocyanic  acid.  However,  undesired  reactions  of  the  intermediate  iso-
cyanic acid can form solid by-products, such as biuret, triuret, cyanuric
acid, ammelide and ammeline [20–23]. Solid deposits formed from urea
and its by-products modify the surface properties of mixer and tailpipe
walls and hence, influence further spray/wall interaction. By decreasing
ammonia production and affecting the flow field, ammonia uniformity is
impaired.  Deposits  formed  on  mixing  elements  can  be  detached  and
entrained  by  liquid  film  dynamics  and  clog  the  catalyst  channels.
Increasing  deposit growth  results in  high backpressure  and, in  severe
cases, in a blockage of the tailpipe.

This review discusses the state of the art of ammonia preparation by
UWS  dosing  and  points  out  potentials  as  well  as  challenges  of  NOx
removal  by  modern  SCR  systems.  The  following  sections  focus  on
different physical and chemical phenomena in the mixing section of SCR
systems, as indicated in Fig. 4: UWS dosing and resulting spray char-
acteristics,  droplet  evaporation  and  gas  phase  reactions,  spray/wall
interaction, liquid film and deposit formation. Interactions of presented
physical  and  chemical  phenomena  are  reviewed  and  modeling  ap-
proaches are given.

3. UWS dosing and spray characteristics

Spray injection, propagation in the turbulent flow field and droplet
evaporation are important physical phenomena of the dispersed liquid
in the gas phase and strongly affect the overall ammonia conversion and
homogenization. Fast evaporation, complete thermal conversion of urea
to  ammonia  and  appropriate  mixing  are  desired  for  a  homogeneous
ammonia distribution in the gas flow entering the SCR catalyst. Hence,
injection and spray characteristics are decisive for the quality of the SCR
system. A thorough understanding of the spray properties is required for
modeling and design of SCR systems. Optimization of spray quality re-
duces  the  risk  of  droplet  impingement,  film  formation  and  resulting

Fig.  3. Schematic  of  consecutive  arrangement  of  exhaust  gas  aftertreatment
components with different DeNOx systems: a) combination of NSC and SCR, b)
SCR  with  upstream  Urea  water  solution  (UWS)  injection  c)  configuration  for
close-coupled arrangement to the engine.

arrangement, the catalyst activity is ensured over the entire temperature
range. For the combination of DPF and SCR, the influence of soot on the
SCR  reactions  has  to  be  considered.  Further,  a  possible  increase  of
backpressure  by  the  SCR  coating  and  its  thermal  stability  has  to  be
accounted for [7].

2. Challenges of ammonia preparation

High  requirements  raised  by  increasingly  stringent  emission  legis-
lations  and  the  ongoing  development  of  more  fuel-efficient  engines
result in the challenge of sufficient spray preparation for NOx  reduction
with,  at  the  same  time,  increasing  urea  dosing  rates  and  decreasing
exhaust  temperatures.  SCR  system  efficiency  heavily  relies  on  the
available amount and homogeneous distribution of ammonia over the
tailpipe cross section immediately in front of the catalyst.

The formation of ammonia from UWS comprises droplet evaporation
and  thermal  decomposition  of  urea  in  the  gas  phase  as  well  as  urea
decomposition from liquid films formed on the mixer, pipe or catalyst
surfaces. Due to the highly transient conditions in the tailpipe in terms of
exhaust  gas  flow  and  temperature  and  the  short  distances  between
injector  and  SCR  catalyst,  complete  spray  evaporation  over  the  wide
range of operating conditions remains critical. Incomplete evaporation
inevitably  is  accompanied  by  the  interaction  of  droplets  with  mixing
devices,  tailpipe  walls  and  the  catalyst  front  face,  particularly  when
considering the requirement of high dosing rates to meet todays NOx
emission limits. The increasing trend of close-coupled positioning of the
aftertreatment system with tightened spatial restrictions supports these
undesired phenomena. Positioning of the SCR system even upstream the
turbocharger [16] leads to further challenges due to elevated pressure
and  mechanical  interactions.  Furthermore,  low  exhaust  temperatures
resulting from increasingly fuel efficient engine operation impede suf-
ficient  spray  preparation.  Until  now,  UWS  is  commonly  not  injected

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009494

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 4. Schematic of relevant physical and chemical processes in the mixing section of SCR systems. Numbers indicate the respective section number, in which the
different phenomena are discussed.

deposit formation.

In  mobile  applications,  UWS  injectors  are  commonly  driven  by
pressures of 3 - 10 bar to generate sprays of 10 - 160μm depending on
injection technology [24]. Spray quality is generally characterized by
global and local spray parameters, including the initial jet velocity, the
spray  angle, spray  penetration and  both the  droplet size and  velocity
distribution. Knowledge of primary spray parameters is substantial for
SCR system design and modeling studies. Investigations on the devel-
oped  spray  characteristics  serve  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  operating
conditions  on  spray  behavior  aiming  to  reduce  the  risk  of  spray
impingement and film formation.

Patternators are frequently used for determination of the spray mass
flux in quiescent environment. For detailed UWS spray analysis, a wide
range of optical methods can be found in literature applied in quiescent
and incident flow conditions. Prevalent diagnostics for droplet size and
velocity are Laser induced fluorescence (LIF) [25], Long Distance (LD)
Microscopy  [25–29],  Mie  scattering  [25,26,30,31],  Phase  doppler
anemometry (PDA) [32–34], Particle image velocimetry (PIV) [30,32]
and  high-speed  imaging  [30,31,33,35,36].  However,  optical  spray
analysis remains challenging due to the complex layout of modern SCR
systems  offering  limited  access  close  to  the  nozzle.  Furthermore,  an
intrinsically  irregular  spray  structure  characterized  by  non-spherical
droplets,  intersections  and  overlaps  impede  optical  analysis.  Particu-
larly  at  high  temperature  conditions,  sophisticated  measurement  and
post-processing  techniques  are  required  [27,28].  Following,  different
injection technologies and related studies on UWS spray characteristics
and their interactions with the operating conditions are discussed.

3.1. Urea-water solution injection

Primary droplet size and velocity distributions of the UWS spray are
mainly dependent on injector characteristics and dosing strategy. Gen-
eral system layout, injector position and mounting additionally affect
spray  penetration.  However,  due  to  the  large  number  of  individual
system  designs,  these  are  not  discussed  at  this  point.  Detailed  mea-
surements and a comparison of spray characteristics of different, com-
mercial  injectors  were  performed  by  Liao  et  al.  [37].  Two  primary
injection  technologies  are applied  for UWS  supply in  SCR  system: air
assisted and airless (pressure-driven) injection. The applied technology
is mainly chosen by the respective dosing quantity and spray quality.
Spray quality is associated with the initial spray characteristics and their
interaction  with  the  flow  field  (penetration,  mixing,  droplet  entrain-
ment) and solid walls (impingement, secondary atomization, film and
deposit formation) [7]. Generally, air assisted injection provides smaller
droplet diameters, expressed by the Sauter mean diameter d32, and leads

to stronger entrainment of the droplets due to their size compared to
airless  injection.  Air  assisted  injection  is  characterized  by  good  spray
mixing and less droplet impingement. However, a comparable mixing
length is required due to reduced heat transfer to the droplets for air
assisted injection. Furthermore, dosing is difficult as it is less precise and
the UWS mass flow is limited. In contrast, pressurized, airless injection
results in larger droplets and an increased risk of impingement. Larger
relative velocities promote heat transfer, but evaporation time increases
with  droplet size. In  combination with  mixing devices, advantages  of
airless injection can be utilized, as the suitability of the injection tech-
nology depends on the individual system layout and urea distribution
strategy [38].

For  comparison,  Fig.  5  shows  the  spray  contours  of  two  example

injectors, air assisted and airless, without cross-flow.

For air assisted injection, stabilization of the spray cone width by the
co-flowing injector air is observed. For pressure driven, airless injection,
the spray cone width is continuously increasing by the initial spray cone
angle, resulting in a larger area of potential droplet impingement at the
opposite wall. A constant velocity of the spray cone tip is determined
whereas  for  air  assisted  injection,  non-uniform  velocity  values  are
measured.

Different  spray  geometries  are  applied  to  reach  optimal  spray  ho-
mogenization in the individual systems. For pressure driven injection,
pressure swirl and liquid jet (full or hollow cone) injectors are applied.
Fig.  6  illustrates  the  different  spray  geometries  of  a  pressure  swirl
injector and a 3-hole liquid jet injector.

The  liquid  distribution  inside  the  spray  body  is  measured  with  a
patternator  for  a  defined  distance  to  the  injector.  The  pressure  swirl
injector shows the highest droplet concentration in the center, which is
gradually decreasing with larger spray body diameter. For the liquid jet
injector, the highest droplet concentration is observed in the three in-
dividual spray cones [7]. The liquid distribution is decisive for appro-
priate  mixing  and,  in  case  of  incomplete  evaporation,  for  the  spray
impingement pattern on mixing elements and walls.

Valve opening and closing was observed to strongly affect the droplet
size  distribution of  the initial  spray. Fig. 7 demonstrates the effect of
valve opening on the UWS spray quality.

Images  are  taken  during  injection  to  a  test  rig  without  cross-flow
using  a  commercial,  pressure-driven  3-hole  injector.  Initially,  a  large
conglomeration of liquid is injected, which  impinges on the wall and
forms  a  liquid  film.  Subsequently,  the  primary  breakup  mechanism
effectively  produces  the  specified  droplet  size  distribution.  This  in-
homogeneity in droplet size drastically increases the impinging liquid
mass and the risk of film and deposit formation. In particular, pulsed
injection  systems  suffer  from  this  phenomenon,  since  the  injection

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009495

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 5. Spray contours during the start of injection for an air assisted (left) and pressure driven, airless system (right) at low cross-flow conditions. Reprinted by
permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: [38], Springer Nature.

Fig.  6. Liquid  distribution  for  two  different  spray  geometries  from  airless  injection  measured  by  a  patternator.  Reprinted  by  permission  from  Springer  Nature
Customer Service Centre GmbH: [7], Springer Nature.

Fig. 7. Effect of valve opening on the initial droplet size distribution of pressure-driven injection. Images show UWS injection by a 3-hole commercial dosing module
in quiescent conditions at different time instants after start of injection.

procedure relies on the continuous opening and closing of the valve. This
effect has to be considered in spray measurements [34] and for overall
system design.

Few studies are available on detailed injector geometry and its in-
fluence  on  the  UWS  spray  development  [39–41].  Cai  et  al.  [40]

investigate the influence of nozzle geometry on the draining of UWS by
back suction and on potential bubble formation in the injector pipe. The
effect of diameter ratio and inclination angle of a simplified nozzle ge-
ometry is investigated by Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simu-
lations using a phase-field method. Fig. 8 presents two modifications of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009496

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 8. CFD simulation of liquid back suction and bubble formation for different nozzle geometries. Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service
Centre GmbH: [40], Springer Nature.

the applied geometry, which is represented by two connected, concen-
tric pipes with a defined diameter ratio.

Results indicate that a decreasing diameter ratio can delay bubble
formation. Furthermore, the existence of a critical inclination angle is
proposed,  which  impedes  bubble  formation,  as  shown  in  Fig.  8.  The
results show the strong effect of geometrical nozzle design on the two
phase flow inside the nozzle during injection breaks.

3.2. Spray development and characterization

Spray development and its interaction with the flow field is decisive
for the overall system performance. Spray penetration depends not only
on  geometrical  injector  characteristics  and  injection  pressure,  which
determine the initial droplet size and velocity distribution. The density
difference between gas and liquid as well as the ambient pressure further
affect the penetration depth [42–44]. The most relevant parameter is the
relative velocity of the droplets. For SCR application, studies focus on
scenarios  of droplets  accelerated by  the gas flow,  as the injection  ve-
locity  is smaller  than the  gas velocity. For  passenger cars and trucks,
exhaust gas velocities range from 5 to 100ms-1 and injection velocities
from 5 to 25ms-1 [45]. For given primary UWS spray characteristics, the
effect of relative velocity was investigated by altering the gas flow rate
[30,33,46]. High gas flow rates promote entrainment of small drops and
decrease spray density, which affects the extent and characteristics of
spray impingement and reduces potential film formation [46].

Spiteri  and  Dimopoulos  Eggenschwiler  [30]  study  injection  and
spray  development  in  a  hot  gas  flow  rig  with  a  cross  section  of  80  x
80mm using optical imaging techniques, such as shadow imaging, PIV
and Mie scattering. A commercial 6-hole full cone injector is used. Re-
sults  show  that  the  spray  tip penetration  velocity and  the  spray  cone
angle  are  independent  from  the  gas  flow  conditions.  Image  intensity
analysis is applied to investigate spray density and contours. The spray is
described to consist of a dense core region surrounded by a peripheral
region,  which  increases  downstream  and  contains  entrained  droplets.
The injected mass in the spray core is likely to impinge on the wall for all
tested  conditions  [30].  Fig.  9  shows  results  of  the  image  intensity
analysis for sprays at different gas flow momentums (a) and a compar-
ison of UWS and water spray behavior (b).

The described spray structure is observed both for high and low gas
flow  momentum.  The  low  flow  momentum  spray  contours  strongly
differ from the high flow momentum cases. The low flow momentum

Fig. 9. (a) Characteristic image intensity isocontours for sprays at different gas
flow momentums (ρu2)gas: 1, high-density contours; 2, intermediate contours; 3,
low-intensity outer contours. (b) Comparative image intensity isocontours for
water  and  UWS  spray  at  identical  gas  flow  momentums.  Reprinted  with
permission from [30]. Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society.

spray  is  less  deflected  and  shows  a  larger  core  region  due  to  less
entrainment. A comparison of UWS and water sprays shows no signifi-
cant difference in the spray structure at the same operating conditions.
Shadow images of spray penetration at different gas flow conditions

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009497

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

are given in Fig. 10. Liao et al. [31] perform a comprehensive analysis of
the spray behavior under exhaust flow conditions using non-intrusive
to
optical techniques. The commercial 3-hole injector is mounted 50
the gas flow direction and operated at 9 bar. The spray cone deflection
due  to  different  gas  flow  velocities  is  negligible.  However,  increased
entrainment  can  be  observed  for  high  gas  flows.  Furthermore,  an  in-
crease in gas temperature is shown to decrease spray impingement. Note
that, in this case, the gas velocity is affected by gas temperature due to
the change in density, while the mass flow is kept constant.

◦

Postrioti  et  al.  [33]  study  the  effect of  the  gas  flow  conditions  on
spray characteristics by PDA. Fig. 11 presents results for the mean ve-
locity and the Sauter mean diameter of the droplets in dependence on
gas temperature.

The increase in velocity for higher gas temperatures is clearly shown.
Furthermore, the effect of enhanced evaporation on the droplet size is
shown by a decrease in droplet size. For a constant relative velocity, a
change  in  gas  temperature  was  observed  to  hardly  influence  spray
propagation [46]. In contrast to the gas temperature, van Vuuren et al.
[47]  found  that  the  UWS  liquid  temperature  drastically  affects  spray
quality,  as  high  temperatures  were  found  to  enhance  the  level  of  at-
omization.  Experiments  were  performed  from  room  temperature  to
boiling temperature by pre-heating the injected solution. Temperature
changes affect viscosity and surface tension of the liquid. The effect of
liquid  properties  on  the  atomization  quality  has  been  elucidated  in
numerous works, i. e. [48–51]. The relation of viscous to surface tension
and  inertial  forces  is  generally  expressed  by  the  Ohnesorge  number,
including the liquids dynamic viscosity η, density ρ and surface tension σ
as well as a characteristic length scale L.

Fig. 10. Shadow images of spray penetration for different operating conditions.
(cid:0) 1  (top  to
Given  conditions  result  in  gas  flow  velocities  of  7,  21  and  17.5ms
bottom).  Reprinted  by  permission  from  Springer  Nature  Customer  Service
Centre GmbH: [31], Springer Nature.

Oh =

√

η
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρσL

=

√

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
We
Re

(3.1)

For  UWS  injection,  surfactant  addition  was  studied  and  showed
improved  breakup  characteristics  and  a  decrease  of  the  droplet  size
distribution width due to lowered surface tension [52].

Note, that all studies presented here rely on different flow setups and
injection  systems.  Therefore,  comparability  is  only  partially  ensured.
Non-invasive, representative measurements of spray  characteristics in
hot flow environment have remained a challenging task. Establishment
of good spray quality reduces the risk of subsequent droplet impinge-
ment, film formation and deposit build-up, which will be discussed in
the next sections.

4. Droplet evaporation and gas phase decomposition

Efficient evaporation of the atomized liquid is required for appro-
priate  conversion  of  urea  to  ammonia  and  a  homogeneous  reducing
agent distribution. Furthermore, rapid evaporation of the droplets pre-
vents  liquid/wall  contact  and  resulting  film  and  deposit  formation.
Subsequent reactions in the gas phase determine the gas composition
and relevant species ratios entering the SCR catalyst. For an optimized
NOx  removal at the catalyst, uniform distributions as well as NO/NO2
and NH3/NOx  ratios of unity are desired for the fast SCR reaction. The
NO/NO2  ratio entering the SCR mixing section is affected by the DOC
positioned  upstream  the  SCR  system  responsible  for  the  oxidation  of
unburned hydrocarbons, CO and NO. For avoidance of ammonia slip,
efficient evaporation and conversion of UWS to ammonia is required to
reach  the  desired  NH3/NOx  ratio  while  dosing  the  stoichiometric
amount of the solution.

Complete evaporation of the spray requires a sufficient temperature
and  residence  time  in  the  mixing  section.  Static  mixing  devices  are
commonly used for short mixing length for secondary atomization of the
spray,  as  it  will  be  discussed  in  Section  7.  Lower  gas  velocities  were
found  to  increase  the  spray  evaporation  efficiency  due  to  increased
droplet residence time [53]. However, for a constant residence time, a
rise in relative velocity increases evaporation efficiency as a result of
stronger convection. It is assumed that, depending on spray character-
istics, enrichment effects of the surrounding gas phase affect the evap-
oration  efficiency,  as  dense  droplet  clusters  may  lead  to  a  vapor
saturated  environment.  For  combustion  applications,  droplet  cluster
evaporation  and  accompanied  gas  phase  enrichment  was  studied
experimentally and numerically [54–56]. The role of enrichment is not
included in current SCR research and deserves detailed studies.

Droplet evaporation under hot flow conditions can be evaluated by
optical measurements of droplet size as presented in the previous sec-
tion.  Generally,  droplet  evaporation  is  enhanced  by  high  relative  ve-
locities and temperatures [17,33,34], see Fig. 11.

4.1. Evaporation kinetics

For  a  detailed  analysis  of  evaporation  kinetics,  experiments  and
simulations  are  performed  for  single  droplets.  Evaporation  of  single
UWS droplets is stated to follow three evaporation stages [57,58]. Musa
et al. [57] suspended single UWS droplets on a thin quartz fiber in a
heated,  quiescent  atmosphere,  while  monitoring  the  evaporation  pro-
cess by a camera. The droplet diameter is evaluated by image analysis.
An example for characteristic droplet evaporation of UWS showing three
stages compared to water is presented in Fig. 12.

In the first stage, evaporation behavior is similar to pure water and
follows  the  D2-law.  Here,  the  evaporation  rate  is  expressed  by  the
droplet volume decrease indicated by its squared diameter, which fol-
lows a linear decrease in time. The second stage is marked by a reduction
of the evaporation rate. The extent of this rate decrease mainly depends
on  temperature  affecting  the  increase  of  urea  concentration  and  a

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009498

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 11. PDA results for droplet size and velocity in dependence on gas temperature given for multiple measurement positions at a constant distance from the nozzle.
#6 denotes the position in the injector axis. Measurements are performed for a 3-hole full cone injector. Reprinted from [33], Copyright (2020), with permission
from Elsevier.

considers only diffusive mass and energy transport in the liquid resulting
in radial gradients of temperature, concentration and liquid properties.
Results show that the RM model predicts UWS droplet evaporation well
while being numerically more effective [45].

There are droplet evaporation models including instantaneous urea
thermo-hydrolysis, which is considered as vaporization process [63–65].
In  contrast,  other  models  describe  urea  decomposition  subsequent  to
evaporation  using  Arrhenius-type  expressions  [45].  Stein  et  al.  [66]
state,  that  evaporation  and  decomposition  of  UWS  droplets  can  be
reproduced more accurately by models accounting for a decomposition
subsequent to water evaporation, instead of a direct decomposition at
the  gas-liquid  interface.  In  order  to  limit  computational  effort  for
calculation  of  droplet  evaporation  and  decomposition  rates,  reduced
models have been proposed, which reproduce droplet evaporation and
gas phase reactions in the temperature range relevant for SCR [66,67].
Habchi  et  al.  [68]  developed  a  model  for  evaporation  and
thermo-hydrolysis of urea droplets, which was validated by two exper-
imental  studies  [58,59].  Results  prove  a  good  prediction  of  droplet
temperature, evaporation rate and urea gasification over a wide tem-
perature  range.  Thermal  decomposition  of  urea  is  accounted  for  by
implementation  of  a  semi-detailed  kinetic  model  comprising  12  re-
actions. An accurate prediction of urea decomposition is stated for low
temperatures, whereas at high temperatures, the non-uniform droplet
temperature resulting from bubble nucleation reduces prediction accu-
racy. Implementation of droplet evaporation and decomposition models
to CFD models is discussed in Section 8.

Fig.  12. Evaporation  characteristics  of  millimetric  water  and  30  wt.-%  urea
solution droplets in a furnace at 200

C [57].

◦

decrease in saturation vapor pressure. In addition, boiling phenomena
like bubble formation and expansion and crystallization of urea can be

(

)

2

observed leading to an unsteady development of

d
d0

. It is assumed

4.2. Gas phase reactions

that,  depending  on  temperature,  bubble  formation  and  expansion  is
caused by gaseous reaction products of urea decomposition. Solidifica-
tion of urea at the gas-liquid interface was partly observed to lead to
microexplosions of droplets due to high pressures from boiling inside the
liquid center [58]. The third stage represents the crystallization stage
leading to complete solidification. Wei et al. [59] summarize the evap-
oration  process  of  suspended  UWS  droplets  in  four  stages,  as  they
defined the initial temperature rise up to the water boiling point as a
separate stage.

Theoretical models for the evaporation of multi-component droplets
were  developed  in  the  context  of  spray  drying  [60,61].  These  are
capable to predict the diameter evolution as well as concentration and
temperature profiles in the droplet. Existing evaporation models for urea
water solution droplets confirm the different evaporation stages given in
Fig. 12 [45,62]. Birkhold et al. [45] compared two droplet evaporation
models  applied to  UWS  droplets. The Rapid  mixing (RM)  model con-
siders infinite high transport coefficients for the liquid phase leading to
uniform  temperature,  concentration  and  liquid  properties  inside  the
droplet. The Diffusion limit (DL) model neglects internal convection and

In addition to droplet evaporation and urea thermo-hydrolysis effi-
ciency,  gas  phase  reactions  affect  the  gas  composition  at  the  catalyst
inlet. These include the NO/NO2  equilibrium, potential NOx  reduction
and NH3  oxidation and reactions of other exhaust components, such as
CO  and  HCs.  Homogeneous  reactions  of  NO/NH3  mixtures  involving
oxygen and water have been studied due to the application of thermal
DeNOx,  known  as  Selective  non-catalytic  reduction  (SNCR),  for  sta-
tionary post-combustion NOx  abatement. Gas phase NOx  reduction by
ammonia  works  in  a  temperature  range  of  900  to  1400K.  Therefore,
experimental  [69–71]  and  modeling  [72–74]  studies  investigate  the
system particularly above 1000K. However, in the past years gas phase
reactions have attracted increased attention in the context of lean-burn
natural gas engines and, meanwhile, several studies on homogeneous
reactions  in  gas  mixtures  at  moderate  temperature  (400-1200K)  are
available. Significant homogeneous conversion of NO to NO2  observed
at moderate temperatures is assumed to affect catalytic NOx  reduction
[75]. In gas mixtures relevant to lean-burn natural gas engines, a pro-
motion  of  the  homogeneous  oxidation  of  light  alkanes  by  NOx  was
formation  of  carcinogenic
demonstrated,  which  can

lead

to

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)1009499

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

formaldehyde [76]. Schmitt et al. [77] investigate the effect of different
exhaust constituents on homogeneous NOx  conversion in the tempera-
ture range of 700 to 1200K. Increased reactivity is observed by addition
of NO2  and HC, such as CH4  and C2H22, lowering the NO conversion
temperature by 200K. Furthermore, methane plays an important role in
carbon and nitrogen chemistry, while the influence of CO on NOx  con-
version is rather small. With regard to NOx  emission control of Diesel
engines,  gas  phase  reactions  become  increasingly  relevant  as  modern
SCR  systems  are  to  be  developed  for  a  pre-turbine  position  involving
pressures of up to 5 bar and elevated temperatures for rapid light-off. At
high temperatures and pressures, not only the NOx  conversion efficiency
of SCR catalysts is improved, but also the catalyst performance is highly
affected  by gas phase reactions [78,79]. However,  further studies are
needed to understand the impact of gas phase reactions on the complete
aftertreatment system.

Due  to  droplet  evaporation  and  urea  thermo-hydrolysis,  gaseous
intermediates of urea decomposition, particularly isocyanic acid HNCO,
are relevant reactants in the gas phase. Gas phase reactions of isocyanic
acid are part of several experimental and numerical studies related to
combustion involving temperatures of 800 - 1500K [80–84]. It repre-
sents an important intermediate in SNCR systems. A recently developed
mechanism for gas phase reactions at 900-1400K by Glarborg et al. [84]
includes reactions of isocyanic acid with OH, O2, H2O and itself. How-
ever, availability of suitable experimental data is limited. Few authors
study  homogeneous  reactions  involving  isocyanic  acid,  particularly
HNCO  hydrolysis,  under  SCR  relevant  conditions.  Urea  thermolysis
conversion increases with temperature and residence time. Koebel and
Strutz [85] show that urea thermolysis is incomplete in the investigated
temperature  range  of  255–440
C  for  residence  times  of  0.09s.  A
considerable amount of urea can be detected at the entrance of the SCR
catalyst.  Complete  decomposition  of  urea  to  ammonia  and  isocyanic
acid was shown by Yim et al. [86] for temperatures above 350
C and
residence times above 0.1s. Isocyanic acid is observed to be highly stable
in the gas phase, as similar concentrations of ammonia and isocyanic
acid are detected [83,85]. Chen et al. [83] detect a NH3  to HNCO ratio
increasing from 1.2 to 1.7 with temperature. The maximum investigated
temperature is 1273K. Fig. 13 shows results on the NH3 to HNCO ratio in
dependence on temperature and vapor concentration.

◦

◦

Isocyanic acid stability in the gas phase is a major concern in SCR
aftertreatment engineering bearing the risk of harmful HNCO and NH3
emissions. In case of incomplete thermolysis and hydrolysis, a consid-
erable section of the catalyst is utilized to convert urea and isocyanic
acid.  Particularly  short  residence  times,  as  present  in  modern,  close-

Fig.  13. NH3  to  HNCO  ratio  in  dependence  on  temperature  and  vapor  con-
centration. Inlet flow composed of urea with a volume fraction of 0.0004, 2–6%
(cid:0) 1.  Reprinted  by
water  vapor,  0%  O2  and  N2  balance;  flow  rate  1lmin
permission  from  Springer  Nature  Customer  Service  Centre  GmbH:  [83],
Springer Nature.

coupled  systems,  will  contribute  to  the  rising  challenge  of  isocyanic
acid  conversion.  In  contrast  to  homogeneous  reactions,  catalytic  iso-
cyanic acid hydrolysis was extensively studied. Generally, isocyanic acid
hydrolysis is found to be strongly accelerated by a catalyst [83,85–90].
Rapid hydrolysis was found for silica, alumina and titania [85] as well as
for  common  SCR  catalysts,  such  as  VWT  [91].  High  conversions  are
achieved  for  catalytic  HNCO  hydrolysis  even  at  high  space  velocities
(cid:0) 1) and low temperatures (150K). Particularly high rates for the
(106h
hydrolysis are found on support materials, e.g. TiO2  and Al2O3, while
the activity is slightly decreased by addition of vanadia, tungsta or CuO
respectively [83,91]. The reaction is consistently stated to be limited by
internal and external mass transfer [83,91,92]. A decrease of hydrolysis
activity is observed for different catalysts by the competitive adsorption
of HNCO and NH3 and subsequent formation of ammonium nitrates [87,
92–94]. However, a re-activation of the catalyst can be achieved by high
temperatures [93]. Recent studies propose a competition of HNCO hy-
drolysis  with  other  reactions,  such  as  oxidation  by  O2  or  NO2  and  a
HNCO-SCR  reaction  via  the  formation  of  HONO  [95].  HNCO  is  less
active to interact with NO compared to NH3. However, in presence of
NO2, the reactivity of HNCO acting as reducing agent was seen to be
significantly promoted [94]. Kinetic models for the hydrolysis of HNCO
over different catalysts were proposed [96,97]. Despite these achieve-
ments on catalytic hydrolysis of HNCO, experiments using SCR mono-
liths  and  engine  test  rig  experiments  considering  conditions  and
catalysts  close  to  application  still  reveal  a  significant  slip  of  both
ammonia and isocyanic acid [91,98,99]. Therefore, it is recommendable
to  further  study  homogeneous  and  catalytic  isocyanic  acid  reactions,
which  strongly  affect  the  efficiency  of  urea  conversion  and  NOx
reduction.

Generally,  droplet  evaporation  efficiency,  thermal  decomposition
and gas phase reactions decide on the composition of the flow entering
the SCR catalyst and the initial conditions of droplet impact in terms of
momentum,  temperature and  urea  concentration. Therefore,  film  and
deposit formation as well as the overall system efficiency are affected.

5. Spray/wall interaction

In  the  combustion  community  and  related  industries,  spray/wall
interaction is important for both fuel injection in IC engines and exhaust
gas  aftertreatment  systems.  Particularly  in  ammonia  SCR  systems,
spray/wall  interaction  is  of  growing  interest  [19,33,63,100–103].
Interaction of spray droplets with the tailpipe wall determines the extent
of liquid/wall contact and film formation. Since the presence of a liquid
film for a certain residence time inevitably results in the formation of
solid  deposits,  spray/wall  interaction  and  particularly  droplet/wall
interaction  represents  a  critical  phenomenon  in  the  preparation  of
ammonia from UWS. Another important aspect of urea conversion ef-
ficiency is impingement on mixing elements, which can be utilized for
secondary atomization and enhanced heat transfer to the liquid in case
of short mixing lengths (see Section 7). Fundamental thermal and hy-
drodynamic  phenomena  during  spray  and  single  droplet  impact  and
approaches to regime classification for modeling droplet/wall interac-
tion are reviewed and discussed next.

5.1. Droplet/wall interaction regimes

The  impact  of  single  droplets  on  dry,  solid  targets  motivated  by
different  applications,  has  been  investigated  by  numerous  authors
[104–118].  Particularly  the  continuing  developments  in  high-speed
imaging  and  post-processing  techniques  throughout  the  last  decades
have  improved  precision  and  quality  of  experimental  investigations
[119–122]. Despite these efforts, not all aspects of droplet/wall inter-
action including hydrodynamic and thermal effects are fully understood.
Spreading, disintegration and formation of secondary droplets are sig-
impingement.
nificant  hydrodynamic  phenomena  of  droplet

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094910

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Droplet/wall  interaction  is  further  affected  by  boiling  characteristics,
thermal  breakup  and  the  Leidenfrost  effect  [123].  Classification  of
droplet  impact  generally  comprises  thermal  and  hydrodynamic  inter-
action regimes as indicated in Fig. 14.

In case of non-heated, dry impingement targets, the hydrodynamic
outcome of droplet impact is assigned to Deposition, Splash and Rebound
regimes  [113,125,126].  Deposition  means  the  adhesion  of  the  total
droplet mass on the surface resulting in a lense-shaped film dependent
on the contact angle. Before reaching its final state, oscillating behavior
of  spreading  and  receding  of  the  droplet  can  be  observed.  Splashing
describes  the  atomization  of  the  droplet  and  formation  of  secondary
droplets due to high kinetic energy. Rebound at low wall temperatures
marks a droplet reflection dominated by the liquid-solid contact angle.
Deposition  and  rebound  occur  for  low  impaction  energies,  whereas
splashing is observed for high kinetic energy of the impinging droplet.
Rioboo et al. [126] introduced a more detailed classification for kinetic
disintegration  differentiating  between  prompt  splash  (instantaneous
disintegration)  and  corona  splash  (lamella  breakup  at  maximum
spreading length). Regime identification is based on the kinetic impac-
tion  energy  expressed  by  the  droplet  Weber  number  with  droplet
diameter  d0  and  impact  velocity  u0,  the  liquid  density  ρl  and  surface
tension σ.

We =

ρl⋅d0⋅u2
0
σ

(5.1)

Generally, a critical Weber number Wecr  or a dimensionless splashing
parameter K = f(We, Re) incorporating Weber and Reynolds number is
defined  for  regime  distinction  [127,128].  Different  correlations  for  K
can be found in literature in dependence on the experimental boundary
conditions [129]. In case of heated targets, thermal interaction regimes,
such  as Breakup and  Rebound, are  considered in  addition to hydrody-
namics.  Here,  breakup  describes  a  disintegration  of  the  droplet  by
dominant thermal mechanisms, while rebound means a reflection of the
total droplet. The Leidenfrost (LF) effect describes the formation of an
insulating vapor layer between droplet and wall impeding liquid/wall
contact. The vapor layer between droplet and wall strongly decreases
heat  transfer.  In  dependence  on  the  boundary  conditions,  transition
regimes,  e.g.  Rebound  with  breakup  or  Boiling-induced  breakup,  are
introduced  in  literature  for  wall  temperatures  of  TB < Tw < TLF  [113,
124,125,130,131]. Here, regime distinction is based on the dimension-
less  parameter  T*  representing  the  ratio  of  wall  temperature  Tw  and
boiling temperature TB  of the liquid.

T * =

Tw
TB

(5.2)

Moreover,  the  droplet  temperature,  heat  capacity  and  the  impact
angle  affect  the  spray/wall  interaction.  Thermophysical  properties  of
the  wall  like  thermal  conductivity,  heat  capacity,  roughness  and

wettability are stated to influence the outcome of droplet impact [132].
Presented dimensionless parameters are used to set up comprehen-
sive regime maps covering the most relevant thermal and hydrodynamic
effects  of  droplet  impingement.  A  qualitative  regime  map  for  single
droplet  impact  on  heated  walls  is  shown  in  Fig.  14.  It  indicates  a
dependence of thermal boundaries, e.g. the wetting boundary defined by
the  Leidenfrost  temperature,  on  the  Weber  number  and  vice  versa,  a
dependence of the splash threshold on temperature. Regime classifica-
tion  and  definition  of  regime  boundaries  is  not  straightforward  and
depends  on  various  parameters,  such  as  the  liquid  properties  (vapor
pressure,  viscosity,  surface  tension),  the  droplet  momentum  (droplet
diameter, velocity, impact angle) and the target surface characteristics
(temperature,  wettability,  roughness).  Droplet/wall  interaction  has
been  extensively  studied  for  pure  liquids,  such  as  water  and  fuels,
revealing  important  global  dependencies  [113,130,133–137].  These
will be discussed in the following paragraphs before regime maps for
UWS droplets are presented.

High  initial  droplet  sizes  and  velocities  promote  spreading  of  the
lamella up to lamella breakup (splash). In case of cold targets, surface
wettability (θ) and roughness (Ra) play a major role for impingement
dynamics. Small contact angles support intense lamella spreading and
kinetic disintegration, whereas increased surface roughness diminishes
spreading  and  induces  disintegration  at  decreased  velocities.  Similar
effects are promoted by liquid property changes to higher surface ten-
sion and viscosity [107].

Lamella breakup is promoted by instabilities and bubble nucleation
induced  by  heat  transfer  from  hot  surfaces.  Bubble  nucleation  site
density is increased by surface roughness [104]. The wetting boundary
separating  wetting  and  non-wetting  regimes  depends  on  the  liquid
properties and a critical wall temperature, which is directly correlated to
the Leidenfrost temperature TLF  [138]. Existing literature is contradic-
tory  concerning  the  dependencies  of  different  parameters  on  the  dy-
namic Leidenfrost temperature. Several authors have studied the effect
of impact velocity [107,119,139,140], droplet size [123,141,142] and
impact  angle  [143,144]  on  the  Leidenfrost  temperature.  However,
contrary trends are observed.

5.2. UWS droplet impingement

Concerning real applications, there is a strong need for research on
single  droplet  impingement  of  solutions,  such  as  UWS.  Apart  from
exhaust after treatment, this is relevant for other technical applications
including general heat transfer [145,146] and fire suppression [147].
The solute is observed to increase heat transfer resistance and decrease
the  vapor  pressure  [147,148].  Bubble  formation  and  breakup  are
intensified by the solute and a foaming behavior is recognized [131,135,
148,149]. In case of thermal decomposition, increased gas bubble for-
mation is seen to enhance boiling and droplet disintegration [148]. Solid
residues resulting from evaporation of the solution are assumed to alter
the subsequent collision dynamics [147].

For the application of SCR systems and the inherent risk of liquid/
wall  contact  from  UWS  injection,  droplet  impact  behavior  of  UWS  is
decisive. Several studies propose regime maps and droplet/wall inter-
action  models  for  UWS  in  particular.  Birkhold  [17]  investigated  the
impact of UWS droplet chains featuring diameters ranging from 90 to
(cid:0) 1. High impact frequencies of
180μm and impact velocities of 5 to 20ms
the droplet generator of up to 10000Hz complicated the visual analysis
of image data and the identification of respective interaction regimes.
Corresponding  to  the  determined  wetting  boundary,  a  Leidenfrost
temperature of 243

C was calculated [17].

B ̈ornhorst and Deutschmann [102] investigated the impact of single
UWS  droplets  in  dependence  on  droplet  momentum  and  target  tem-
perature. Droplet impact was classified to the regimes Deposition, Splash,
Boiling-induced  Breakup,  Rebound  with  Breakup  and  Total  Rebound.
Characteristic impingement behavior for different regimes is illustrated
in Fig. 15.

◦

Fig.  14. Qualitative  regime  map  for  single  droplet  impingement  on  heated
walls dependent on dimensionless numbers, adapted from [124].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094911

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 15. Characteristic behavior of UWS droplet impact for respective regimes: a-c) Deposition, d-f) Splash, g-i) Boiling-induced Breakup, j-l) Rebound with Breakup
m-o) Total Rebound. Time specification indicates time after impact [150].

Further studies involve a variation in the concentration of the solu-
tion and modifications of the target surface. Here, millimetric droplets
(cid:0) 1  are used for a detailed observation
(2-3mm) with velocities of 1-4ms
of  the  phenomena.  Results  show  a  strong  effect  of  dissolved  urea  in
comparison  to  pure  water.  Dissolved  urea  promotes  droplet  breakup
processes  at  higher  temperatures  due  to  enhanced  bubble  nucleation
and formation of gaseous decomposition products. However, an increase
of  urea  concentration  to  40wt.-%  is  not  observed  to  shift  regime
boundaries  significantly  in  the  applied  parameter  range.  Using  an
aluminum target, the Leidenfrost temperature is slightly increased from
TLF = 198∘C for 32.5wt.-% urea to TLF = 204∘C for 40wt.-% urea. These
values  are  significantly  lower  compared  to  Leidenfrost  temperatures
measured  by  Birkhold  [17].  Due  to  the  different  experimental  condi-
tions,  particularly  droplet  size  and  velocity,  results  are  only  partially
comparable [150].

Quissek et al. [103] set up a regime map for UWS based on inclined
(cid:0) 1  velocities. Weber
impact experiments with 300μm droplets of 1-8ms
C  are
number  dependent  Leidenfrost  temperatures  of  280  to  310
determined. Again, different experimental boundary conditions and the
investigated parameter range limit the comparability and general val-
idity of the regime map and characteristic temperatures.

◦

Presented studies do not investigate the effect of target material or
surface  properties  on  droplet  impingement.  Aluminum  and  stainless
steel  targets  of  identical  roughness  were  shown  to  result  in  similar
regime maps [150]. However, most studies do not consider or give in-
formation on the impingement target properties. Bernardin and Muda-
war  [106]  study  the  effects  of  surface  properties  on  the  Leidenfrost
temperature by sessile drop evaporation experiments. Results show that
the  Leidenfrost  temperature  is  relatively  insensitive  to  wetting  condi-
tions of the surface and that increased roughness could lift the wetting
boundary up  to higher temperatures. Recent studies  have shown that
surface roughness plays a role for impingement hydrodynamics and can
significantly shift the regime boundaries. Fig. 16 shows a regime map for
droplet/wall  interaction  for  a  rough,  porous  stainless  steel  surface
compared to a smooth, non-porous reference.

A strong effect is shown on the splashing boundary, which is shifted
to  lower  K  values  for  the  rough  sample.  Droplet  rebound  by  the  Lei-
denfrost  effect  is  shifted  to  higher  temperatures.  It  is  assumed,  that
vapor can escape through the pores of the target impeding the formation
of  a  stable  vapor  layer.  More  detailed  investigations  are  necessary  to
include the effect of rough or porous surfaces to the regime classifica-
tion.  However,  these  findings  indicate  the  relevance  of  surface

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094912

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 16. Experimentally determined regime maps for UWS on a smooth (Ra = 0.6μm) and a rough (Ra = 19.7μm), porous (43% porosity, 60μm mean pore size)
stainless steel surface [151].

properties  on  the  impingement  dynamics.  The  comparison  or  use  of
existing regime data e. g. for modeling purposes should be accompanied
by  a  careful  analysis  of  the  suitability  according  to  the  experimental
boundary conditions including surface properties.

5.3. Models for UWS impingement

Spray  impact  modeling  is  relevant  to  many  technical  applications
and  has  been  extensively  studied  during  the  past  decades.  Although
single droplet impingement is understood well, the transfer of the results
to spray impact models is still an active field of research. Large effort has
been  put  in  understanding  and  modeling  multiple  droplet  interaction
[129,152–156]. Many spray impact models rely on single droplet data
incorporated  to  a  statistical  approach  resulting  in  a  superposition  of
single impact events [132,157–159]. Another approach is the formula-
tion  of  empirical  correlations  based  on  a  high  number  of  spray
impingement experiments and statistical data analysis [156,160]. The
remaining challenge is a reliable prediction of the deposited liquid mass
fraction  and  the  characteristics  of  secondary  droplets  over  a  wide

parameter range [129,161].

For UWS, spray impact models are generally based on experimen-
tally determined regime maps implemented as sub-models in CFD codes
for the prediction of film and secondary droplet formation. Here, char-
acteristic  data  of  the  impacting  droplet,  the  target  surface  and  the
environment serve as model input. Depending on the detected regime
for  this  input,  number  and  size  of  the  secondary  droplets,  velocity
components  and  droplet  mass  fractions  are  calculated  by  statistical
functions. Research on spray/wall and spray/film interaction is mainly
found  in  the  context  of  spray  cooling  [129,161–163]  and  fuel
impingement [159,164–166]. For simulation of spray/wall interaction
inside of SCR systems, many studies rely on a model proposed by Kuhnke
[132]. From single droplet experiments using isooctane, sodium chlo-
ride  ethanol  solution  and  glycerol  water  mixtures  a  regime  map
comprising deposition, splash, rebound and breakup was derived based
cr =
on the parameters K and T*. The wetting boundary is defined as T*
1.1.  Droplets  impinging  on  a  wall  below  this  temperature  deposit  or
splash leading to wall film formation, whereas droplets hitting the wall
above this temperature are reflected by the Leidenfrost phenomenon or

Fig. 17. Qualitative regime maps for droplet impingement on dry walls correlating to mathematical models from literature [125,132].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094913

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

disintegrate  thermally.  The  underlying  regime  map  is  shown  qualita-
tively in Fig. 17(a).

and the wall temperature. Seven different regimes are

The Kuhnke model was applied in simulations by Birkhold et al. [45]
and adapted in terms of the wetting boundary due to different physical
properties of UWS compared to the model fluids. Based on the work of
Kuhnke [132], a spray/wall interaction regime map for UWS was pro-
posed. A more sophisticated model for spray/wall interaction was pro-
posed  by  Bai  and  Gosman  [125].  As  this  model  was  intended  for
simulation of Diesel impingement, it is based on impact data from hy-
drocarbon sprays. In addition, literature data on water spray impinge-
ment  is  included.  The  model  provides  regime  classifications  and
calculations  of  respective  post-impingement  data  for  dry  and  wetted
walls in dependence on the droplet Weber number, the droplet Laplace
number La = σρld0
η2
l
proposed  with  respective  thermal  and  kinetic  boundaries.  Kinetic
boundaries are deduced from literature correlations for dry and wetted
walls.  Thermal  boundaries  are  defined  by  a  pure  adhesion temperature
TPA, which lies above the boiling temperature, the Nukiyama tempera-
ture  TN  marking  the  maximum  droplet  evaporation  rate  and  a  pure
rebound temperature, which is below Leidenfrost temperature. An over-
view on regimes and boundaries of the Bai-Gosman-model is given in
Fig. 17(b). Garcia Rosa et al. [167] present another approach to model
spray/wall interaction. The model consists of statistical correlations and
takes the most relevant impact parameters and physical properties into
account.  The  same  dimensionless  numbers  K  and  T*  are  applied  for
regime  classification.  Other  studies  rely  on  spray/wall  impingement
models  proposed  by  Stanton  and  Rutland  [165]  and  O’Rourke  and
Amsden  [168].  O’Rourke  and  Amsden  [168]  include  the  initial  film
thickness  and  boundary  layer  thickness  to  the  dimensionless  kinetic
parameter E used for setting up the regime maps.

Bai-Gosman  wall impingement  was  applied  and  adapted by  Smith
et al. [169]. The model is calibrated based on measurements of original
and post-impingement spray characteristics inside a real-scale exhaust
gas system including mixing geometries. CFD simulations are found to
be predictive for the applied range of operating conditions. Measured
ammonia  distributions  are  reproduced  qualitatively  by  the  proposed
model.

Quissek et al. [103] extended the Bai-Gosman model based on ex-
periments of UWS droplet impingement. For SCR relevant conditions,
the  regime  Thermal  induced  Breakup  was  added,  describing  the
impingement of droplets on a wall with Tw > TB  forming a liquid film,
which immediately starts boiling and produces a large number of sec-
ondary droplets. Experimentally obtained regime data was compared to
existing literature maps for UWS droplets [45,102]. Results show that
the different drop impact setups influence the obtained regime data and

are only partially consistent. The model adaptions were implemented
into  a  CFD  code  and  tested  by  simulation  of  an  exhaust  system.  The
experimentally  established  regime  map  and  the  adapted  Bai-Gosman
model are displayed in Fig. 18.

In a subsequent publication, Quissek et al. [170] particularly account
for  the  co-existence  of  two  or  more  regime  characteristics  for  given
boundary  conditions.  Based  on  visual  analysis  of  droplet  impact
high-speed recordings, impingement characteristics are described by a
set  of  four  maps  assigning  mass  fractions  to  the  respective  impact
behavior. The four scenarios used are spread, splash, thermal induced
breakup  and  rebound.  The  proposed  model  represents  a  promising
attempt to reduce the shortcomings of fixed boundary models. However,
no validation is presented [170].

5.4. Spreading of impacting droplets

In  addition  to  thermal  and  hydrodynamic  outcomes  of  droplet
impact, researchers are interested in the initial spreading behavior of
UWS droplets. Spreading dynamics of impinging droplets are decisive
for the extent of wetting and therefore affect deposit formation. Not only
the  final  spreading  radius,  but  also  the  maximum  spreading  extent
reached during droplet deposition are crucial information of droplet/
wall collision processes.

Droplet impact on a solid target results in rapid spreading in radial
direction within several milliseconds. A lamella is formed and spreading
finally stops reaching a maximum spreading radius before receding. The
droplet  volume  adopts  from  a  sphere  to  a  disc-like  shape.  Spreading
dynamics  are  dominated by  the  droplet inertia  and  further  driven  by
capillary and viscous forces. These forces are quantified by the dimen-
sionless numbers We and Re revealing the droplet inertia (d0, u0) and the
liquid properties (ρl, ηl, σ) as most important influence factors [171].

A  typical  measure  for  quantification  of  wetting  dynamics  is  the
spreading factor β, which is defined as the ratio between the instanta-
neous diameter of the wetted circular base area of the droplet and the
initial  droplet  diameter.  Special  focus  is  placed  on  the  maximum
spreading  factor  in  literature  and  several  correlations  exist  to  predict
βmax  [172].  At  present,  no  generally  valid  correlation  exists,  but  the
applicability of a model depends on the droplet impact parameters and
wall properties. In spite of a large number of investigations using water
and  other  model  fluids  to  propose  mentioned  correlations,  very  few
studies are found on the dynamic wetting behavior of a UWS droplet,
directly relevant to the SCR application. In a recent study on spreading
of  single  UWS  droplets,  two  empirical  correlations  [173,174]  were
found to predict the maximum spreading radius for millimetric droplets
reasonably well [175]. However, the study reveals limitations of liter-
ature correlations as their validity is limited to certain parameter ranges.

Fig. 18. Experimentally obtained regime map for UWS droplets (a) and adapted Bai-Gosman model (b) by Quissek et al. [103]. Republished with permission of SAE
International from [103].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094914

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

5.5. Spray/wall heat transfer

In SCR systems, heat transfer between wall and liquid is decisive in
terms of film and deposit formation not only during droplet impinge-
ment but also for  existing liquid films. The behavior of an  impinging
droplet is drastically affected by the temperature of the solid surface. In
addition  to  hydrodynamic  regimes  presented  in  previous  sections,
liquid/wall interaction can be classified by heat transfer characteristics.
For the droplet temperature Td < Tw, Td  is increased by impingement
heat  transfer,  while  the  surface  is  cooled.  As  local  cooling  reaches  a
critical surface temperature, wall wetting can be observed. Heat transfer
between liquid and wall is dependent on the temperature difference, the
contact area and the heat transfer coefficient and can be classified into
four  regimes.  Regime  definitions  are  deduced  from  the  Nukiyama
boiling curve, which was originally derived for pool boiling [177].

A common technique to measure heat transfer characteristics is an
analysis of droplet lifetime, revealing the regime boundaries between
natural convection (NC), nucleate boiling (NB), transition boiling (TB)
and  film  boiling  (FB).  Fig.  20(a)  shows  the  qualitative  evolution  of
droplet evaporation time as a function of wall superheat describing the
excess temperature difference to the liquids boiling point TB.

Further, a qualitative pool boiling curve gives the wall heat flux q
and  the  heat  transfer  coefficient  α  as  a  function  of  wall  superheat  in
Fig. 20(b). Droplet evaporation time clearly shows an inverse correla-
tion to wall temperature compared to wall heat flux, i. e. droplet life
time decreases where the heat flux increases with temperature. At low
temperatures,  heat  transferred  from the  surface  is  conducted  through
the liquid and dissipated at the gas-liquid interface by evaporation. This
leads to a low heat transfer rate resulting in a long droplet evaporation
time  in  the  natural  convection  regime.  With  increasing  surface  tem-
perature, nucleation sites are activated leading to gas bubble growth and
rising.  Bubble  formation  in  the  nucleate  boiling  regime  results  in
enhanced  convection  and  mixing  inducing  a  dramatic increase  of  the
heat transferred to the liquid and consequently, a decrease of evapora-
tion time. With rising temperature, bubble formation and coalescence is
enhanced  until  reaching  a  maximum  heat  flux,  which  simultaneously
marks the minimum droplet lifetime. The upper limit is referred to as
critical heat flux (CHF). A further increase in temperature results in the
transition boiling regime. Here, an instable, insulating vapor layer de-
velops between surface and liquid locally resulting in a chaotic variation
between nucleate and film boiling. Transition boiling is characterized by
a reduction of evaporation rate and an increase in droplet lifetime. The
vapor  layer  substantially  grows  with  rising  temperature  and  further
prevents liquid-solid contact until a stable vapor layer has developed.
This temperature marks the Leidenfrost point (LFP), which corresponds

Fig. 19. Temporal evolution of droplet shapes in experiment (left column) and
simulation  (right  column)  for  droplet  diameter  1.95mm  and  impact  velocity
1.95ms

(cid:0) 1  [175].

Fig. 19 shows the temporal evolution of droplet shape during spreading
obtained from experiments and CFD simulations.

Another recent study accounts for SCR relevant conditions in terms
of droplet size and velocity [176]. The authors underline the importance
of  wettability  on  the  impact  dynamics  and  propose  regime  maps  for
droplet deposition and rebound at ambient, isothermal conditions.

Fig. 20. a) Qualitative droplet evaporation time for characteristic heat transfer regimes and b) Nukiyama boiling curve adapted from [178] showing the wall heat
flux q and the heat transfer coefficient α over the temperature difference.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094915

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

to the minimum heat flux and and the maximum droplet evaporation
time. In the film boiling regime starting from the LFP, the liquid remains
separated from the wall by the developed vapor layer. Heat is conducted
through  the  vapor  layer,  which  results  in  a  strong  decrease  of  heat
transfer. Rising temperatures in the film boiling regime lead to a slight
increase in heat transfer and reduction of droplet evaporation time [106,
178].

For the highly transient process of spray impingement, heat transfer
and  hydrodynamics  are  strongly  affected  by  multiple  droplet  interac-
tion  [179].  Characteristics  of  spray  impingement  heat  transfer  are
commonly  described  by  the  presented  boiling  curves  [161,180–183].
Many studies on spray cooling exist, since it is an advantageous cooling
method for technical applications in terms of spatial uniformity and both
liquid  and  energy  consumption.  Measurements  of  boiling  curves  for
impinging sprays reveal the temperature dependent heat transfer rate,
the critical heat flux (CHF) and the Leidenfrost temperature. High sur-
face temperatures result in increased heat transfer rates. Spray proper-
ties  (droplet  diameter  and  velocity)  described  by  the  Weber  number,
mass flux density and liquid properties were further identified as gov-
erning parameters for heat transfer [161]. Yao and Cox [182] defined
spray-related parameters to correlate heat transfer efficiency for a wide
range of boundary conditions, spray types and experimental methods.
The spray Reynolds Resp  and spray Weber number Wesp  provide a more
accurate reflection of the spray behavior since they include the spray
mass flux G as described by Equations  (5.3), (5.4) and (5.5).

Resp =

Gd32
ηl

Wesp =

G2d32
ρlσ

G =

]

kgs(cid:0) 1m(cid:0) 2

[

 ̇msp
A

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

The  spray  mass  flux  describes  the  density  of  spray  impact  onto  a
surface and is found to be decisive for spray heat transfer efficiency. The
use  of  Wesp  is  favored  compared  to  We  since  the  effect  of  normal
impingement velocity on the heat transfer efficiency is not yet clarified
[183].  An  increase  of  the  spray  impact  density  leads  to  higher  heat
transfer efficiencies and strongly affects the boiling curve as it increases
both Leidenfrost TLF  and Nukiyama temperature TN  and the respective
heat fluxes qLF  and qCHF  [181].

Most  studies  discussed  above  account  for  the  isothermal  drop  or
spray impact. For the case of intermittent UWS injection and impinge-
ment under SCR conditions, transient heat transfer phenomena have to
be accounted for, as droplet and wall temperature change during impact
and  transitions  between  different  heat  transfer  regimes  may  occur
[184].  Several  studies  address  the  transient  nature  of  spray  cooling
processes  [179,185,186],  including  the  substrate  conductivity  [163,
187], superposed air flow [162] and the transient droplet temperature
[188,189].  Tenzer  et  al.  [163]  obtained  transient  boiling  curves  for
water on a stainless steel target measuring the instantaneous, local heat
flux in dependence on the spray properties. A theoretical model is pro-
vided,  that  predicts  the  substrate  temperature  over  time  in  the  film
boiling regime taking into account thermal conduction in the substrate
and the fluid temperature.

In the context of SCR systems, no detailed studies on transient heat
transfer during impingement are available. The heat transfer of sessile
urea  water  droplets  was  intensively  studied  under  isothermal  condi-
tions. Evaporation behavior of millimetric UWS droplets was found to
follow  the  four  characteristic  heat  transfer  regimes  [31,57].  It  is
assumed, that urea decomposition and solid formation affect the evap-
oration behavior. Compared to another salt solution, a non-reproducible
chaotic behavior during transition boiling was observed for UWS, which
is attributed to gaseous by-product formation from urea decomposition
[57]. A comparison of droplet lifetime for UWS with water and NaCl

solution is shown in Fig. 21. Thermal droplet breakup is stated favorable
in  terms  of  deposit  formation,  since  it  results  in  smaller  secondary
droplets experiencing film boiling.

For  impinging  urea  water  sprays,  heat  transfer  was  observed  to
follow a non-linear relation to the wall temperature, which is analogous
to the heat transfer characteristics known from Nukiyama pool boiling
[190].  In  comparison  to  pure  water  sprays,  regime  boundaries  and
characteristic parameters, such as the Leidenfrost temperature and the
temperature of CHF, are shifted to higher values for urea water solution
[150,190].  With  regard  to  SCR  application,  thermophysical  material
properties, surface wettability and roughness are identified as important
parameters  affecting  heat  transfer  characteristics  [190].  Schweigert
et  al.  [191]  investigate  the  effects  of  mentioned  properties  using
high-speed  imaging  and  IR  thermography  in  parallel  on  a  spray
impingement setup without incident flow. Heat transfer is quantitatively
described  by  introduction  of  an  evaporated  mass  fraction,  which  is
calculated from an energy balance based on the wall temperature data
obtained by IR thermography during impingement. Results show that
wettability effects are dominant over thermophysical material proper-
ties and roughness. Measured boiling curves exhibit a hysteresis due to a
change in wettability resulting from the pre-conditioning of the mate-
rial. Fig. 22 shows two example boiling curves measured for ferritic steel
with  (HTS)  and  without  (LTS)  thermal  pre-conditioning.  A  clear  hys-
teresis and shift of related heat transfer regimes is observed.

The effects of injection conditions, wall surface and material prop-
erties on the heat transfer characteristics of impinging urea water sprays
can be utilized for a more targeted design of SCR systems in terms of
impingement target coatings.

Spray/wall heat transfer of urea water solution in flow environment
has  not  been  studied  in  detail.  A  critical  temperature  for  liquid  film
formation was found by Birkhold et al. [63], marking the surface tem-
perature at which wetting is observed for the first time. Brack et al. [19]
uses temperature measurements of the tailpipe wall as correlation data
for  a  calculated  spray  surface  load,  which  is  directly  related  to  an
increased  deposition  risk.  Characteristic  heat  transfer  regimes  of
impinging urea water sprays in a flow channel have been observed by
Liao et al. [192] for the first time. Temperature measurements of the
outer flow channel walls and an inverse heat conduction model are used
to  calculate  heat  transfer  data  over  time  and  correlate  them  to  the
operating  conditions.  The  measurement  duration  covers  multiple  in-
jection and impingement events and demonstrate the dynamic temper-
ature response of the wall. Fig. 23 shows measured wall temperature
data and the resulting spray heat flux calculated from the inverse heat
conduction model.

Here, the highest heat flux values are determined for the third in-

Fig. 21. Evaporation characteristics of UWS, distilled water and NaCl solution
droplets [57].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094916

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

heat transfer correlations and models can be found in recent reviews on
spray cooling [138,161,194,195].

Studies on UWS impingement commonly apply the Rohsenow pool
boiling correlation [196] to predict wall heat transfer in cases of wet-
ting, which is the case for droplet impingement below TLF  and for an
existing liquid film. For droplet impact at temperatures exceeding the
Leidenfrost  point,  different  approaches  can  be  found  to  model
impingement heat transfer. A commonly applied model for heat transfer
in  the  film  boiling  regime  is  an  approach  proposed  by  Wruck  [197],
which implies calculation of effective contact time and area [24,45,53,
198].  More  precise  modeling  of  impingement  heat  transfer  was  pro-
posed by an adaption of the Wruck model [199]. Here, the correlation
for the effective contact area by Akao et al. [200] is only applied for We
numbers below the splashing threshold. Above, a We independent cor-
relation is introduced.

Spray impingement and heat transfer decides on the extent of liquid
film formation and evaporation, which is addressed in the next section.

6. Film and deposit formation

The  formation  of  liquid  film  by  spray  impact  and  resulting  solid
residues  is  one  of  the  main  challenges  of  modern  SCR  systems.
Depending on spray impingement hydrodynamics and heat transfer at
the  wall,  the  materials  are  cooled  by  periodic  impact  events.  With
decreasing temperature, liquid deposition is favored and results in the
initiation and accumulation of a wall film. Surfaces prone to wetting by
spray  impact  are  mixer  blades  and  tailpipe  walls,  particularly  when
located in pipe bends or in the spray cone range. Film formation and
local cooling inevitably leads to urea precipitation and reaction to un-
desired  by-products.  Thus,  formation  of  solid  deposits  from  urea

Fig. 22. Hysteresis  effect in spray/wall impingement heat  transfer (water on
ferritic  steel).  LTS  = low  temperature  state,  HTS  = high  temperature  state,
*repeated  measurements.  Reprinted  from  [191],  Copyright  (2020),  with
permission from Elsevier.

jection event, where the critical heat flux regime is reached. Increasing
gas flow rates are observed to decrease spray cooling due to enhanced
spray entrainment. High gas temperatures lead to increased wall tem-
peratures and, consequently, heat transfer rates, which can be related to
different impact regimes [193]. Measurements enable the determination
of characteristic parameters such as TLF  and qCHF  [192,193].

Characterization  of  liquid/wall  heat  transfer  is  substantial  for
modeling UWS spray impingement. While heat transfer is well described
by  analytical  models  for  single  droplet  impact,  models  for  multiple
droplet and spray impact heat transfer are mostly empirical, particularly
for wall wetting regimes. More details on available droplet and spray

Fig. 23. Heat flux data calculated from an inverse heat conduction model based on temperature measurements at the rear side of a test rig for the first four injection
events. Gas flow: 100kgh

(cid:0) 1, 400∘C; injection parameters: 100ms, 2Hz. Reprinted from [192], Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094917

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

decomposition is the undesirable result from liquid/wall contact. The
liquid film mass, area and temperature as well as its residence time are
decisive  for  the  amount  and  composition  of  solid  deposits  [19].  The
evolution of solid by-products follows the reaction kinetics of thermal
urea decomposition. The following sections will discuss the formation of
liquid films, evaporation and urea crystallization as well as its chemical
decomposition leading to solid deposition.

6.1. Liquid film formation and evaporation

Initiation and accumulation of a liquid wall film in SCR systems is
highly  dependent  on  the  hydrodynamics  and  transient  heat  transfer
dynamics of the intermittent spray impact. Generally, liquid is deposited
on  the  wall  when  the  wall  temperature  lies  beneath  the  wetting
boundary,  as  explained  in  Section  5.1.  For  higher  wall  temperatures,
spray impingement results in local cooling without wall wetting [201].
The wetting boundary is often referred to as critical wall temperature
Tcr, marking the temperature of liquid film initiation. It is determined
from a characteristic decrease of the wall cooling rate during wetting
[17,150]. While heat transfer is low for non-wetting interaction regimes,
heat transfer between wall and liquid is strongly increased by liquid-wall
contact. Experiments on film formation at a hot gas test rig indicate a
clear dependence of the wetting boundary on the experimental condi-
tions  [150].  In  this case,  a  definition of  the  wetting  boundary  by the
Leidenfrost temperature is not sufficient. Furthermore, the results show
that wetting boundaries defined by single droplet experiments can not
directly be transferred to spray experiments with smaller droplet sizes.
In  addition  to  differing  droplet  sizes,  the  wetting  boundary  for  inter-
mittent  spray  impact  is  dependent  on  the  transient  heat  transfer  dy-
namics between wall and liquid [17,150].

Experimental  investigation  of  the  initiation  and  accumulation  of
liquid  films  under  SCR  conditions  is  challenging.  Few  studies  give
qualitative information on liquid films evolving from urea injection at
different conditions [19,46,101,202,203]. Since the setups do not allow
for a direct measurement, the film area is estimated by other parameters,
e.g. the spray density distribution above the wall [46] or the calculated
spray surface load [19]. The experimental results are used to validate
CFD  simulations of spray  impingement and  film  formation. However,
comparability  of  experimental  and  numerical  data  is  limited,  since
direct  measurements  of  the  liquid  film  area  and  pathways  are  chal-
lenging. Furthermore, the mentioned studies do not consider measure-
ments  of  the  film  thickness.  Information  on  film  thickness  is  usually
derived from CFD simulations.

Detailed investigations on liquid film dynamics were performed by
Grout et al. [18], who studied film formation experimentally at a test
bench  under  realistic  conditions  offering  optical  access  by  the  use  of
glass walls. A quantitative analysis of the liquid film area is conducted
by backlight imaging. Liquid film initiation is observed after a charac-
teristic time interval. High gas temperature and mass flow increase the
characteristic  onset  of  film  formation,  whereas  high  UWS  mass  flows
decrease it. The authors differentiate between three regimes for liquid
film: liquid accumulation, liquid film flow and liquid evaporation. The
film  area  continuously  increases  during  injection.  After  reaching  a
certain size, liquid film transport by shear stress is observed leading to
decreased film thickness, which is promoted by film evaporation due to
high  gas  temperatures [18].  Film movement  was  further  observed by
Liao et al. [204]. Here, momentum of spray impingement is identified as
main  cause  for  downstream  liquid  accumulation  and  resulting  solid
deposits.

Fig.  24  summarizes  influencing  factors  on  liquid  film  formation,

transport and evaporation.

The turbulent flow field exerts shear stresses on the UWS liquid film.
Pulsed injection leads to droplet impingement on the liquid film causing
periodic motion on the one hand, temperature and concentration gra-
dients on the other hand. For wall films, radial temperature gradients are
intensified  by  low  wall  temperatures  in  contrast  to  the  high  gas

Fig. 24. Major physical phenomena governing film evaporation and flow.

temperature. As several studies show that no deposits are derived in the
impingement area [204,205], the transport of accumulated liquid film
can be seen as preliminary step of solid deposit formation.

Due to the liquid film exposition to high temperature and convective
flow,  evaporation  occurs  and  urea  can  crystallize.  Evaporation  and
crystallization of a two-component droplet or liquid film deposited on a
hot surface is strongly dependent on the ambient temperature and flow.
Fig.  25  schematically  illustrates  different  evaporation  phases  by  the
example of a sessile droplet on a heated surface eventually leading to
solidification.

The  initial  droplet  volume  is  marked  by  t0.  In  the  first  phase,  the
droplet temperature rises at nearly constant composition due to the hot
surface. The evaporation rate follows a linear relationship to the droplet
temperature and is highest in the vicinity of the three-phase contact line.
Reaching a constant temperature, the droplet volume decreases while
the  solute  concentration  increases.  A  higher  solute  concentration  de-
creases the saturation vapor pressure of the solution and therefore af-
fects  the  evaporation  rate.  Fig.  26(a)  shows  the  vapor  pressure  for
saturated urea water solution as a function of temperature compared to
pure water.

Vapor  pressure  data  is  calculated  based  on  solubility  data  of  urea
depicted  in  26(b).  At  t1  the  saturation  concentration  of  the  solute  is
reached and the second evaporation phase starts. As evaporation con-
tinues with decreased rate, solute precipitation begins at the three-phase
contact line and with further decreasing droplet volume, the solidifica-
tion front moves to the center of the droplet until all liquid is evaporated
at  t2.  The  initial  droplet  heat-up  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  separate
evaporation phase [209,210].

Schmid et al. [211] studied crystallization characteristics of sessile
urea water solution droplets at sub-boiling temperatures and reported
the previously described phases of evaporation. Crystal growth during
evaporation  is  observed  macroscopically  in  dependence  on  substrate
surface temperature and wettability. For low temperatures and contact
angles,  slow  crystallization  is  found  to  result  in  a  fine  white  crystal
structure,  whereas  high  temperatures  and  hydrophobic  surfaces  pro-
mote  rapid  solidification  leading  to  a  smooth  surface  deposit  while
maintaining the initial droplet shape. Representative solid structures are
shown in Fig. 27.

Thermographic  imaging  during  evaporation  clearly  shows  the

Fig.  25. Schematic  evaporation  phases  of  a  two-component  liquid  droplet
representing a film on a heated surface.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094918

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 26. (a) Saturation vapor pressure of urea water solution compared to pure water based on Wagner equation [206] and (b) solubility data of urea in water
[207,208].

temperature rise along the three-phase contact line due to heat of so-
lidification.  Furthermore,  the  rate  of  solidification  is  observed  to  in-
crease with rising temperature. This is explained by higher saturation
concentrations of urea present in the crystallization phase causing rapid
solidification [211].

Based on experimental data and literature correlations, Bender et al.
[212]  propose  a  model  for  evaporation  and  crystallization  of  sessile
UWS  droplets.  The  model  allows  for  resolution  of  temperature  and
concentration fields inside the evaporating droplet and accounts for the
feedback of the evolved solids on the droplet. Fig. 28 shows a prediction
of the temporal evolution of urea mass fraction inside an evaporating
sessile droplet and indicates urea crystallization.

The  simulations  confirm  the  observations  of  the  solid  formation
being initiated at the three-phase contact line forming ring-shaped de-
posits. A parametric study is performed to propose a correlation for the
starting  time  of  solids  formation  in  dependence  on  droplet  size,  wall
temperature  and  initial  urea  concentration.  The  solid  growth  rate  is
observed to increase with time after the start of crystallization [212].

6.2. Kinetics of urea decomposition and by-product formation

◦

Above  133

C,  crystalline  urea  melts  and  chemically  decomposes.
Apart from thermolysis and hydrolysis reactions forming the required
reducing  agent  several  side  reactions  may  lead  to  formation  of  by-
products of higher molecular weight, such as biuret, triuret, cyanuric
acid, ammelide, ammeline or melamine [20]. By-product formation and
their decomposition is mainly dependent on temperature. Table 1 shows
data on the melting and decomposition temperatures of urea and rele-
vant by-products.

The decomposition kinetics of urea and  its by-products have been

Fig. 27. Characteristic solid structures derived for slow (left) and rapid (right)
solidification of a sessile UWS droplet. Reprinted from [211], Copyright (2020),
with permission from Elsevier.

extensively studied by several groups [20–23,100,218–220]. Common
experimental methods are thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), differen-
tial  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC),  high  performance  liquid  chromatog-
raphy (HPLC) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR).

A  first  detailed  description  of  urea  decomposition  reactions  was
given by Schaber et al. [20] based on TGA, HPLC, FTIR and ammonium
ion-selective  electrode  (ISE)  experiments.  Based  on  experimental  and
literature data, a reaction scheme of 23 reactions comprising urea and its
by-products biuret, cyanuric acid, ammelide, ammeline and melamine
was  proposed.  For  urea  decomposition  at  high  temperatures,  cyanate
and  cyanurate  salts  and  cyanamide  were  identified  as  possible  in-
termediates. Triuret reactions were not included to the reaction scheme.
Four temperature regimes for urea decomposition were proposed. The
first temperature regime comprises urea melting and vaporization from
◦
C followed by decomposition to ammonia and isocyanic acid. With
133
increasing temperature up to 190
C, biuret, cyanuric acid and amme-
lide  are  formed.  The  second  temperature  regime  of  190–250
C  is
assigned to biuret decomposition. Several side reactions produce cya-
nuric acid and ammelide. The authors observed formation of a sticky,
◦
solid  matrix  from  the  melt  at  225
C,  which  was  attributed  to  ionic
formations of different by-products. The temperature regime from 250
◦
to 360
C was dedicated to cyanuric acid sublimation and decomposition
followed by decomposition of ammelide, ammeline and melamine in the
fourth temperature regime starting at 360
C. Complete decomposition
of  ammelide  was  observed  for  600
C,  ammeline  decomposition  was
seen complete at 700

C [20].

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

Eichelbaum et al. [22] derived a scheme of nine major reactions for
urea  decomposition  from  experimental  investigations  using  simulta-
neous  TGA  and  differential  thermal  analysis  (DTA)  measurements
coupled  with  gas  chromatography  (GC)/mass  spectrometry  (MS)  gas
analysis.  Reactions  for  decomposition  of  ammelide,  ammeline  and
melamine  were  proposed  and  complete  decomposition  was  measured
for temperatures above 625
C. However, the reaction scheme lacks in
accurate  description  of  relevant  parallel  and  equilibrium  reactions.
Metal  exchanged  zeolites  were  shown  to  accelerate  urea  pyrolysis.
Bernhard et al. [23] developed a more detailed reaction scheme based
on flow reactor experiments and subsequent FTIR and HPLC analysis for
gaseous and solid reaction products. The scheme including 15 decom-
position reactions covers triuret production and decomposition as well
as several equilibrium reactions [23].

◦

Fig.  29  demonstrates  a  characteristic  mass  loss  during  thermal

decomposition of urea measured by TGA.

TGA results clearly demonstrate four characteristic mass loss stages
attributed  to  the  evolution  and  decomposition  of  typical  urea  by-
products. These data are commonly used to investigate the decomposi-
tion behavior of urea and its by-products. When analyzing urea derived
deposits, the extent of respective mass loss stages gives an indication of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094919

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 28. Numerical results for the temporal evolution of the urea mass fraction inside an evaporating sessile drop and local evaporation rate. Solid formation is
indicated in red. The initial temperature of gas and liquid is set to 25∘C, the wall temperature to 65∘C. Reprinted from [212], Copyright (2020), with permission from
Elsevier. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 1
Physical properties of urea and relevant by-products * in water (20∘C) ** decomposition prior to melting.

Component

Molecular formula

Molar mass
(cid:0) 1
gmol

Melting point
∘C

Decomp. point
∘C

Solubility*
gl(cid:0) 1

Urea

Biuret

Triuret

Cyanuric acid

Ammelide

Ammeline

Melamine

CO(NH2)
2
C2H5N3O2

C3H6N4O3
C3N3(OH)
C3H4N4O2

3

C3H5N5O

C3H6N6

60.06

103.9

146.11

129.08

128.09

127.11

126.12

132.7
188–195

n/a

**

**

**

**

132.7

187

233

250

360

360

300

1079

20

n/a

2

0

trace

3.2

Ref.

[213]

[214]

[213]

[20,213,215]

[20,216]

[20,216]

[217]

authors have developed kinetic schemes for modeling urea decomposi-
tion, which has become of great interest in terms of predictive modeling
and design of SCR systems. A first kinetic model describing evaporation
and decomposition of UWS was proposed by Ebrahimian et al. [221].
The model includes  urea thermolysis to ammonia and isocyanic acid,
equilibrium  reactions  forming  biuret  and  the  subsequent  reactions  to
cyanuric  acid  and  ammelide.  Ammelide  decomposition  to  gaseous
by-products is assumed.

Gan et al. [222] developed a semi-detailed kinetic model for urea
decomposition based on the work of Schaber et al. [20] and Ebrahimian
et  al.  [221].  The  kinetic  scheme  contains  9  reactions  and  is  applied
together with a droplet evaporation model. The dependence of droplet
diameter on evaporation time, relative gas velocity and gas temperature
is  presented.  Temperature  is  identified  as  decisive  factor  for  deposit
yield. However, results deliver only a qualitative comparison of UWS
droplet decomposition simulation with deposits derived at an SCR test
rig [222].

Brack et al. [100] proposed a kinetic model based on urea decom-
position reactions given by Bernhard et al. [23]. TGA and HPLC exper-
iments were used for detailed model validation. The model describes the
production  and  decomposition  reactions  of  the  most  important
by-products  and  adequately  maps  the  characteristic  decomposition
stages of urea. However, relevant physical and chemical processes are
not considered. The conversion of biuret to a solid biuret matrix species is
specified  for  temperatures  around  220
C.  At  this  temperature,

◦

Fig.  29. Mass  loss  during  thermal  decomposition  of  urea  measured  by  TGA
(cid:0) 1. Char-
with an initial sample mass of 60.3mg and a heating rate of 2K min
acteristic decomposition stages of urea are indicated as stated in literature [20,
22]. 1: urea decomposition, 2: biuret decomposition, 3: cyanuric acid decom-
position, 4: ammelide and ammeline decomposition. Solidification (matrix) as
mentioned by Schaber et al. [20] is indicated by the orange marker.

the sample composition. Moreover, TGA results deliver valuable data for
kinetic reaction modeling.

Based  on  the  experimental  results  given  by  Schaber  et  al.  [20],
Eichelbaum et al. [22] and Bernhard et al. [23] among others, numerous

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094920

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

solidification of the melt was visually detected during the experiments,
but no specific measurements or thermodynamic information are given.
Ammelide  decomposition  is  implemented  as  sublimation,  while  other
high molecular weight by-products are not considered.

Fig. 30 a) gives an overview on the reactions included in the model.
Tischer et al. [223] present a revised kinetic scheme based on the
model  of  Brack  et  al.  [100]  including  thermodynamic  considerations
derived  from  TGA  and  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  data.
Experimental data and thermodynamic calculations reveal the presence
of an eutectic mixture of urea and biuret, which can explain the phase
change effects first observed by Schaber et al. [20]. The phase diagram
of urea and biuret is given in Fig. 31.

The phase diagram reveals that biuret becomes liquid at 193

C in
case of a mixture of 67% biuret and 33% urea. By decomposition of urea
with  increasing  temperatures,  the  amount  of  urea  is  decreased  and
biuret becomes solid again. Based on these data, solidification of biuret
is  initiated  for  temperatures  above  210
C  before  the  actual  melting
◦
point of biuret is reached at 233
C. Including these effects, the proposed
model (see Fig. 30b)) predicts urea decomposition well. However, due to
a lack of thermodynamic data of biuret and triuret, not all relevant ef-
fects can be included. [223]

◦

◦

Most of the existing models cover urea decomposition until forma-
tion of ammelide or ammeline. In literature, various proposals for re-
action  pathways  starting  from  ammelide  at  high  temperatures  are
available  [20,22,23,219].  Different  authors  propose  ammination  re-
actions from ammelide to ammeline (6.1) and from ammeline to mel-
amine (6.2) for temperatures above 250

C [20,22,23].

◦

ammelide + NH3→ammeline + H2O

ammeline + NH3→melamine + H2O

(6.1)

(6.2)

◦

◦

C and 700

In thermal decomposition experiments, ammelide and ammeline are
found in the sample mixture up to temperatures of 600
C
respectively [20]. Eichelbaum et al. [22] describe a polymerization of
◦
melamine to melem at 500
C and a subsequent decomposition of melem
to  (CN)2  and  HNCO  for  temperatures  above  625
C.  Other  works
mention melon as high temperature product of urea decomposition. A
recent study identifies the final pyrolysis products and proposes a kinetic
model for urea decomposition over the entire temperature range rele-
vant  to  SCR  application  [224].  Reaction  kinetics  and  thermodynamic
data of pyrolysis products like cyanamide, melamine, melon, graphitic
carbon nitride and others are included to the model.

◦

Literature emphasizes a strong effect of the experimental conditions
on urea decomposition kinetics. The heating rate of the sample [20,218,
219]  as  well  as  the  arrangement  of  the  powder  sample  and  different
crucible geometries inside the setup [21,22,219] affect the decomposi-
tion  behavior.  Increased  surface  area  of  the  sample  is  assumed  to

Fig.  31. Phase  diagram  of  eutectic  mixture  of  urea  and  biuret  adapted  from
Tischer  et  al.  [223].  The  orange  dotted  lines  indicate  a  composition  of  67%
biuret and 33% urea leading to melting of biuret.

accelerate mass transport of gaseous products at the sample surface and
their removal as it was shown by using TGA crucibles of different base
areas [22]. This leads to an increase of urea conversion and reduction of
by-product formation. The same effect was observed in investigations on
the  thermal  decomposition  of  urea  and  its  by-products  using  impreg-
nated monoliths in addition to cup geometries in a flow reactor [21].
Further  studies  on  decomposition  of  urea  in  impregnated  monoliths
state that the presence of water in the gas phase decreases by-product
formation due to isocyanic acid hydrolysis [23]. Generally, an acceler-
ated decomposition of urea is observed on surfaces catalyzing the hy-
drolysis of isocyanic acid if water is present to a sufficient amount [22,
23,225].  Catalytic  hydrolysis  of  isocyanic  acid  has  been  investigated
experimentally  by  both  kinetic  measurements  and  diffuse  reflectance
infrared  Fourier  transform  spectra  (DRIFTS)  studies  [87,88,91,
226–228] and by density functional theory (DFT) calculations [89,90].
Regarding solid by-product formation from urea decomposition, posi-
tive effects of catalysts dedicated to isocyanic acid hydrolysis have been
observed [22,23,64,220]. Formed deposits reveal similar compositions
as  compared  to  measurements  without  catalysts  but  the  catalyst  in-
creases  the  decomposition  rate.  However,  an  aging  effect  of  the
decomposed  products  on  the  catalyst  surface  was  observed  [220].
Furthermore,  it  was  found  that  urea  itself  can  contribute  to  a  direct
reduction of NO in the presence of a catalyst [220]. As indicated above,

Fig. 30. Reaction schemes used for kinetic modeling of urea decomposition. a) adapted from [100], b) [223] - published by the PCCP Owner Societies.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094921

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

isocyanic acid production and its consumption by hydrolysis drastically
influence the formation of by-products.

Fig. 32 shows thermogravimetric data on decomposition of pure urea

samples with varying initial sample mass and crucible geometries.

The crucible geometries differ in diameter, as the plate features a 2.5
times  larger  diameter  than  the  cylinder  crucible.  While  maintaining
identical initial sample mass, the use of the plate crucible reveals faster
decomposition kinetics compared to the cylinder crucible. Furthermore,
◦
a higher residual mass is obtained for the plate geometry over 500
C. By
varying  the  initial  sample  mass  using  the  cylinder  crucible,  faster
decomposition is observed for the small initial mass. This clearly reveals
the importance of the surface-to-volume ratio of the sample. Here, iso-
cyanic acid release at the sample surface plays a major role since it is
involved in the thermodynamic equilibrium between urea and biuret as
well as between biuret and triuret. Results show that a high surface-to-
volume ratio promotes urea decomposition as a result of the increased
mass  transport  of  gaseous  products  at  the  interface.  The  key  role  of
isocyanic  acid  for  ammonia  preparation,  deposit  formation  and  SCR
catalysis  has  often  been  underestimated  in  previous  studies  and  will
attract more focus of SCR related studies in the next years.

6.3. Deposit formation and characterization

Several studies address the formation of harmful solid deposits due to
urea injection at realistic operating conditions using hot gas or engine
test  benches  [19,202,205,229–232].  Deposits  derived  at  different
operating  conditions  are  analyzed  in  terms  of  position,  yield  and
composition  by  the  analytical  methods  discussed  above.  Generally,  a
strong  dependence  on  temperature,  UWS  dosing  rate  and  spray
impingement locations is found.

Brack  et  al.  [19]  propose  a  classification  of  operating  regimes
regarding deposit quantity based on experimental and numerical results.
◦
For wall temperatures below 150
C, mainly crystalline urea is found in
solid residues. At these temperatures, intense wall film formation bears
the risk of liquid flowing into the SCR catalyst. Wall temperatures of 150
to 250
C are stated as critical conditions inducing large quantities of
deposits. Even a blockage of the pipe can be observed by massive solid
formation (Fig. 33).

◦

Moreover, existing deposits are found to act as flow barrier leading to
film accumulation near the deposits. Based on their results, Brack et al.
◦
[19] regard temperatures above 250
C as not critical in terms of deposit
formation. Generally, a strong relation between wall wetting and solids
formation is observed. Concerning deposit composition, a dependence
on the liquid film thickness is proposed.

Smith et al. [202] focus on wetting and deposit formation on mixer
blades. By optical analysis, two types of deposit growth are observed:
damming growth by liquid film reaching existing deposits before solidi-
fication  and  peripheral  growth  describing  solidification  at  the  edge  of
existing  deposits  induced  by  capillary  flow  through  the  porous  solid

Fig. 33. Severe case of solid deposits formed from urea decomposition leading
to pipe blockage. Courtesy of W. Brack, BMW Group, Munich, Germany.

structure. Liquid film pathways and deposit growth from liquid film on a
mixer blade is demonstrated in Fig. 34.

Deposit  formation  is  seen  to  be  prevented  at  locations  marked  by
continuous dilution of the liquid film due to the impinging solution or
film transport [202].

Chemical  analysis  of  deposits  is  relevant  to  the  identification  of
critical  deposition  regimes  and  to  the  development  of  regeneration
strategies.  Furthermore,  it  supports  the  development  of  models  pre-
dicting deposit formation, which are essential in the design and opti-
mization of SCR systems. Characteristic decomposition stages revealed
by thermogravimetric analysis give a qualitative indication of the de-
posit  composition  as  a  function  of  temperature  [202,230,231].  Few
authors apply HPLC analysis for quantification of the deposits chemical
composition  [19,150,205,232].  Measurement  accuracy  of  HPLC
methods  for  analysis  of  urea  deposits  reaches  from  < 5  to  20%  for
different  by-products.  Fig.  35  shows  HPLC  analysis  data  of  deposits
derived in a hot gas test rig at different temperatures.

HPLC  data  are  shown  together  with  experimental  and  numerical

Fig. 32. Effect of experimental boundary conditions on urea thermal decom-
position. Experiments are performed using different initial sample masses and
cylinder types but an identical heating rate of 2K min

(cid:0) 1.

Fig. 34. Deposit growth on mixer blades in an engine test bench operated with
(cid:0) 1  exhaust mass flow and an injection rate of
250∘C gas temperature, 100kg h
(cid:0) 1.Yellow  arrows  indicate  liquid  film  pathways  (dashed,  if  hidden  by
25mgs
blades).  Dotted  red  lines:  damming  growth,  dot-dashed  red  lines:  peripheral
growth, (1): 20 min, (2): 40 min, (3): 60 min. Republished with permission of
SAE International from [202]. (For interpretation of the references to colour in
this figure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094922

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

evaluated 2D and 3D height profiles in terms of surface roughness and
performed power spectral density as well as a fractal analyses. Results
show  strong  variations  in  the  surface  roughness  profiles.  Self-affine
surfaces and an identical fractal dimension are found for the analyzed
deposits.  Systematic  studies  on deposit  structure and  morphology  are
desirable  for  a  quantitative  description  that  can  be  used  in  further
studies concerning wetting behavior, heat and mass transfer or deposit
formation kinetics.

7. Role of mixing devices

For efficient NOx  removal, both velocity and species uniformity is
required at the entrance of the SCR catalyst to ensure utilization of the
entire  monolithic  catalyst.  Mixing  lengths  for  ammonia  preparation
from  UWS  are  often  limited  as  a  result  of  space  restrictions  and
furthermore,  the  ideal  injection  position  may  not  be  realized.  Static
mixing devices are employed to reduce mixing length and the overall
size of the aftertreatment system, while maintaining ammonia unifor-
mity at high UWS dosing rates.

Multiple mixer types are available, such as wire-meshes, blade mixer,
two-stage mixer and swirl mixer, which differ in their geometrical fea-
tures  [7,234].  When  inserting  mixing  devices  to  the  aftertreatment
system,  a  trade-off  between  mixing  performance  and  an  increase  in
backpressure  has  to  be  found  [235].  Furthermore,  by  introducing
additional surfaces to the tailpipe, the risk of film and deposit formation
is increased. Wire-mesh mixers package well and do not tend to form
deposits, but mixing is poor and backpressure increase is high. Due to a
high  area-to-volume  ratio,  evaporation  performance  is  poor.  Blade
mixers  are  prone  to  deposit  formation  but  show  good  mixing  and
backpressure performance. Swirl mixers offer excellent mixing perfor-
mance but deposition free operation results in a substantial backpressure
penalty. Two-stage mixers were developed to compensate the mass flow
dependent spray impact position by a pre-mixing zone [234]. The choice
of  mixer  type  depends  on  the  individual  application  geometry  and
operating conditions [236].

Mixing  devices  inserted  to  the  SCR  mixing  section  fulfill  several
functions. By generation of turbulence, mixing devices promote uniform
inlet conditions for the SCR catalyst and hence, improve NOx  reduction
and decrease ammonia slip as shown in Fig. 38 [7,198,237,238].

Furthermore, mixing elements serve as primary impingement target
for the UWS spray and enable secondary atomization [29,202]. Due to
exposure to the hot exhaust gas flow, their temperature adapts to the gas
temperature resulting in high heat transfer to the impinging liquid [198,
202] compared to heat transfer at the tailpipe wall.

Secondary  atomization  of  impinging  UWS  on  mixing  devices  is
desired  and,  due  to  the  higher  temperatures,  droplets  are  likely  to
experience thermal breakup or rebound, which are favorable with re-
gard  to  evaporation  and  ammonia  uniformity.  However,  consecutive
spray impact reduces the mixer temperature and may lead to liquid film
formation. In case of a blade mixer, shear flow transports the liquid to
the trailing edge of the blades. Here, liquid accumulates and the highly
inhomogeneous flow field leads to oscillation. Once a critical amount of
liquid is reached, a liquid ligament forms and is cut off the bulk liquid
[29]. Fig. 39 shows the formation and detachment of such a ligament at
the trailing edge of a mixer blade.

D ̈ornh ̈ofer et al. [29] have performed experimental and numerical
investigations showing that the critical mass for ligament detachment
depends on the shear flow velocity and oscillation frequency induced by
the mixer flow field. An increase of the shear flow velocity leads to a
more  frequent  breakup  of  the  liquid  to  ligaments  and  ligaments  to
droplets. Furthermore, the secondary droplet size is reduced.

The mechanisms of liquid sheet breakup were studied by numerous
authors in the context of air-blast atomization. By high-speed imaging,
PDA  and  PIV  measurements,  different  atomization  regimes  can  be
determined [239] and the distributions for the film deformation velocity
as well as droplet size and velocity can be assessed [240]. Most works in

Fig. 35. HPLC analysis results of urea deposits generated at different temper-
atures. Simulation results for the overall sample mass during urea decomposi-
tion  and  the  evolution  and  consumption  of  relevant  species  are  compared  to
experimental TGA and HPLC data. Temperatures of deposit generation are 150,
180,  190,  220,  255,  280  and  320∘C.  Reprinted  with  permission  from
B ̈ornhorst [150].

results  for  urea  decomposition.  Here,  the  kinetic  model  proposed  by
Tischer et al. [223] is applied. From the HPLC results, temperature re-
gimes can be classified by deposit composition. For temperatures below
◦
200
C, deposits mainly consist of urea and only small amounts of biuret,
◦
triuret and cyanuric acid are detected. For temperatures between 200
C
◦
and 250
C, deposits represent mixtures of biuret, triuret, cyanuric acid
and ammelide. In this temperature regime, no urea is left in the samples.
Above 250
C the main component of deposits is cyanuric acid, small
amounts of ammelide and ammeline are found [151].

◦

As  shown  in  Fig.  35,  the  composition  of  urea  deposits  is  strongly
temperature  dependent,  as  it  can  be  predicted  by  the  evolution  and
decomposition of by-products during urea decomposition over temper-
ature. The model predicts the temperature regimes for deposit compo-
sition well and can therefore benefit the evaluation and design of SCR
systems. Generally, high temperatures are often regarded as not critical
in  terms  of  solid  deposits,  as  the  absolute  amount  of  deposits  is  low
compared  to  lower  temperatures  (see  Fig.  35).  However,  in  terms  of
regeneration, deposits formed at high temperatures are persistent and
can  be  accumulated  in  SCR  applications  in  the  long  term.  Therefore,
long-term deposit management requires, on the one hand, sophisticated
layout and operation of SCR systems to prevent liquid film formation
and deposit build-up, on the other hand, effective regeneration strate-
gies to reduce even high temperature by-products.

In comparison to chemical analyses, literature lacks in detailed to-
pological  and  morphological  characterization  of  urea  deposits.
B ̈ornhorst  et  al.  [205]  derived  topological  data  on  deposits  from  ex-
periments  in  a  hot  gas  test  rig  at  different  operating  conditions,  see
Fig. 36. The study points out severeness of low temperature operation
regarding  deposit  growth  and  indicates  the  effect  of  operating  condi-
tions on deposit load and shape. However, only global structural data is
provided. A recent study indicates an influence of the operating condi-
tions on the morphology of solid deposits [233]. Fig. 37 shows micro-
scopic images of deposits derived at a hot gas test rig at two different
temperatures.

Crystal structures are identified for the low temperature conditions,
while for higher temperatures less structured, porous solids are observed
in the top layer of the deposits, while in the bottom layer, similar crystal
structures  are  observed.  Differences  in  morphology  are  dedicated  to
different  growth  mechanisms:  damming  growth  and  capillary  growth,
which were already observed by Smith et al. [202]. Ates et  al. [233]

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094923

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 36. Topological data and photographs of deposits generated at different operating conditions. Left: 280∘C gas temperature, 9.5m s
gas temperature, 8ms

(cid:0) 1  gas velocity; positive y-direction represents the flow direction. Reprinted from [205], Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier.

(cid:0) 1  gas velocity; Right: 320∘C

Fig. 37. Microscopic images of deposit samples generated at different gas temperatures in a hot gas test rig. Gas velocity 10ms
45 min.

(cid:0) 1, urea dosage of 1g min

(cid:0) 1  for 3 x

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094924

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

Fig. 38. Influence of an optimized mixing device on NOxreduction efficiency and ammonia slip. Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service
Centre GmbH: [7], Springer Nature.

Fig. 39. Liquid accumulation, oscillation, ligament detachment and breakup at a mixer blade edge. Top: simulation by Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH)
method,  bottom:  experimental  observation  by  long  distance  microscopy.  Reprinted  by  permission  from  Springer  Nature  Customer  Service  Centre  GmbH:  [29],
Springer Nature.

this field focus on the spray characteristics downstream the atomizer,
which  are  mainly  affected  by  the  air  velocity  and  pressure  [241].
Furthermore,  liquid  properties,  such as  surface  tension,  can influence
the  resulting  droplet  size  [242].  For  air-blast  atomizers,  the  effect  of
liquid film thickness on the Sauter mean diameter of the droplets has not
been clarified. On the one hand, an increase in film thickness is stated to
increase the SMD [243,244], on the other hand, the film disintegration is
described as decoupled from the liquid film thickness at the atomization
edge due to liquid accumulation [242,245].

Direct numerical simulation (DNS) is found to be a suitable numer-
ical approach to model primary breakup of air-blast atomization as all
scales are resolved. Warncke et al. [240] embedded the highly resolved
DNS  in a  coarser  Large eddy simulation (LES). Besides DNS  and  LES,
Volume  of  fluid  (VOF),  Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes  (RANS)  and
Level set (LS) approaches and their combinations are applied [246,247].
For  modeling  the  entire  atomization  process  including  primary  and
secondary  atomization,  Eulerian  multiphase  solvers  are  coupled  with
Lagrangian particle tracking [248]. A promising, meshless approach is

given  by  Smoothed  Particle  Hydrodynamics  (SPH)  [249,250].  These
achievements in the field of air-blast atomizers might be transferable to
the  film  breakup  mechanisms  on  SCR  mixing  devices.  However,  ac-
cording  to  the  specific  conditions  and  fluid  properties,  more  detailed
studies on film breakup on SCR mixing devices are desirable.

Film  transport  and  deposit  position  are  mainly  dependent  on  the
operating conditions. Smith et al. [202] investigate wall film flow and
deposit  formation  on  a  blade  mixer  in  an  engine  test  bench.  Results
show,  that  liquid  film  is  extensively  distributed  from  the  primary
impingement region via blade junctions and film transport takes place
on the rear side of the blades. Depending on the contact with impinging
liquid, two mechanisms for deposit formation are defined (see Section 6,
Fig.  34).  Deposits  formed  on  the  mixer  blades  negatively  effect  the
secondary atomization in terms of frequency and secondary droplet size
[29]. In the experiments of Smith et al. [202], large secondary droplets
are observed for low temperature operation resulting from incomplete
preparation  of UWS and liquid  detachment. Large secondary droplets
released  by  liquid  detachment  from  mixer  blades  can  lead  to  film

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094925

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

formation  downstream the  mixer  and  decrease evaporation efficiency
and ammonia uniformity [29]. In close-coupled systems, impingement
of these droplets on the catalyst front face is likely.

The use of mixing devices is beneficial for effective ammonia gen-
eration from UWS in short distances.  However, sufficient mixing per-
formance  and,  at  the  same  time,  avoidance  of  deposit  formation  and
release  of  large  secondary  droplets  needs  accurate  mixer  design  and
positioning as well as knowledge of the mixer operating window. CFD
simulation is a valuable tool for design and optimization of mixing de-
vices in SCR systems and will be discussed in the next section.

8. CFD modeling of physical and chemical phenomena in the
mixing section

Previous sections discuss the physical and chemical processes in the
mixing section of SCR systems relevant for ammonia preparation and the
accompanying  formation  of  liquid  and  solid  depositions.  Numerical
simulation of physical and chemical phenomena in the mixing section of
SCR systems by CFD methods is a fundamental tool for system design
and  optimization.  An  accurate  description  of  spray  evaporation,
decomposition  and  the  resulting  ammonia  distribution  particularly
contributes to efficient dimensioning of the system layout and catalyst.
Furthermore, models capable of predicting potential impingement and
harmful  deposit  formation  are  desired  in  aftertreatment  engineering.
Therefore, there is a strong demand for reliable prediction of the overall
system performance by models covering the interactions of all processes
in the pipe.

Generally,  the  solution  of  the  Navier-Stokes  equations  with  finite
volume methods is frequently used for SCR applications as it is imple-
mented in open source and commercial CFD software. Prevalent mesh
sizes of 2–10 million cells are used depending on application [24]. A
common approach is the representation of the spray by  a Lagrangian
phase. For description of the statistical spray properties and tracking of
spray propagation in the turbulent flow field, an adequate number of
numerical  parcels  is  introduced.  Spray  initiation  is  based  on  uniform
cloud  representations  with  constant  droplet  size,  Rosin-Rammler  dis-
tributions or experimentally determined droplet size distributions. More
detailed  representations  of  the  spray  can  improve  SCR  performance
predictions,  as  it  further  increases  the  accuracy  of  evaporation  and
decomposition predictions. LES based studies on UWS spray dynamics
are available [251]. A two-zone definition of the spray using different
droplet size distributions for the inner and hollow cone was proposed by
Rog ́o ̇z et al. [252]. Experimental spray analysis, as presented in Section
3, is used to validate primary spray atomization and propagation [36,46,
53,63,253,254]. Fig. 40 shows numerical results on spray propagation in
a hot cross-flow conditions compared to experimental results obtained
by  shadowgraphy  imaging.  Several  semi-empirical  and  numerical
models were developed for fuel injection and are capable to well predict
the spray penetration length [42,44,255,256].

Calculation  of  the  turbulent  flow  field  by  appropriate  models  is
decisive  for  an  accurate  prediction  of  spray  propagation,  mixing  and
distribution of the required reducing agent ammonia over the catalyst
cross-section.  RANS  models  assuming  isotropic  turbulence  are  widely
applied  in  SCR  related  studies,  e.g.  [17,63,101,257,258].  A  more
detailed approach of a Reynolds stress model (RSM) was presented by
Fischer et al. [198] taking all components of the Reynolds stress tensor
into account. Results show an improved representation of the turbulent
flow with respect to ammonia uniformity. An adaption of the turbulent
Schmidt number is proposed to overcome the underestimation of scalar
transport by RANS models. A comparison of different turbulence models
indicates the necessity of LES to accurately model the turbulent kinetic
energy [259]. Fig. 41 indicates underestimation of the Reynolds stress.
The  LES  results  in  a  good  prediction  of  Reynolds  stress,  particularly
regarding the high turbulent intensity in the exhaust flow core region.
Advanced research on suitable turbulence models is desirable, particu-
larly when considering the current developments towards non-tubular

Fig.  40. Simulation  result  (top)  and  experimental  visualization  (bottom)  of
spray propagation in the experimental setup of Kim et al. [32] for a gas tem-
(cid:0) 1  10ms  after  start  of  injection.
perature  of  150∘C  and  gas  velocity  of  25m  s
Republished  with  permission  of  SAE  International,  from  [63];  permission
conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc..

Fig. 41. Comparison of Reynolds stress (UU) prediction by RANS-RSM and LES
approach with LDA measurement data in a series exhaust system. Republished
with permission of SAE International from [259].

mixing sections and complex mixer geometries.

Another focus of existing SCR modeling studies is the effect of mixing
elements  on  droplet  impingement,  turbulent  flow  field  and  ammonia
uniformity  [169,198,202,260,261].  Smith  et  al.  [169]  investigate
ammonia  uniformity  in  two  series  SCR  systems  after  enhancing  and
validating a CFD model proposed by Fischer [262]. The study compares
a long underbody and a close-coupled SCR system in terms of sensitivity
to various parameters and ammonia homogeneity. Results show higher
ammonia uniformity for the long SCR system due to increased mixing
length  and  the  design  of  mixer  and  pipe  bends.  A  comparison  of

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094926

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

experimental and numerical results is given in Fig. 42.

Numerical studies involving mixing devices are mostly conducted to
evaluate the efficiency of series exhaust geometries. Mixer performance
is  commonly  rated  by  the  ammonia  uniformity  ahead  of  the  catalyst
inlet. However, the simulation results strongly depend on the individual
design of the overall SCR system.

Spray evaporation is accounted for by different models discussed in
Section 4 [17,28,62,66]. These have been implemented to CFD codes to
predict spray penetration and ammonia formation accurately [45,63,68,
263,264].  Habchi et al. [68] model spray evaporation in a flow test rig
at Diesel exhaust conditions [32]. CFD results show good correlation to
the experimentally determined ammonia formation efficiency. The use
of  reduced  models  in  CFD  codes  was  shown  to  enable  cost-effective
prediction  of  multi-component  droplet  evaporation  [263,264].  Accu-
rate prediction of evaporation kinetics is substantial to further predict
the  conversion  of  urea  to  gaseous  reducing  agents  and  the  droplet
properties prior to impingement.

Numerous studies address numerical modeling of spray impingement
and  film  formation  [63,65,169].  Different  impingement  models  are
presented in Section 5. Model validation is usually performed by spray
impingement  experiments  in  quiescent  flow  conditions  [45,265,266].
Shahariar  and  Lim  [266]  use  these  experiments  for  validation  of  a
spray/wall  interaction  model  based  on  approaches  of  both  Kuhnke
[132] and Bai and Gosman [125]. A comparison for experimental and
simulated spray impingement at quiescent flow conditions is given in
Fig. 43.

Optical evaluations based on shadowgraphy measurements as well as
wall cooling data determined e. g. by infrared thermal imaging are used
for model validation [63,199,266].

Detailed  validation  of  impingement  and  heat  transfer  models  is
decisive for the prediction of the evolving liquid films, which directly
affect the amount of solid deposits. 2D liquid film models are frequently
used to describe liquid film formation, evaporation and transport [63,
101,199,258,267,268].  At  reduced  complexity,  these  are  capable  of
predicting shear flow and film breakup phenomena and incorporating
evaporation and chemistry models. However, recent studies have shown
limitations of the 2D liquid film representation as it is particularly valid

Fig. 43. Comparison of experimental and simulated spray impingement [266].

for thin films (< 500μm) [268]. Prediction accuracy is reduced in case of
thick  UWS  films  and  rivulets  [199].  Despite  all  efforts  in  liquid  film
modeling,  quantitative  experimental  data  on  liquid  film  thickness  for
model validation is lacking, as mentioned in Section 6.

Despite these achievements well predicting relevant physics, incor-
poration of chemical reactions in multi-phase simulations is accompa-
nied  by  high  numerical  effort.  Here,  a  particular  challenge  is  the
implementation  of  urea  decomposition  reactions  in  the  liquid  film  in
CFD simulations [19], which has been extensively studied [68,199,258,
267–270]. The target of modeling the long-term evolution of urea de-
posits  in  SCR  systems  yields  trade-off  solutions  concerning  the  appli-
cable time steps. Fig. 44 gives an overview on the different time step
requirements of relevant physical and chemical phenomena.

Spray injection and dispersed flow occur in timescales of millisec-
onds.  Liquid  film  formation  and  wall  cooling  range  in  timescales  of
minutes,  whereas  deposit  formation  takes  place  in  minutes  or  even
hours. For an adequate representation of injection and spray propaga-
tion,  numerical  time  steps  of  less  than  milliseconds  are  required  in
dependence on gas and droplet velocities. Applying identical time steps
for  simulations  of  film  and  deposit  formation  would  implicate unrea-
sonably high computational costs. For a reliable and quantitative pre-
diction  of  urea  decomposition  and  by-product  formation,  different
timescale  phenomena  need  to  be  handled  by  effective  numerical
approaches.

Most  numerical  studies  including  urea  thermal  decomposition  are
limited to the thermolysis and hydrolysis reactions given by Eqs. (1.4)
and  (1.5)  producing  ammonia  [17,32,53,63,101,202,257,271].  Kim
et  al.  [32]  implement  a  single  kinetic  rate  model  to  include  urea

Fig.  42. Ammonia  uniformity  at  the  catalyst  front  face.  FTIR  measurements
and  simulation  for  different  operating  points  with  temperatures  of  200,  250,
350 and 450∘C for OP L1-4 respectively. Republished with permission of SAE
International from [169].

Fig.  44. Time  scales  of  relevant  physical  and  chemical  phenomena  for
comprehensive modeling of UWS decomposition and deposit formation.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094927

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

decomposition  from  droplets  to  a  CFD  model  for  prediction  of  spray
mixing  and  ammonia  formation.  The  Arrhenius  expression  is  defined
based on experimental results on ammonia generation. A discrete par-
ticle  model  included  in  the  FLUENT  software  [272]  is  used  in  a
Lagrangian frame of reference for modeling spray development. Simu-
lation  results  match  well  with  measured  ammonia  conversion  data,
while no comparison on the spatial ammonia distribution is presented.
Further reactions of urea are not included [32].

Wurzenberger  and  Wanker  [257]  presented  3D  simulations  with
Euler-Lagrange approach and the discrete droplet model [273] in FIRE.
Here, the monolithic SCR catalyst is integrated to the simulations, which
is represented by a 1D model validated by literature data. Considering
standard, fast and slow SCR reactions, the calculated rates are used as
source  terms  in  the  CFD  model.  Urea  thermolysis  is  accounted  for  as
homogeneous gas phase reaction using a standard power law approach.
Subsequent hydrolysis of isocyanic acid or other reactions of urea are
not considered. Adequate prediction of SCR reactions is shown, whereas
no validation for urea decomposition is presented [257].

A  comprehensive  modeling  approach  comprising  multi-phase  in-
teractions  as  well  as  urea  thermo-hydrolysis  was  first  presented  by
Birkhold  et  al.  [63].  The  model  describes  the  turbulent  flow  and  the
Lagrangian droplet phase including evaporation and spray/wall inter-
action.  Wall  heat  transfer  and  two-component  film  formation  is
accounted  for.  Spray/wall  interaction  and  impingement  heat  transfer
are simulated using models by Kuhnke [132] and Wruck [197] respec-
tively.  The  fluid  film  is  represented  by  a  2D  finite  volume  model.
Nukiyama boiling [274] is applied to model heat transfer from wall to
film. An interface of the CFD software to the Chemkin chemistry solver is
utilized to implement urea thermolysis and hydrolysis as homogeneous
gas  phase  reactions.  Good  agreement  to  experimental  data  from  Kim
et al. [32] is achieved in terms of ammonia conversion as function of gas
temperature and velocity. A spray impingement setup is used to validate
predicted wall cooling. Fig. 45 shows simulation results for the liquid
film  thickness and  urea  content.  The  wall film  is  predicted  for  an  in-
jection of 0.83g UWS at a gas temperature of 340

C.

◦

Evaporation  of  the  wall  film  is  considered  in  the  model,  but  urea
reactions  inside  the  film  are  not  included.  Simulation  results  for  film
thickness  and  urea  concentration  are  not  compared  to  experimental
data. However, this model enables the prediction of liquid deposition

and indicates critical locations for solid formation [63].

Numerous subsequent CFD studies rely on the models developed by
Birkhold et al. [17,63] in terms of both multi-phase physics and UWS
droplet evaporation and decomposition [53,101,202,271].

Aiming  to  a  prediction  of  deposit  formation,  several  authors
enhanced their models by routines to evaluate a deposition risk based on
temperature  and  concentration  data  in  the  liquid  film  [101,199,202,
269,275].  This  procedure  demonstrates  critical  operating  conditions
and locations prone to deposit formation. Smith et al. [202] developed a
routine to evaluate the risk of deposit formation based on a choice of
parameters describing wall film dynamics as well as temperature and
concentration data of the liquid film. Fig. 46 presents a visualization of
the  deposition  risk  on  a  mixer  blade.  A  chemistry  model  describing
secondary reactions of urea to solid by-products is not implemented.

Sun et al. [269] presented another approach for prediction of urea
deposit formation by a CFD simulation. The procedure includes simu-
lations of the steady flow, spray development, impingement, local wall
cooling,  a  wall  film  property  based  evaluation  of  deposition  risk  and
simulations with a detailed urea decomposition mechanism. Simulations
were  carried  out  in  the  CONVERGE  CFD  software  package  and  were
compared to experiments at an engine test setup. Results are in good
agreement  with  experimental  data  in  terms  of  deposit  location  and
qualitative  composition.  However,  the  simulations  were  limited  to
several seconds and are only partially comparable to deposits derived
from experiments of 12 h duration.

Habchi  et  al.  [258]  account  for  the  competition  of  isocyanic  acid
implementing  a
hydrolysis  and  urea  by-product  formation  by
semi-detailed  urea  decomposition  model  into  a  CFD  simulation.  The
model comprises 12 reactions including the by-products biuret, cyanuric
acid  and  ammelide.  Despite  a  more  detailed  description  of  urea
decomposition, the model lacks in physical property data of the different
compounds as they are assumed to be equal to pure water. Wall tem-
peratures are set identical to the gas temperatures as no heat transfer
model  is  implemented.  Based  on  simulation  results,  two  temperature
regimes  for  deposit  formation  are  proposed.  Excessive  computational
costs  limit  the  simulation  duration  to  1s  and  hinder  validation  by
comparison  to  experimental  data  on  urea  decomposition  and  deposit
formation. Computation time for one second of physical time amounts to
one week using 256 cores [258].

The kinetic model was further implemented to the Lagrangian phase
model  in  a  subsequent  publication  [68].  Simulation  results  are
compared  to  experimental  data  of  UWS  droplet  evaporation  on

Fig. 45. Simulation results for wall film thickness and urea concentration for
an  injection  of  0.83g  UWS  at  a  gas  temperature  of  340∘C  derived  by  a  3D
simulation  in  FIRE.  Republished  with  permission  of  SAE  International,  from
[63]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.

Fig.  46. Deposition  risk  on  the  upstream  area  (left)  and  the  rear  blade  side
(right) calculated from liquid film simulation data such as velocity, temperature
and  concentrations.  Republished  with  permission  of  SAE  International
from [202].

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094928

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

thermocouple  rings  and  quartz  beads  [58,59]  and  show  satisfactory
agreement with regard to droplet size and temperature. The model was
further validated against experimental data on spray injection to a hot
gas  tube  from  Kim  et  al.  [32].  Good  agreement  was  achieved  for
different gas temperatures, flow rates and residence times. No detailed
information  on  the  computational  costs  or  the  effect  of  the  kinetics
implementation is available.

Recently, a detailed kinetic model and thermodynamic equilibria of
relevant species were integrated into the CFD code StarCCM+ [267]. In
this study, physical models and respective parameters describing spray
propagation,  impingement,  film  formation  and  evaporation  were
applied according to Fischer [262],. By user coding, a 0D batch reactor
algorithm  for  calculation  of  reaction  rates  in  multiple  phases  and  an
adaption  of  the  kinetic  scheme  proposed  by  Brack  et  al.  [100]  was
implemented to the commercial CFD code StarCCM+. This procedure
enables  the  calculation  of  production  and  consumption  rates  of  urea,
biuret, triuret, cyanuric acid and ammelide based on temperature and
concentration  data  in  the  liquid  film.  The  procedure  was  validated
against TGA experiments and applied to simulations of a hot gas test rig.
Results show acceptable prediction of spray impingement and film for-
mation. However, comparison with experimental data reveals deficits of
the  applied  physical  models.  Particularly  the  impingement  and  heat
transfer  models  lack  in  accuracy.  Due  to  the  implementation  of  urea
decomposition kinetics, the model is able to predict urea reactions in the
liquid film and the formation of urea by-products can be investigated
locally. Fig. 47 shows an example for deposit formation in the liquid film
(cid:0) 1 after 18 min
◦
for a gas temperature of 220
physical time.

C and a gas velocity of 11ms

In relation to the physical time, computational costs are not signifi-
cantly increased by the integration of decomposition kinetics. However,
due to the discrepancy of time step requirements for different physical
and  chemical  phenomena,  presented  simulations  over  minutes  are
highly  cost  intensive.  Limited  comparability  of  experimental  and
simulation results on deposit composition is given as the experimental
duration is 2h, whereas the simulated time is less than 20min.

Tackling the timescale problem, Budziankou et al. [268] proposed a
spray source approach significantly reducing computational time. Here,
spray parcels are substituted by source terms of mass, momentum and
energy, which are applied to the film and gas phase. Pre-simulations of
spray injection at different conditions (e.g. gas temperature) were per-
formed using small time steps (0.3 ms) to calculate and save the source
terms for the gas and liquid phase. The pre-calculated source terms were
then  applied  to  unsteady  simulations,  where  they  substitute  the
Lagrangian parcels and enable the use of larger time steps (5–10 ms). In
case  of  transient  operating  conditions,  source  terms  were  updated
periodically.  Urea  decomposition  kinetics  were  calculated  in  detail
relying  on  the  implementation  described  by  B ̈ornhorst  et  al.  [267].
Simulation results were compared to experimental data from an engine
test bench and show good agreement in terms of film formation, wall
cooling  and  position  of  deposits.  Quantitative  comparison  of  deposits
after  20min  experimental  and  simulation  duration  shows  deviations,
which are attributed to an underestimated isocyanic acid concentration
in the liquid film in the simulations. Furthermore, the implementation of
recent mechanisms for urea decomposition [223] is recommended.

In  a  subsequent  publication,  in  addition  to  the  spray  source
approach, Budziankou et al. [199] implemented a modified Bai-Oneira
[167] impingement and Wruck [197] heat transfer model to overcome
the  aforementioned  shortcomings.  Furthermore,  the  deposition  risk
estimation  routine  proposed  by  Smith  et  al.  [202]  was  adapted  and
applied to simulations of two engine test benches. Deposition inhibiting
and  promoting  liquid  film  properties  were  identified  and  empirically
determined threshold values were applied. Simulation results correlate
well with experimental findings, while maintaining reasonable compu-
(cid:0) 1,  which  is  far  beyond the  capabilities of
tational  speed  of  45 -  65sd
most  mentioned  studies.  The  presented  reduction  of  computational
time,  for  the  first  time,  enables  model  verification  by  a  direct

Fig. 47. Simulated solid deposition thickness and by-product formation in the
liquid film (gas temperature 220∘C, gas velocity 11 ms

(cid:0) 1).

comparison  of  numerical  and  experimental  results  for  identical  time
scales  [199,268].  Previous  studies,  constrained  by  high  computation
costs,  used  to  correlate  experimental  results  on  deposit  composition
measured after several hours of operation to simulation results for sec-
onds or minutes of physical time [202,258,267,269,275,276].

Consecutive developments of sub-models relevant to UWS injection,
evaporation  and  decomposition  in  SCR  systems  by  different  research
groups have lead to accurate, comprehensive CFD models describing the
overall process from injection to deposit formation. Presented studies
demonstrate the capabilities and frequent use of existing CFD models to
predict ammonia generation from UWS injection accompanied by liquid
and solid depositions. However, high computational costs result from
small time step requirements for the representation of the Lagrangian
phase in combination with the implementation of urea decomposition
kinetics.  First  approaches  to  overcome  this  obstacle  were  made  and
implementations to assess deposition risk and to calculate urea decom-
position in detail are available.

9. Conclusion and outlook

Efficient  NOx  removal  by  urea  SCR  systems  demands  a  complete
conversion of adequately dosed urea to ammonia and its homogeneous
distribution over the catalyst cross section without system degradation
by  solid  by-product  deposits.  Over  the  last  two  decades,  tremendous
efforts have been made towards a better understanding of physical and
chemical  sub-processes  in  the  mixing  section  of  SCR  systems,  which

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094929

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

today enables model-based design of aftertreatment devices.

Detailed knowledge of injection characteristics and spray develop-
ment  is  required  to  enable  complete  evaporation.  A  wide  range  of
measurement techniques has been developed to characterize injectors as
well as spray evaporation and mixing in diverse system layouts. How-
ever, determination of droplet size and velocity distributions at realistic,
transient conditions involving high temperatures and non-ideal sprays
remains a challenge and limits the prediction accuracy of droplet kine-
matics and evaporation models.

The gas phase composition, affected by droplet evaporation and urea
decomposition, and homogeneous reactions have so far been handled
with low priority in urea SCR related research. Several studies call for a
better understanding of gas phase reactions, particularly including iso-
cyanic  acid,  as  it  affects  the  catalysts’  potential  and  harmful  deposit
formation. Low reactivity of isocyanic acid in the gas phase decreases
the  NOx  removal  rate  and  bears  the  risk  of  HNCO  emissions.  More
detailed  studies  on  homogeneous  reactions  at  SCR  conditions,  HNCO
stability and catalytic HNCO hydrolysis are recommended.

Despite sophisticated injector design, system layout and operation,
incomplete  evaporation  and  impingement  of  droplets  on  the  physical
system boundaries needs to be accepted and controlled as part of the
urea conversion process. In particular, the development towards close-
coupled  positioning  of  the  aftertreatment  system  inevitably  leads  to
liquid/wall and liquid/mixer contact. Multi-functional mixer develop-
ment  dedicated  not  only  to  turbulence  induction,  but  also  to  heat
transfer  and  secondary  atomization  deserves  increased  attention.
Advanced integration of catalytic functions enhancing HNCO hydrolysis
might  improve  urea  conversion  efficiency.  Based  on  droplet impinge-
ment experiments, regime classifications and several models for spray/
wall  interaction  of  UWS  were  developed,  which  are  continuously
applied in CFD tools for the development of SCR technologies. However,
experimental  validation  data  and  respective  models  have  to  be  per-
formed and selected carefully. Existing regime maps integrate important
thermal  and  kinetic  parameters,  but  not  all  relevant  parameters  are
accounted  for.  Recent  studies  indicate  a  strong  influence  of  surface
properties,  particularly  wettability  and  roughness,  on  hydrodynamic
and thermal effects during droplet impact and also reveal hysteresis and
memory effects. Furthermore, experimentally determined regime data
usually  cover  a limited  range of  parameters, such  as droplet  size, ve-
locity and surface temperature. Extrapolation of regime boundaries to
SCR relevant conditions, in particular, the application of data obtained
by relatively large and slow droplets to modeling of impingement with
small  droplets  and  high  velocities  demands  adequate  verification.
Furthermore, a suitable transfer of single droplet data to spray models is
required. Modeling and utilization of spray/wall interaction is of utmost
importance, as it represents the initiation of liquid and solid deposits in
SCR systems.

Liquid  accumulation,  evaporation  and  transport  is  rarely  studied
under realistic conditions as transient measurements of film thickness
and concentrations are challenging. These valuable data can contribute
to  the  predictive  accuracy  of  film  and  deposition  models,  which  are
mostly limited to 2D representations in CFD.

Extensive research is available on the position and quantity of solid
urea  by-products  deposited  on  system  walls  and  mixing  devices  of
diverse SCR geometries. Methods are available for temperature depen-
dent deposit composition analysis and modeling. Yet, long-term accu-
mulation, durability and regeneration strategies of high temperature by-
products  should  not be  disregarded.  Furthermore,  detailed  studies  on
deposit morphology will help to understand the growth mechanisms and
predict deposit formation.

Over  the  last  years,  there  has  been  significant  progress  towards
predictive modeling of the entire process, including deposit formation,
with  regard  to  SCR  system  engineering  and  optimization.  Presented
modeling  approaches  are  promising  and  push  the  limits  of  today’s
computational capabilities. Despite the scientific interest in integration
of  chemical  kinetics  to  turbulent,  multi-phase  flow  simulations,

deposition risk approaches are considered to be of increased value to
SCR system engineering compared to more detailed deposition models
with respect to computational efficiency. Existing CFD models with in-
tegrated urea decomposition kinetics often lack in detailed comparison
and validation with quantitative experimental data on deposit forma-
tion,  as  the  duration  of  experiments  strongly  exceeds  the  simulated
physical time.

Particularly  for  modern,  close-coupled  systems,  interaction  of  the
droplets with the catalyst front face and potential liquid and solid de-
positions inside the catalyst channels need to be accounted for. These
need to be addressed in addition to investigations on the SCR catalytic
activity  on  isocyanic  hydrolysis,  especially  with  respect  to  potential
future emission legislations for HNCO and N2O. Furthermore, the trend
towards combination and integration of aftertreatment components, e.
g. SCR coated DPF, imposes new challenges.

Several decades of research and development in academics and in-
dustry  have  established  urea-based  SCR  systems  as  a  state-of-the-art
aftertreatment technique for NOx  removal from the emissions of IC en-
gines. Existing experimental and numerical methods bear the potential
to develop SCR systems according to future requirements of emission
regulations independently from the drive technology. The challenge of
NOx  removal will remain as long as air is used as oxidizer in combustion
systems.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interest or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

e.V.

for  Combustion  Engines

The  authors  kindly  acknowledge  financial  support  by  the  German
Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG) through
project 237267381 - TRR 150. Our research was further funded by the
Research  Association
(For-
schungsvereinigung  Verbrennungskraftmaschinen  e.V.,  FVV)  and  the
German  Federation  of  Industrial  Research  Associations  (Arbeitsge-
meinschaft  industrieller  Forschungsvereinigungen,  AiF).  Furthermore,
we appreciate financial support by the Friedrich and Elisabeth Boysen
Foundation.  We  acknowledge  Steinbeis  GmbH  &  Co.  KG  für  Tech-
nologietransfer (STZ 240 Reaktive Str ̈omung) for a cost-free license of
DETCHEM. We would like to thank our colleagues Christian Kuntz, Anna
Bert ́otin ́e  Abai  and  Carola  Kuhn  (KIT)  for  their  contributions  to  our
research.  Steffen  Tischer  (KIT)  is  acknowledged  for  his  support  in
development of the DETCHEMMPTR  module and kinetic modeling. We
would  like  to  sincerely  thank  Thomas  Lauer  (TU  Vienna)  for  fruitful
discussions and cooperation in our joint project (FVV 6012623).

References

[1] Koch TA, Boehlke T. The averaging bias - a standard miscalculation, which

extensively underestimates real CO2 emissions. ZAMM Journal of Applied
Mathematics and Mechanics 2021.

[2] Seboldt D, Lejsek D, Bargende M. Injection strategies for low HC raw emissions in
SI engines with CNG direct injection. Automotive and Engine Technology 2016;
60:81–91. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41104-016-0002-4.

[3] Lott P, Deutschmann O. Lean-Burn Natural Gas Engines: Challenges and Concepts
for an Efficient Exhaust Gas Aftertreatment System. Emission Control Science and
Technology 2020;7:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40825-020-00176-w.
[4] Wang Y, Banerjee A, Deutschmann O. Dynamic behavior and control strategy

study of CO2\H2O co-electrolysis in solid oxide electrolysis cells. Journal of
Power Sources 2019;412:255–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2018.11.047.

[5] Borchers M, Keller K, Lott P, Deutschmann O. Selective Catalytic Reduction of

NOx with H2 for Cleaning Exhausts of Hydrogen Engines: Impact of H2O, O2, and
NO/H2 Ratio. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2021;60:6613–26.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.0c05630.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094930

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

[6] Knirsch S, Weiß U, Fr ̈ohlich A, Pamio G, Helbig J, Ritter H. The new generation of
the Audi V6 TDI engine: 25 years of Technology - Dynamics - Innovation, Vienna,
Austria. 2014.

Reduction–DeNOx Applications. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
2014;53(8):3047–55. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie404037h.

[31] Liao Y, Nocivelli L, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Spiteri A. Experimental

[7] Nova I, Tronconi E. Urea-SCR Technology for deNOx After Treatment of Diesel
Exhausts. Springer New York; 2014. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-8071-
7.

[8] Solla A, Westerholm M, S ̈oderstr ̈om C, Tormonen K, H ̈arm ̈a T, Nissinen T, et al.
Effect of Ammonium Formate and Mixtures of Urea and Ammonium Formate on
Low Temperature Activity of SCR Systems. SAE Technical Paper 2005;(2005-01-
1856). https://doi.org/10.4271/2005-01-1856.

[9] Kr ̈ocher O, Elsener M, Jacob E. New reducing agents for the low-NOx SCR

technology. Proceedings of the 5th International Exhaust Gas and Particulate
Emissions Forum, Ludwigsburg 2008.

[10] Ramachandran BR, Halpern AM, Glendening ED. Kinetics and Mechanism of the
Reversible Dissociation of Ammonium Carbamate: Involvement of Carbamic
Acid. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 1998;102(22):3934–41. https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp980376n.

[11] Wilson JG, Hargrave G. Analysis of a Novel Method for Low-Temperature
Ammonia Production Using DEF for Mobile Selective Catalytic Reduction
Systems. SAE Technical Paper 2018;(2018-01-0333). https://doi.org/10.4271/
2018-01-0333.

[12] Elmøe TD, Sørensen RZ, Quaade U, Christensen CH, Nørskov JK, Johannessen T.
A high-density ammonia storage/delivery system based on Mg(NH3)6Cl2 for SCR
– DeNOx in vehicles. Chemical Engineering Science 2006;61(8):2618–25. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2005.11.038.

[13] Deutschmann O, Grunwaldt J-D. Abgasnachbehandlung in mobilen Systemen:

Stand der Technik, Herausforderungen und Perspektiven. Chemie Ingenieur
Technik 2013;85(5):595–617. https://doi.org/10.1002/cite.201200188.
[14] Merker GP, Teichmann R. Grundlagen Verbrennungsmotoren. Springer

Fachmedien Wiesbaden; 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-19212-9.
[15] Balland J, Schreurs B, Peters M, Parmentier M, Schmitt J, Hardam H, et al.

A Super Clean Diesel Vehicle for US LEV-III SULEV Category: Second Report;
Advanced A/F Control for NOx Reduction and for SCR Heat Up. Proceedings of
the FISITA 2012 World Automotive Congress 2012;189:183–93. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-33841-0_14.

[16] Rammelt T, Torkashvand B, Hauck C, B ̈ohm J, Gl ̈aser R, Deutschmann O. Nitric
Oxide Reduction of Heavy-Duty Diesel Off-Gas by NH3-SCR in Front of the
Turbocharger. Emission Control Science and Technology 2017;3(4):275–88.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40825-017-0078-y.

[17] Birkhold F. Selektive katalytische Reduktion von Stickoxiden in Kraftfahrzeugen:
Untersuchung der Einspritzung von Harnstoffwasserl ̈osung. Karlsruhe, Germany:
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology; 2007. PhD thesis.

[18] Grout S, Blaisot J-B, Pajot K, Osbat G. Experimental investigation on the injection
of an urea–water solution in hot air stream for the SCR application: Evaporation
and spray/wall interaction. Fuel 2013;106:166–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2012.09.022.

[19] Brack W, Heine B, Birkhold F, Kruse M, Deutschmann O. Formation of Urea-Based
Deposits in an Exhaust System: Numerical Predictions and Experimental
Observations on a Hot Gas Test Bench. Emission Control Science and Technology
2016;2(3):115–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40825-016-0042-2.

[20] Schaber PM, Colson J, Higgins S, Thielen D, Anspach B, Brauer J. Thermal

decomposition (pyrolysis) of urea in an open reaction vessel. Thermochimica Acta
2004;424(1-2):131–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tca.2004.05.018.

[21] Lundstr ̈om A, Andersson B, Olsson L. Urea thermolysis studied under flow reactor
conditions using DSC and FT-IR. Chemical Engineering Journal 2009;150(2-3):
544–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2009.03.044.

[22] Eichelbaum M, Farrauto RJ, Castaldi MJ. The impact of urea on the performance
of metal exchanged zeolites for the selective catalytic reduction of NOx: Part I.
Pyrolysis and hydrolysis of urea over zeolite catalysts. Applied Catalysis B:
Environmental 2010;97(1-2):90–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcatb.2010.03.027.

[23] Bernhard AM, Peitz D, Elsener M, Wokaun A, Kr ̈ocher O. Hydrolysis and

thermolysis of urea and its decomposition byproducts biuret, cyanuric acid and
melamine over anatase TiO2. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2012;115-116:
129–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2011.12.013.

[24] Lauer T. Preparation of Ammonia from Liquid AdBlue - Modeling Approaches and

Future Challenges. Chemie Ingenieur Technik 2018;90(6):783–94. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cite.201700107.

[25] Kapusta ŁJ, Teodorczyk A. Laser diagnostics for urea-water solution spray

characterization. MATEC Web of Conferences 2017;118:00029. https://doi.org/
10.1051/matecconf/201711800029.

[26] Kapusta ŁJ, Sutkowski M, Rog ́o ̇z R, Zommara M, Teodorczyk A. Characteristics of
Water and Urea–Water Solution Sprays. Catalysts 2019;9(9):750. https://doi.org/
10.3390/catal9090750.

[27] Lieber C, Koch R, Bauer H-J. Microscopic Imaging Spray Diagnostics under High

Temperature Conditions: Application to Urea–Water Sprays. Applied Sciences
2019;9(20):4403. https://doi.org/10.3390/app9204403.

[28] Lieber C, Koch R, Bauer H-J. Spray evaporation of urea–water solution:

Experiments and modelling. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2020;116:
110108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2020.110108.

[29] D ̈ornh ̈ofer J, B ̈ornhorst M, Ates C, Samkhaniani N, Pfeil J, W ̈orner M, et al.

A Holistic View on Urea Injection for NOx Emission Control: Impingement, Re-
atomization, and Deposit Formation. Emission Control Science and Technology
2020;6(2):228–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40825-019-00151-0.
[30] Spiteri A, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P. Experimental Fluid Dynamic
Investigation of Urea–Water Sprays for Diesel Selective Catalytic

investigation of urea-water sprays in selective catalytic reduction (SCR) systems.
Proceedings of the 15th Stuttgart International Symposium 2012:953–66.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-08844-6_65.

[32] Kim JY, Ryu SH, Ha JS. Numerical prediction on the characteristics of spray-
induced mixing and thermal decomposition of urea solution in SCR systems.
Proceedings of ICEF04, 2004 Fall Technical Conference of the ASME Internal
Combustion Engine Division 2004;(889).

[33] Postrioti L, Brizi G, Ungaro C, Mosser M, Bianconi F. A methodology to

investigate the behaviour of urea-water sprays in high temperature air flow for
SCR de-NOx applications. Fuel 2015;150:548–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2015.02.067.

[34] Payri R, Bracho G, Gimeno J, Moreno A. Investigation of the urea-water solution
atomization process in engine exhaust-like conditions. Experimental Thermal and
Fluid Science 2019;108:75–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
expthermflusci.2019.05.019.

[35] Oh J, Lee K. Spray characteristics of a urea solution injector and optimal mixer
location to improve droplet uniformity and NOx conversion efficiency for
selective catalytic reduction. Fuel 2014;119:90–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2013.11.032.

[36] Payri R, Bracho G, Martí-Aldaraví P, Marco-Gimeno J. Computational Study of
Urea–Water Solution Sprays for the Analysis of the Injection Process in SCR-like
Conditions. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2020;59(41):18659–73.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.0c02494.

[37] Liao Y, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Spiteri A, Nocivelli L, Montenegro G,
Boulouchos K. Fluid Dynamic Comparison of AdBlue Injectors for SCR
Applications. SAE International Journal of Engines 2015;8(5):2303–11. https://
doi.org/10.4271/2015-24-2502.

[38] Spiteri A, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Liao Y. Comparison of pressure and air-

assisted atomizers for Urea-SCR injection in diesel engine exhaust. In:
Bargende M, Reuss H-C, Wiedemann J, editors. 14. Internationales Stuttgarter
Symposium. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden; 2014, ISBN 978-3-
658-05129-7. p. 911–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-05130-3_65.

[39] Huthwohl G, Dolenec S. A new Approach in AdBlue Dosing to Improve

Performance and Durability of SCR Systems for the Use in Passenger Cars up to
Heavy Duty Vehicles. SAE Technical Paper 2011-01-2095. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2011-01-2095.

[40] Cai X, W ̈orner M, Marschall H, Deutschmann O. CFD Simulation of Liquid Back
Suction and Gas Bubble Formation in a Circular Tube with Sudden or Gradual
Expansion. Emission Control Science and Technology 2017;3(4):289–301.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40825-017-0073-3.

[41] van Vuuren N, Postrioti L, Brizi G, Picchiotti F. Instantaneous Flow Rate Testing
with Simultaneous Spray Visualization of an SCR Urea Injector at Elevated Fluid
Temperatures. SAE International Journal of Engines 2017;10(5):2478–85.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-24-0109.

[42] Wan Y, Peters N. Scaling of spray penetration with evaporation. Atomization and

Sprays 1999;9(2):111–32. https://doi.org/10.1615/AtomizSpr.v9.i2.10.
[43] Araneo L, Coghe A, Brunello G, Cossali G. Experimental Investigation of Gas

Density Effects on Diesel Spray Penetration and Entrainment. SAE Transactions
1999;(108):679–93.

[44] Roisman IV, Araneo L, Tropea C. Effect of ambient pressure on penetration of a
diesel spray. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2007;33(8):904–20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2007.01.004.

[45] Birkhold F, Meingast U, Wassermann P, Deutschmann O. Modeling and

simulation of the injection of urea-water-solution for automotive SCR DeNOx-
systems. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2007;70(1-4):119–27. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2005.12.035.

[46] Varna A, Spiteri AC, Wright YM, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Boulouchos K.
Experimental and numerical assessment of impingement and mixing of
urea–water sprays for nitric oxide reduction in diesel exhaust. Applied Energy
2015;157:824–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.03.015.

[47] van Vuuren N, Brizi G, Buitoni G, Postrioti L, Ungaro C. AUS-32 Injector Spray

Imaging on Hot Air Flow Bench. SAE Technical Paper Series. SAE
International400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United States; 2015.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-1031.

[48] Corbeels PL, Senser DW, Lefebvre AH. Atomization characteristics of a highspeed

rotary-bell paint applicator. Atomization and Sprays 1992;2(2):87–99. https://
doi.org/10.1615/AtomizSpr.v2.i2.20.

[49] Dorfner V, Domnick J, Durst F, Kohler R. Viscosity and surface tension effects in
pressure swirl atomization. Atomization and Sprays 1995;5(3):261–85. https://
doi.org/10.1615/AtomizSpr.v5.i3.20.

[50] Shah PR, Ganesh A. Study the influence of pre-heating on atomization of straight
vegetable oil through Ohnesorge number and Sauter mean diameter. Journal of
the Energy Institute 2018;91(6):828–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
joei.2017.10.006.

[51] Urb ́an A, Malý M, J ́ozsa V, Jedelský J. Effect of liquid preheating on high-velocity

airblast atomization: From water to crude rapeseed oil. Experimental Thermal
and Fluid Science 2019;102:137–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
expthermflusci.2018.11.006.

[52] Kulkarni AP, Megaritis T, Ganippa LC. Insights on the morphology of air-assisted
breakup of urea-water-solution sprays for varying surface tension. International
Journal of Multiphase Flow 2020;133:103448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmultiphaseflow.2020.103448.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094931

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

[53] Nayak NS. The Evaporation and Spray Wall Interaction Behavior of Urea Water
Solution (UWS) in Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) Systems of Modern
Automobiles. SAE Technical Paper 2013;(2013-24-0162). https://doi.org/
10.4271/2013-24-0162.

[54] Elperin T, Krasovitov B. Analysis of evaporation and combustion of random
clusters of droplets by a modified method of expansion into irreducible
multipoles. Atomization and Sprays 1994;4(1):79–97. https://doi.org/10.1615/
AtomizSpr.v4.i1.40.

[55] Greenberg JB, Katoshevski D. Vaporization Damk ̈ohler Number and Enrichment
Effects in Spray Diffusion Flames in an Oscillating Flow Field. Combustion
Science and Technology 2013;185(6):898–919. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00102202.2013.764288.

[56] Greenberg JB, Katoshevski D. Polydisperse spray diffusion flames in oscillating

flow. Combustion Theory and Modelling 2016;20(2):349–72. https://doi.org/
10.1080/13647830.2015.1132773.

[57] Musa SNA, Saito M, Furuhata T, Arai M. Evaporation characteristics of a single

aqueous urea solution droplet, Kyoto, Japan. 2006.

diluted conditions of exhaust–gases of lean operated natural gas engines.
International Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/
kin.21435.

[78] Günter T, Pesek J, Sch ̈afer K, Bert ́otin ́e Abai A, Casapu M, Deutschmann O, et al.
Cu-SSZ-13 as pre-turbine NOx-removal-catalyst: Impact of pressure and catalyst
poisons. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2016;198:548–57. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.06.005.

[79] Bert ́otin ́e Abai A, Zengel D, Janzer C, Maier L, Grunwaldt J-D, Olzmann M, et al.

Effect of NO2 on Gas-Phase Reactions in Lean NOx/NH3/O2/H2O Mixtures at
Conditions Relevant for Exhaust Gas Aftertreatment. SAE Technical Paper 2021;
(2021-01-5005). https://doi.org/10.4271/2021-01-5005.

[80] Caton JA, Siebers DL. Comparison of Nitric Oxide Removal by Cyanuric Acid and
by Ammonia. Combustion Science and Technology 1989;65(4-6):277–93.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102208908924054.

[81] Miller JA, Bowman CT. Kinetic modeling of the reduction of nitric oxide in

combustion products by isocyanic acid. International Journal of Chemical
Kinetics 1991;23(4):289–313. https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.550230403.

[58] Wang TJ, Baek SW, Lee SY, Kang DH, Yeo GK. Experimental investigation on

evaporation of urea-water-solution droplet for SCR applications. AIChE Journal
2009;55(12):3267–76. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.11939.

[82] Glarborg P, Kristensen PG, Jensen SH, Dam-Johansen K. A flow reactor study of
HNCO oxidation chemistry. Combustion and Flame 1994;98(3):241–58. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0010-2180(94)90239-9.

[59] Wei L, Youtong Z, Asif M. Investigation on UWS evaporation for vehicle SCR

[83] Chen Z-C, Yang W-J, Zhou J-H, Lv H-K, Liu J-Z, Cen K-F. HNCO hydrolysis

applications. AIChE Journal 2016;62(3):880–90. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aic.15078.

[60] Brenn G. Concentration fields in evaporating droplets. International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer 2005;48(2):395–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2004.07.039.

[61] Brenn G, Deviprasath LJ, Durst F, Fink C. Evaporation of acoustically levitated

multi-component liquid droplets. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
2007;50(25-26):5073–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2007.07.036.

[62] Kontin S, H ̈ofler A, Koch R, Bauer H-J. Heat and Mass Transfer accompanied by
Crystallisation of single Particles containing Urea-water-solution. 2010.Brno,
Czech Republic

[63] Birkhold F, Meingast U, Wassermann P, Deutschmann O. Analysis of the Injection
of Urea-Water-Solution for Automotive SCR DeNOx-Systems: Modeling of Two-
Phase Flow and Spray/Wall-Interaction. SAE Technical Paper 2006-01-0643
2006. https://doi.org/10.4271/2006-01-0643.

[64] Lundstr ̈om A, Snelling T, Morsing P, Gabrielsson P, Senar E, Olsson L. Urea

decomposition and HNCO hydrolysis studied over titanium dioxide, Fe-Beta and
γ-Alumina. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2011;106(3-4):273–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2011.05.010.

[65] Abu-Ramadan E, Saha K, Li X. Numerical Modeling of the Impingement Process of
Urea-Water Solution Spray on the Heated Walls of SCR Systems. SAE Technical
Paper 2012;(2012-01-1301). https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-1301.
[66] Stein M, Bykov V, Maas U. The Effect of Evaporation Models on Urea

Decomposition from Urea-Water-Solution Droplets in SCR Conditions. Emission
Control Science and Technology 2017;3(4):263–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40825-017-0075-1.

[67] Stein M, Bykov V, Bert ́otin ́e Abai A, Janzer C, Maas U, Deutschmann O, et al.

A reduced model for the evaporation and decomposition of urea–water solution
droplets. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2018;70:216–25. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2018.02.005.

[68] Habchi C, Quan S, Drennan S, Bohbot J. Towards Quantitative Prediction of Urea
Thermo-Hydrolysis and Deposits Formation in Exhaust Selective Catalytic
Reduction (SCR) Systems. SAE Technical Paper Series. SAE International400
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United States; 2019. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2019-01-0992.

[69] Hulgaard T, Dam-Johansen K. Homogeneous nitrous oxide formation and

destruction under combustion conditions. AIChE Journal 1993;39(8):1342–54.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690390811.

[70] Rota R, Antos D, Zanoelo EF, Carra S. Experimental Study and Kinetic Modelling
of Nitric Oxide Reduction with Ammonia. Combustion Science and Technology
2001;163(1):25–47. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200108952150.
[71] Kasuya F, Glarborg P, Johnsson JE, Dam-Johansen K. The thermal DeNOx

process: Influence of partial pressures and temperature. Chemical Engineering
Science 1995;50(9):1455–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2509(95)00008-S.

[72] Glarborg P, Dam-Johansen K, Miller JA, Kee RJ, Coltrin ME. Modeling the
thermal DENOx process in flow reactors. Surface effects and Nitrous Oxide
formation. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics 1994;26(4):421–36.
https://doi.org/10.1002/kin.550260405.

[73] Miller JA, Glarborg P. Modeling the thermal De-NOx process: Closing in on a final
solution. International Journal of Chemical Kinetics 1999;31(11):757–65.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4601(1999)31:11<757::AID-JCK1>3.0.CO;
2-V.

[74] Skreiberg Ø, Kilpinen P, Glarborg P. Ammonia chemistry below 1400 K under
fuel-rich conditions in a flow reactor. Combustion and Flame 2004;136(4):
501–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2003.12.008.

[75] Smith J, Phillips J, Graham A, Steele R, Redondo A, Coons J. Homogeneous

Chemistry in Lean-Burn Exhaust Mixtures. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
1997;101(48):9157–62. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp9716647.

[76] Torkashvand B, Lott P, Zengel D, Maier L, Hettel M, Grunwaldt J-D, et al.

Homogeneous oxidation of light alkanes in the exhaust of turbocharged lean-burn
gas engines. Chemical Engineering Journal 2019;377:119800. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2018.08.186.

[77] Schmitt S, Schwarz S, Ruwe L, Horstmann J, Sabath F, Maier L, et al.

Homogeneous conversion of NOx and NH3 with CH4, CO, and C2H4 at the

performance in urea-water solution thermohydrolysis process with and without
catalysts. Journal of Zhejiang University-SCIENCE A 2010;11(11):849–56.
https://doi.org/10.1631/jzus.A0900798.

[84] Glarborg P, Miller JA, Ruscic B, Klippenstein SJ. Modeling nitrogen chemistry in
combustion. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 2018;67:31–68. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2018.01.002.

[85] Koebel M, Strutz EO. Thermal and Hydrolytic Decomposition of Urea for
Automotive Selective Catalytic Reduction Systems: Thermochemical and
Practical Aspects. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2003;42(10):
2093–100. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie020950o.

[86] Yim SD, Kim SJ, Baik JH, Nam I-S, Mok YS, Lee J-H, et al. Decomposition of Urea
into NH3 for the SCR Process. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2004;
43(16):4856–63. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie034052j.

[87] Piazzesi G, Kr ̈ocher O, Elsener M, Wokaun A. Adsorption and hydrolysis of

isocyanic acid on TiO2. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2006;65(1-2):55–61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2005.12.018.

[88] Piazzesi G, Devadas M, Kr ̈ocher O, Elsener M, Wokaun A. Isocyanic acid

hydrolysis over Fe-ZSM5 in urea-SCR. Catalysis Communications 2006;7(8):
600–3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catcom.2006.01.022.

[89] Czekaj I, Kr ̈ocher O, Piazzesi G. DFT calculations, DRIFT spectroscopy and kinetic

studies on the hydrolysis of isocyanic acid on the TiO2-anatase (101) surface.
Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical 2008;280(1-2):68–80. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.molcata.2007.10.027.

[90] Czekaj I, Kr ̈ocher O. Decomposition of Urea in the SCR Process: Combination of
DFT Calculations and Experimental Results on the Catalytic Hydrolysis of
Isocyanic Acid on TiO2 and Al2O3. Topics in Catalysis 2009;52(13-20):1740–5.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11244-009-9344-8.

[91] Kleemann M, Elsener M, Koebel M, Wokaun A. Hydrolysis of Isocyanic Acid on
SCR Catalysts. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2000;39(11):
4120–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie9906161.

[92] Hauck P, Jentys A, Lercher JA. Surface chemistry and kinetics of the hydrolysis of
isocyanic acid on anatase. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2007;70(1-4):
91–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2005.12.025.

[93] Piazzesi G, Elsener M, Kr ̈ocher O, Wokaun A. Influence of NO2 on the hydrolysis

of isocyanic acid over TiO2. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2006;65(3-4):
169–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2006.01.002.

[94] Ma Y, Wu X, Zhang J, Ran R, Weng D. Urea-related reactions and their active sites
over Cu-SAPO-34: Formation of NH3 and conversion of HNCO. Applied Catalysis
B: Environmental 2018;227:198–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcatb.2018.01.026.

[95] Seneque M, Can F, Duprez D, Courtois X. NOx Selective Catalytic Reduction (NOx
-SCR) by Urea: Evidence of the Reactivity of HNCO, Including a Specific Reaction
Pathway for NOx Reduction Involving NO + NO2. ACS Catalysis 2016;6(7):
4064–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.6b00785.

[96] Grossale A, Nova I, Tronconi E, Chatterjee D, Weibel M. NH3–NO/NO2 SCR for
Diesel Exhausts Aftertreatment: Reactivity, Mechanism and Kinetic Modelling of
Commercial Fe- and Cu-Promoted Zeolite Catalysts. Topics in Catalysis 2009;52
(13-20):1837–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11244-009-9354-6.

[97] Hauck P, Jentys A, Lercher JA. On the quantitative aspects of hydrolysis of

isocyanic acid on TiO2. Catalysis Today 2007;127(1-4):165–75. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cattod.2007.05.012.

[98] Kr ̈ocher O, Elsener M, Koebel M. An ammonia and isocyanic acid measuring

method for soot containing exhaust gases. Analytica Chimica Acta 2005;537(1-2):
393–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2004.12.082.

[99] Suarez-Bertoa R, Astorga C. Isocyanic acid and ammonia in vehicle emissions.
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 2016;49:259–70.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2016.08.039.

[100] Brack W, Heine B, Birkhold F, Kruse M, Schoch G, Tischer S, et al. Kinetic

modeling of urea decomposition based on systematic thermogravimetric analyses
of urea and its most important by-products. Chemical Engineering Science 2014;
106:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2013.11.013.

[101] Sadashiva Prabhu S, Nayak NS, Kapilan N, Hindasageri V. An experimental and
numerical study on effects of exhaust gas temperature and flow rate on deposit
formation in Urea-Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) system of modern

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094932

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

automobiles. Applied Thermal Engineering 2017;111:1211–31. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.09.134.

[102] B ̈ornhorst M, Deutschmann O. Single droplet impingement of urea water solution

on a heated substrate. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2018;69:
55–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2017.10.007.

[103] Quissek M, Lauer T, García-Afonso O, Fowles S. Identification of Film Breakup for
a Liquid Urea-Water-Solution and Application to CFD. SAE Technical Paper 2019;
(2019-01-0983). https://doi.org/10.4271/2019-01-0983.

[104] Bernardin JD, Stebbins CJ, Mudawar I. Effects of surface roughness on water

droplet impact history and heat transfer regimes. International Journal of Heat
and Mass Transfer 1996;40(1):73–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(96)
00067-1.

[105] Bernardin JD, Stebbins CJ, Mudawar I. Mapping of impact and heat transfer

regimes of water drops impinging on a polished surface. International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer 1997;40(2):247–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310
(96)00119-6.

[106] Bernardin JD, Mudawar I. The Leidenfrost Point: Experimental Study and
Assessment of Existing Models. Journal of Heat Transfer 1999;121(4):894.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2826080.

[108]

[107] Karl A, Frohn A. Experimental investigation of interaction processes between
droplets and hot walls. Physics of Fluids 2000;12(4):785–96. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.870335.
ˇ
Sikalo S, Marengo M, Tropea C, Gani ́c E. Analysis of impact of droplets on
horizontal surfaces. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2002;25(7):503–10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0894-1777(01)00109-1.
ˇ
Sikalo S, Tropea C, Ganic EN. Impact of droplets onto inclined surfaces. Journal of
colloid and interface science 2005;286(2):661–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcis.2005.01.050.
ˇ
Sikalo S, Wilhelm H-D, Roisman IV, Jakirli ́c S, Tropea C. Dynamic contact angle
of spreading droplets: Experiments and simulations. Physics of Fluids 2005;17(6):
062103. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1928828.

[109]

[110]

[111] Roisman IV, Opfer L, Tropea C, Raessi M, Mostaghimi J, Chandra S. Drop impact
onto a dry surface: Role of the dynamic contact angle. Colloids and Surfaces A:
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 2008;322(1-3):183–91. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2008.03.005.

[112] Cossali GE, Marengo M, Santini M. Thermally induced secondary drop

atomisation by single drop impact onto heated surfaces. International Journal of
Heat and Fluid Flow 2008;29(1):167–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatfluidflow.2007.09.006.

[113] Castanet G, Li ́enart T, Lemoine F. Dynamics and temperature of droplets

impacting onto a heated wall. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
2009;52(3-4):670–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2008.07.024.
[114] Marengo M, Antonini C, Roisman IV, Tropea C. Drop collisions with simple and

complex surfaces. Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science 2011;16(4):
292–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cocis.2011.06.009.

[115] Berberovi ́c E, Roisman IV, Jakirli ́c S, Tropea C. Inertia dominated flow and heat
transfer in liquid drop spreading on a hot substrate. International Journal of Heat
and Fluid Flow 2011;32(4):785–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatfluidflow.2011.05.001.

[116] Sinha-Ray S, Sinha-Ray S, Yarin AL, Weickgenannt CM, Emmert J, Tropea C. Drop

impact cooling enhancement on nano-textured surfaces. Part II: Results of the
parabolic flight experiments [zero gravity (0g) and supergravity (1.8g)].
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2014;70:1107–14. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2013.11.008.

[117] Roisman IV, Lembach A, Tropea C. Drop splashing induced by target roughness
and porosity: The size plays no role. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science
2015;222:615–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2015.02.004.

[118] Schremb M, Roisman IV, Tropea C. Transient effects in ice nucleation of a water
drop impacting onto a cold substrate. Physical Review E 2017;95(2-1):022805.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.95.022805.

[119] Celata GP, Cumo M, Mariani A, Zummo G. Visualization of the impact of water
drops on a hot surface: Effect of drop velocity and surface inclination. Heat and
Mass Transfer 2006;42(10):885–90. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00231-006-0139-
1.

[120] Hutchings IM, Martin GD, Hoath SD. High Speed Imaging and Analysis of Jet and

Drop Formation. Journal of Imaging Science and Technology 2007;51(5):438.
https://doi.org/10.2352/J.ImagingSci.Technol.(2007)51:5(438).

[121] Thoroddsen ST, Etoh TG, Takehara K. High-Speed Imaging of Drops and Bubbles.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 2008;40(1):257–85. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.fluid.40.111406.102215.

[122] Thoraval M-J, Takehara K, Etoh TG, Thoroddsen ST. Drop impact entrapment of

bubble rings. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2013;724:234–58. https://doi.org/
10.1017/jfm.2013.147.

[123] Gottfried BS, Lee CJ, Bell KJ. The Leidenfrost phenomenon: Film boiling of liquid
droplets on a flat plate. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 1966;9
(11):1167–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(66)90112-8.

[124] Rein M. Interactions between Drops and Hot Surfaces. Rein M. (eds) Drop-Surface

Interactions. CISM International Centre for Mechanical Sciences (Courses and
Lectures), Springer, Vienna. 456; 2002. p. 185–217. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-7091-2594-6-6.

[125] Bai C, Gosman AD. Development of Methodology for Spray Impingement

Simulation. SAE Technical Paper 950283 1995. https://doi.org/10.4271/950283.
[126] Rioboo R, Tropea C, Marengo M. Outcomes from a Drop Impact on Solid Surfaces.
Atomization and Sprays 2001;11(2):12. https://doi.org/10.1615/AtomizSpr.v11.
i2.40.

[127] Stow CD, Hadfield MG. An Experimental Investigation of Fluid Flow Resulting

from the Impact of a Water Drop with an Unyielding Dry Surface. Proceedings of
the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 1981;373
(1755):419–41. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1981.0002.

[128] Mundo C, Sommerfeld M, Tropea C. Droplet-wall collisions: Experimental studies
of the deformation and breakup process. International Journal of Multiphase Flow
1995;21(2):151–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/0301-9322(94)00069-V.

[129] Moreira A, Moita AS, Pan ̃ao MR. Advances and challenges in explaining fuel spray
impingement: How much of single droplet impact research is useful? Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science 2010;36(5):554–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pecs.2010.01.002.

[130] Staat HJJ, Tran T, Geerdink B, Riboux G, Sun C, Gordillo JM, et al. Phase diagram
for droplet impact on superheated surfaces. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2015;779.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2015.465.

[131] Liang G, Shen S, Guo Y, Zhang J. Boiling from liquid drops impact on a heated
wall. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2016;100:48–57. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016.04.061.

[132] Kuhnke D. Spray wall interaction modelling by dimensionless data analysis.

Aachen, Germany: RWTH Aachen University; 2004. PhD thesis.
[133] Moita AS, Moreira A. Drop impacts onto cold and heated rigid surfaces:

Morphological comparisons, disintegration limits and secondary atomization.
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2007;28(4):735–52. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2006.10.004.

[134] Tran T, Staat HJJ, Prosperetti A, Sun C, Lohse D. Drop impact on superheated

surfaces. Physical review letters 2012;108(3):036101. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.108.036101.

[135] Breitenbach J, Roisman IV, Tropea C. Phenomena of Drop Impact on Hot

Surfaces: Pure Newtonian Liquids. 2015.Tainan, Taiwan

[136] Bertola V. An impact regime map for water drops impacting on heated surfaces.
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2015;85:430–7. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2015.01.084.

[137] Khavari M, Sun C, Lohse D, Tran T. Fingering patterns during droplet impact on

heated surfaces. Soft matter 2015;11(17):3298–303. https://doi.org/10.1039/
c4sm02878c.

[138] Liang G, Mudawar I. Review of drop impact on heated walls. International

Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2017;106:103–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2016.10.031.

[139] Richter B, Dullenkopf K, Bauer H-J. Investigation of secondary droplet

characteristics produced by an isooctane drop chain impact onto a heated piston
surface. Experiments in Fluids 2005;39(2):351–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00348-005-1018-0.

[140] Wang A-B, Lin C-H, Cheng C-C. Pattern analysis of a single droplet impinging onto

a heated plate. Heat Transfer Asian Research 2005;(34):579–94.

[141] Nishio S, Hirata M. Direct contact phenomenon between a liquid droplet and high
temperature solid surface. 6th International Heat Transfer Conference, Toronto,
Canada 1978;(1):245–50.

[142] Kunihide M, Michiyoshi I. Effects of the initial size of water droplet on its

evaporation on heated surfaces. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
1979;22(6):979–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(79)90041-3.

[143] Yao S-C, Cai KY. The dynamics and leidenfrost temperature of drops impacting on
a hot surface at small angles. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 1988;1(4):
363–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/0894-1777(88)90016-7.

[144] Kang BS, Lee DH. On the dynamic behavior of a liquid droplet impacting upon an

inclined heated surface. Experiments in Fluids 2000;29(4):380–7. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s003489900104.

[145] Frost W, Kippenhan CJ. Bubble growth and heat-transfer mechanisms in the

forced convection boiling of water containing a surface active agent. International
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 1967;10(7):931–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0017-9310(67)90070-1.

[146] Yang YM, Maa JR. Pool Boiling of Dilute Surfactant Solutions. Journal of Heat

Transfer 1983;105(1):190. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3245541.

[147] Manzello SL, Yang JC. On the collision dynamics of a water droplet containing an

additive on a heated solid surface. Proceedings of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 2002;458(2026):2417–44.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2002.0980.

[148] Cui Q, Chandra S, McCahan S. The Effect of Dissolving Gases or Solids in Water

Droplets Boiling on a Hot Surface. Journal of Heat Transfer 2001;123(4):719.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1376394.

[149] Qiao YM, Chandra S. Experiments on adding a surfactant to water drops boiling
on a hot surface. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences 1997;453(1959):673–89. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rspa.1997.0038.

[150] B ̈ornhorst M. Urea-Water Sprays in NOx Emission Control Systems: Interaction

with Solid Walls and Deposit Formation. Karlsruhe, Germany: Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology; 2019. PhD thesis.

[151] Kuhn C, Schweigert D, Kuntz C, B ̈ornhorst M. Single droplet impingement of urea
water solution on heated porous surfaces. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 2021. Submitted for publication.

[152] Tropea C, Roisman IV. Modeling of spray impact on solid surfaces. Atomization
and Sprays 2000;10(3-5):387–408. https://doi.org/10.1615/AtomizSpr.v10.i3-
5.80.

[153] Roisman IV, Prunet-Foch B, Tropea C, Vignes-Adler M. Multiple Drop Impact onto

a Dry Solid Substrate. Journal of colloid and interface science 2002;256(2):
396–410. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcis.2002.8683.

[154] Roisman IV. Dynamics of inertia dominated binary drop collisions. Physics of

Fluids 2004;16(9):3438–49. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1777584.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094933

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

[155] Mundo C, Tropea C, Sommerfeld M. Numerical and experimental investigation of

spray characteristics in the vicinity of a rigid Wall. Experimental Thermal and
Fluid Science 1997;15(3):228–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0894-1777(97)
00015-0.

[156] Kalantari D, Tropea C. Spray impact onto flat and rigid walls: Empirical

characterization and modelling. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2007;
33(5):525–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2006.09.008.
[157] Stanton DW, Rutland CJ. Modeling fuel film formation and wall interaction in

diesel engines. SAE Transactions 1996;(105):808–24.

[158] Senda J, Fujimoto HG. Multidimensional Modeling of Impinging Sprays on the

Wall in Diesel Engines. Applied Mechanics Reviews 1999;52(4):119–38. https://
doi.org/10.1115/1.3098930.

[159] Bai CX, Rusche H, Gosman AD. Modeling of gasoline spray impingement.

Atomization and Sprays 2002;12(1-3):1–28. https://doi.org/10.1615/AtomizSpr.
v12.i123.10.

[160] Han Z, Xu Z, Trigui N. Spray/wall interaction models for multidimensional engine
simulation. International Journal of Engine Research 2000;1(1):127–46. https://
doi.org/10.1243/1468087001545308.

[161] Breitenbach J, Roisman IV, Tropea C. From drop impact physics to spray cooling

models: a critical review. Experiments in Fluids 2018;59(3). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00348-018-2514-3.

[162] Puschmann F, Specht E. Transient measurement of heat transfer in metal

quenching with atomized sprays. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2004;
28(6):607–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2003.09.004.
[163] Tenzer FM, Roisman IV, Tropea C. Fast transient spray cooling of a hot thick

target. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2019;881:84–103. https://doi.org/10.1017/
jfm.2019.743.

[164] Cossali GE, Coghe A, Marengo M. The impact of a single drop on a wetted solid

surface. Experiments in Fluids 1997;22(6):463–72. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s003480050073.

[165] Stanton DW, Rutland CJ. Multi-dimensional modeling of thin liquid films and

spray-wall interactions resulting from impinging sprays. International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer 1998;41(20):3037–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-
9310(98)00054-4.

[166] Kittel HM, Roisman IV, Tropea C. Splash of a drop impacting onto a solid

substrate wetted by a thin film of another liquid. Physical Review Fluids 2018;3
(7). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevFluids.3.073601.

[167] Garcia Rosa N, Villedieu P, Dewitte J, Lavergne G. A new droplet-wall interaction
model. 10th International Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems,
ICLASS. 2006.Kyoto, Japan

[168] O’Rourke PJ, Amsden AA. A Spray/Wall Interaction Submodel for the KIVA-3
Wall Film Model. SAE Technical Paper 2000;(2000-01-0271). https://doi.org/
10.4271/2000-01-0271.

[169] Smith H, Z ̈ochbauer M, Lauer T. Advanced Spray Impingement Modelling for an
Improved Prediction Accuracy of the Ammonia Homogenisation in SCR Systems.
SAE International Journal of Fuels and Lubricants 2015. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2015-01-1054.

[170] Quissek M, Budziankou U, Lauer T. A Novel Approach for the Impingement of

AdBlue-Droplets based on Smooth Regime Transitions. SAE Technical Paper
2020;(2020-01-2179). https://doi.org/10.4271/2020-01-2179.

[171] Yarin AL. Drop Impact Dynamics: Splashing, Spreading, Receding, Bouncing....
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 2006;38(1):159–92. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.fluid.38.050304.092144.

[172] Josserand C, Thoroddsen ST. Drop Impact on a Solid Surface. Annual Review of

Fluid Mechanics 2016;48(1):365–91. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-
122414-034401.

[173] Scheller BL, Bousfield DW. Newtonian drop impact with a solid surface. AIChE
Journal 1995;41(6):1357–67. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690410602.
[174] Bayer IS, Megaridis CM. Contact angle dynamics in droplets impacting on flat

surfaces with different wetting characteristics. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2006;
558:415. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112006000231.

[175] B ̈ornhorst M, Cai X, W ̈orner M, Deutschmann O. Maximum Spreading of Urea

Water Solution during Drop Impingement. Chemical Engineering & Technology
2019;42(11):2419–27. https://doi.org/10.1002/ceat.201800755.
[176] W ̈orner M, Samkhaniani N, Cai X, Wu Y, Majumdar A, Marschall H, et al.

Spreading and rebound dynamics of sub-millimetre urea-water-solution droplets
impinging on substrates of varying wettability. Applied Mathematical Modelling
2021;95:53–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2021.01.038.

[177] Nukiyama S. The maximum and minimum values of the heat Q transmitted from
metal to boiling water under atmospheric pressure. International Journal of Heat
and Mass Transfer 1966;9(12):1419–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(66)
90138-4.

[178] VDI Gesellschaft. VDI-W ̈armeatlas. 11. Springer; 2013, ISBN 978-3-540-25503-1.

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-19981-3.

[179] Breitenbach J, Roisman IV, Tropea C. Heat transfer in the film boiling regime:
Single drop impact and spray cooling. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 2017;110:34–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2017.03.004.

[180] Puschmann F. Experimentelle Untersuchung der Spraykühlung zur

Qualit ̈atsverbesserung durch definierte Einstellung des W ̈armeübergangs.
Magdeburg, Germany: Otto von Guericke University of Magdeburg; 2003. PhD
Thesis.

[182] Yao SC, Cox TL. A general heat transfer correlation for impacting water sprays of
high-temperature surfaces. Experimental Heat Transfer 2010;15(4):207–19.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08916150290082649.

[183] Labergue A, Gradeck M, Lemoine F. Comparative study of the cooling of a hot
temperature surface using sprays and liquid jets. International Journal of Heat
and Mass Transfer 2015;81:889–900. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2014.11.018.

[184] Roisman IV, Breitenbach J, Tropea C. Thermal atomisation of a liquid drop after
impact onto a hot substrate. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2018;842:87–101.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2018.123.

[185] Wendelstorf J, Spitzer K-H, Wendelstorf R. Spray water cooling heat transfer at
high temperatures and liquid mass fluxes. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 2008;51(19-20):4902–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2008.01.032.

[186] Chaze W, Caballina O, Castanet G, Pierson J-F, Lemoine F, Maillet D. Heat flux
reconstruction by inversion of experimental infrared temperature measurements –
Application to the impact of a droplet in the film boiling regime. International
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2019;128:469–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2018.08.069.

[187] Cebo-Rudnicka A, Malinowski Z, Buczek A. The influence of selected parameters

of spray cooling and thermal conductivity on heat transfer coefficient.
International Journal of Thermal Sciences 2016;110:52–64. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2016.06.031.

[188] Dunand P, Castanet G, Gradeck M, Maillet D, Lemoine F. Energy balance of

droplets impinging onto a wall heated above the Leidenfrost temperature.
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2013;44:170–80. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2013.05.021.

[189] Chaze W, Caballina O, Castanet G, Lemoine F. Spatially and temporally resolved
measurements of the temperature inside droplets impinging on a hot solid
surface. Experiments in Fluids 2017;58(8). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00348-017-
2375-1.

[190] Schweigert D, Damson B, Lüders H, B ̈ornhorst M, Deutschmann O. Heat transfer
during spray/wall interaction with urea water solution: An experimental
parameter study. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2019;78:108432.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2019.108432.

[191] Schweigert D, Damson B, Lüders H, Stephan P, Deutschmann O. The effect of

wetting characteristics, thermophysical properties, and roughness on spray-wall
heat transfer in selective catalytic reduction systems. International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer 2020;152:119554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2020.119554.

[192] Liao Y, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Furrer R, Wang M, Boulouchos K. Heat

transfer characteristics of urea-water spray impingement on hot surfaces.
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 2018;117:447–57. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.10.031.

[193] Liao Y, Furrer R, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Boulouchos K. Experimental

investigation of the heat transfer characteristics of spray/wall interaction in diesel
selective catalytic reduction systems. Fuel 2017;190:163–73. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2016.11.035.

[194] Liang G, Mudawar I. Review of spray cooling – Part 1: Single-phase and nucleate

boiling regimes, and critical heat flux. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 2017;115:1174–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2017.06.029.

[195] Liang G, Mudawar I. Review of spray cooling – Part 2: High temperature boiling

regimes and quenching applications. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 2017;115:1206–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2017.06.022.

[196] Rohsenow WM. A method of correlating heat transfer data for surface boiling
liquids: Journal of Heat Transfer. Journal of Heat Transfer 1952;(74):969–76.

[197] Wruck N. Transientes Sieden von Tropfen beim Wandaufprall. Aachen, Germany:

RWTH Aachen University; 1998. PhD thesis.

[198] Fischer S, Bitto R, Lauer T, Krenn C, Tauer J, Pessl G. Impact of the Turbulence

Model and Numerical Approach on the Prediction of the Ammonia
Homogenization in an Automotive SCR System. SAE International Journal of
Engines 2012;5(3):1443–58. https://doi.org/10.4271/2012-01-1291.

[199] Budziankou U, Quissek M, Lauer T. A Fast Modeling Approach for the Numerical
Prediction of Urea Deposit Formation. SAE Technical Paper Series. SAE
International400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United States; 2020.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2020-01-0358.

[200] Akao J, Akaki K, Mori S, Moriyama A. Deformation Behaviors of a Liquid Droplet
Impingement onto a Hot Metal Surface. Transactions of the Iron and Steel
Institute of Japan 1980:737–43.

[201] Wang J, Fu H, Hu Y, Cai Y, Chen K. Experiment investigation on the effects of air

assisted SCR spray impingement on wall temperature evolution. Energy 2020;
204:117943. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117943.

[202] Smith H, Lauer T, Mayer M, Pierson S. Optical and Numerical Investigations on
the Mechanisms of Deposit Formation in SCR Systems. SAE International Journal
of Fuels and Lubricants 2014;7(2):525–42. https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-
1563.

[203] Niwa A, Sakatani S, Matsumura E, Kitamura T. Prediction of Spray Behavior in

Injected by Urea SCR Injector and the Reaction Products. SAE International
Journal of Fuels and Lubricants 2017;10(3). https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-
2375.

[181] Al-Ahmadi HM, Yao SC. Spray cooling of high temperature metals using high

[204] Liao Y, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Rentsch D, Curto F, Boulouchos K.

mass flux industrial nozzles. Experimental Heat Transfer 2008;21(1):38–54.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08916150701647827.

Characterization of the urea-water spray impingement in diesel selective catalytic
reduction systems. Applied Energy 2017;205:964–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2017.08.088.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094934

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

[205] B ̈ornhorst M, Langheck S, Weickenmeier H, Dem C, Suntz R, Deutschmann O.

Characterization of solid deposits from urea water solution injected into a hot gas
test rig. Chemical Engineering Journal 2019;377:119855. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2018.09.016.

[206] Wagner W. New vapour pressure measurements for argon and nitrogen and a new
method for establishing rational vapour pressure equations. Cryogenics 1973;13
(8):470–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/0011-2275(73)90003-9.

[207] Pinck LA, Kelly MA. The Solubility of Urea in Water. Journal of the American
Chemical Society 1925;47(8):2170–2. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01685a502.

[208] Lee F-M, Lahti LE. Solubility of urea in water-alcohol mixtures. Journal of
Chemical & Engineering Data 1972;17(3):304–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/
je60054a020.

[209] Kovalchuk NM, Trybala A, Starov VM. Evaporation of sessile droplets. Current

Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science 2014;19(4):336–42. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cocis.2014.07.005.

SAE Technical Paper 2016;(2016-01-0989). https://doi.org/10.4271/2016-01-
0989.

[233] Ates C, B ̈ornhorst M, Koch R, Eck M, Deutschmann O, Bauer H-J. Morphological
characterization of urea derived deposits in SCR systems. Chemical Engineering
Journal 2021;409:128230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.128230.
[234] Gehrlein J, Lang A, Palmer G. Optimization of SCR Systems by Integration of

Mixture Elements. MTZ worldwide 2009;70(3):18–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF03227938.

[235] Zhang C, Sun C, Wu M, Lu K. Optimisation design of SCR mixer for improving
deposit performance at low temperatures. Fuel 2019;237:465–74. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.10.025.

[236] Schiller S, Brandl M, Hoppenstedt B, de Rudder K. Wire Mesh Mixer Optimization

for DEF Deposit Prevention. SAE Technical Paper Series. SAE International400
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United States; 2015. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2015-01-0989.

[210] Ryddner DT, Trujillo MF. Modeling Urea-Water Solution Droplet Evaporation.

[237] Zheng G, Sampath MK, Alcini W, Salanta G, Kotrba A, Axe B. Design

Emission Control Science and Technology 2015;1(1):80–97. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40825-014-0006-3.

[211] Schmid J, Zarikos I, Terzis A, Roth N, Weigand B. Crystallization of urea from an

evaporative aqueous solution sessile droplet at sub-boiling temperatures and
surfaces with different wettability. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 2018;
91:80–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2017.10.008.

[212] Bender A, Stephan P, Gambaryan-Roisman T. A fully coupled numerical model for

deposit formation from evaporating urea-water drops. International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer 2020;159:120069. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120069.

[213] Budavari S., Ed.. The Merck Index Eleventh Edition. Chemical & Engineering

News 1989;67(49). https://doi.org/10.1021/cen-v067n049.ifc.

[214] Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG. Sicherheitsdatenblatt gem ̈aß Verordnung (EG) Nr.

1907/2006: Biuret. www.carlroth.com.

[215] Merck KGaA. Sicherheitsdatenblatt gem ̈aß Verordnung (EG) Nr. 1907/2006:

Cyanurs ̈aure. http://www.merckmillipore.com.

[216] Bann B, Miller SA. Melamine And Derivatives Of Melamine. Chemical Reviews

1958;58(1):131–72. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr50019a004.

[217] Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG. Sicherheitsdatenblatt gem ̈aß Verordnung (EG) Nr.

1907/2006: Melamin. www.carlroth.com.

[218] Stradella L, Argentero M. A study of the thermal decomposition of urea, of related
compounds and thiourea using DSC and TG-EGA. Thermochimica Acta 1993;219:
315–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-6031(93)80508-8.

[219] KoryakinA.G. & Gal’perin, V.A. & Sarbaev, A.N. & Finkel’shtein, A.I..

Thermography of urea and its pyrolysis products. Zh Org Khim (Russion Journal
of Organic Chemistry) 1971;(7):972–7.

[220] Fang HL, DaCosta HF. Urea thermolysis and NOx reduction with and without SCR
catalysts. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2003;46(1):17–34. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0926-3373(03)00177-2.

[221] Ebrahimian V, Nicolle A, Habchi C. Detailed modeling of the evaporation and
thermal decomposition of urea-water solution in SCR systems. AIChE Journal
2012;58(7):1998–2009. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.12736.

[222] Gan X, Yao D, Wu F, Dai J, Wei L, Li X. Modeling and simulation of urea-water-
solution droplet evaporation and thermolysis processes for SCR systems. Chinese
Journal of Chemical Engineering 2016;24(8):1065–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cjche.2016.04.026.

[223] Tischer S, B ̈ornhorst M, Amsler J, Schoch G, Deutschmann O. Thermodynamics

and reaction mechanism of urea decomposition. Physical chemistry chemical
physics : PCCP 2019;21(30):16785–97. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9cp01529a.
[224] Kuntz C, Kuhn C, Weickenmeier H, Tischer S, B ̈ornhorst M, Deutschmann O.

Improvements of Urea SCR Mixing for Medium-Duty Trucks. SAE Technical Paper
Series. SAE International400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United
States; 2013. https://doi.org/10.4271/2013-01-1074.

[238] Michelin J, Guilbaud F, Guil A, Newbigging I, Jean E, Reichert M, et al. Advanced
Compact SCR Mixer: BlueBox. SAE Technical Paper Series. SAE International400
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United States; 2014. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2014-01-1531.

[239] Bhayaraju U, Hassa C. Planar liquid sheet breakup of prefilming and

nonprefilming atomizers at elevated pressures. Atomization and Sprays 2009;19
(12):1147–69. https://doi.org/10.1615/AtomizSpr.v19.i12.50.

[240] Warncke K, Gepperth S, Sauer B, Sadiki A, Janicka J, Koch R, et al. Experimental
and numerical investigation of the primary breakup of an airblasted liquid sheet.
International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2017;91:208–24. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2016.12.010.

[241] BhayarajuF. Giuliani, C. Hassa. Planar liquid sheet breakup of pre- and

nonprefilming airblast atomisers at elevated ambient air pressure. ILASS Europe,
20th Annual Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems, Orleans,
France 2005.

[242] Aigner M, Wittig S. Swirl and Counterswirl Effects in Prefilming Airblast

Atomizers. Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 1988;110(1):
105–10. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3240072.

[243] El-Shanawany MS, Lefebvre AH. Airblast Atomization: Effect of Linear Scale on
Mean Drop Size. Journal of Energy 1980;4(4):184–9. https://doi.org/10.2514/
3.62472.

[244] Rizk NK, Lefebvre AH. Influence of atomizer design features on mean drop size.

AIAA Journal 1983;21(8):1139–42. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.8217.

[245] B ̈arow E, Gepperth S, Koch R, Bauer H-J. Effect of the Precessing Vortex Core on
Primary Atomization. Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie 2015;229(6):909–29.
https://doi.org/10.1515/zpch-2014-0619.

[246] Pringuey T, Cant RS. Robust Conservative Level Set Method for 3D Mixed-

Element Meshes — Application to LES of Primary Liquid-Sheet Breakup.
Communications in Computational Physics 2014;16(2):403–39. https://doi.org/
10.4208/cicp.140213.210214a.

[247] Sander W, Weigand B. Direct numerical simulation and analysis of instability

enhancing parameters in liquid sheets at moderate Reynolds numbers. Physics of
Fluids 2008;20(5):053301. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2909661.

[248] Zuzio D, Estivalezes J-L, Villedieu P, Blanchard G. Numerical simulation of

primary and secondary atomization. Comptes Rendus M ́ecanique 2013;341(1-2):
15–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crme.2012.10.003.

[249] Braun S, Wieth L, Holz S, Dauch TF, Keller MC, Chaussonnet G, et al. Numerical

Kinetic modeling and simulation of high-temperature by-product formation from
urea decomposition. Chemical Engineering Science 2021;246:116876. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2021.116876.

prediction of air-assisted primary atomization using Smoothed Particle
Hydrodynamics. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 2019;114:303–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2019.03.008.

[225] Eichelbaum M, Siemer AB, Farrauto RJ, Castaldi MJ. The impact of urea on the
performance of metal-exchanged zeolites for the selective catalytic reduction of
NOx—Part II. Catalytic, FTIR, and NMR studies. Applied Catalysis B:
Environmental 2010;97(1-2):98–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apcatb.2010.03.028.

[226] Bernhard AM, Peitz D, Elsener M, Schildhauer T, Kr ̈ocher O. Catalytic urea

hydrolysis in the selective catalytic reduction of NOx: Catalyst screening and
kinetics on anatase TiO2 and ZrO2. Catalysis Science & Technology 2013;3(4):
942–51. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2cy20668d.

[227] Peitz D, Bernhard A, Elsener M, Kr ̈ocher O. Laboratory test reactor for the

investigation of liquid reducing agents in the selective catalytic reduction of NOx.
The Review of scientific instruments 2011;82(8):084101. https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.3617463.

[228] Kr ̈ocher O, Elsener M. Materials for thermohydrolysis of urea in a fluidized bed.
Chemical Engineering Journal 2009;152(1):167–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cej.2009.04.030.

[229] Strots VO, Santhanam S, Adelman BJ, Griffin GA, Derybowski EM. Deposit

Formation in Urea-SCR Systems. SAE International Journal of Fuels and
Lubricants 2009;2(2):283–9. https://doi.org/10.4271/2009-01-2780.

[230] Bai SZ, Lang SG, Yuan KP, Liu Y, Li GX. Experimental Study of Urea Depositions in
Urea-SCR System. Advanced Materials Research 2014;937:74–9. https://doi.org/
10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.937.74.

[250] Holz S, Braun S, Chaussonnet G, Koch R, Bauer H-J. Close Nozzle Spray

Characteristics of a Prefilming Airblast Atomizer. Energies 2019;12(14):2835.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en12142835.

[251] Nishad K, Ries F, Janicka J, Sadiki A. Analysis of spray dynamics of urea–water-
solution jets in a SCR-DeNOx system: An LES based study. International Journal of
Heat and Fluid Flow 2018;70:247–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijheatfluidflow.2018.02.017.

[252] Rog ́o ̇z R, Kapusta ŁJ, Bachanek J, Vankan J, Teodorczyk A. Improved urea-water

solution spray model for simulations of selective catalytic reduction systems.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2020;120:109616. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2019.109616.

[253] Varna A, Boulouchos K, Spiteri A, Dimopoulos Eggenschwiler P, Wright YM.

Numerical Modelling and Experimental Characterization of a Pressure-Assisted
Multi-Stream Injector for SCR Exhaust Gas After-Treatment. SAE International
Journal of Engines 2014;7(4):2012–21. https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-2822.

[254] Frühhaber J, Lieber C, Mattes D, Lauer T, Koch R, Bauer H-J. Modeling the

Formation of Urea-Water Sprays from an Air-Assisted Nozzle. Applied Sciences
2020;10(16):5723. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10165723.

[255] Naber JD, Siebers DL. Effects of Gas Density and Vaporization on Penetration and

Dispersion of Diesel Sprays. SAE Transactions 1996;(105):82–111.

[256] Sazhin SS, Feng G, Heikal MR. A model for fuel spray penetration. Fuel 2001;80

(15):2171–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361(01)00098-9.

[231] Weeks CL, Ibeling DR, Han S, Ludwig L, Ayyappan P. Analytical Investigation of

[257] Wurzenberger JC, Wanker R. Multi-Scale SCR Modeling, 1D Kinetic Analysis and

Urea Deposits in SCR System. SAE International Journal of Engines 2015;8(3).
https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-1037.

3D System Simulation. SAE Technical Paper 2005;(2005-01-0948). https://doi.
org/10.4271/2005-01-0948.

[232] Eakle S, Kroll S, Yau A, Gomez J, Henry C. Investigation of Urea Derived Deposits
Composition in SCR Systems and Their Potential Effect on Overall PM Emissions.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094935

M. B ̈ornhorst and O. Deutschmann

[258] Habchi C, Nicolle A, Gillet N. Numerical Study of Deposits Formation in SCR

Systems Using Urea-Water Solution Injection. Journal of Materials Science and
Nanotechnology 2018;6(1). https://doi.org/10.15744/2348-9812.6.104.
[259] Z ̈ochbauer M, Smith H, Lauer T. Advanced SCR Flow Modeling with a Validated
Large Eddy Simulation. SAE Technical Paper 2015;(2015-01-1046). https://doi.
org/10.4271/2015-01-1046.

[260] Budziankou U, Lauer T, Yu X, Schmidt BM, Cho N. Modeling Approach for a

Wiremesh Substrate in CFD Simulation. SAE International Journal of Fuels and
Lubricants 2017;(2017-01-0971). https://doi.org/10.4271/2017-01-0971.
[261] Michelin J, Nappez P, Guilbaud F, Hinterberger C, Ottaviani E, Gauthier C, et al.
Advanced Close Coupled SCR Compact Mixer Architecture. SAE Technical Paper
2015;(2015-01-1020). https://doi.org/10.4271/2015-01-1020.

[262] Fischer S. Simulation of the urea-water-solution preparation and ammonia

homogenization with a validated CFD-model for the optimization of automotive
SCR-systems. Vienna, Austria: Vienna University of Technology; 2012. PhD thesis.

[263] Nishad K, Sadiki A, Janicka J. Numerical Investigation of AdBlue Droplet

Evaporation and Thermal Decomposition in the Context of NOx-SCR Using a
Multi-Component Evaporation Model. Energies 2018;11(1):222. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en11010222.

[264] Nishad K, Stein M, Ries F, Bykov V, Maas U, Deutschmann O, et al. Thermal
Decomposition of a Single AdBlue Droplet Including Wall–Film Formation in
Turbulent Cross-Flow in an SCR System. Energies 2019;12(13):2600. https://doi.
org/10.3390/en12132600.

[265] Shahariar GMH, Wardana MKA, Lim OT. Investigation of urea-water solution
spray impingement on the hot surface of automotive SCR system. Journal of
Mechanical Science and Technology 2018;32(6):2935–46. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12206-018-0550-9.

[272] ANSYS Inc.. ANSYS Fluent CFD Software. 2019. www.ansys.com.
[273] Dukowicz JK. A particle-fluid numerical model for liquid sprays. Journal of

Computational Physics 1980;35(2):229–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991
(80)90087-X.

[274] Incropera FP, DeWitt DP, Bergmann TL, Lavine AS. Fundamentals of heat and

mass transfer. 7th. John Wiley & Sons; 2013, ISBN 0471457280.
[275] Zheng G. CFD Modeling of Urea Spray and Deposits for SCR Systems. SAE

Technical Paper 2016;(2016-01-8077). https://doi.org/10.4271/2016-01-8077.

[276] Smith H. Modelling Deposit Formation in Automotive SCR Systems. Vienna,

Austria: Vienna University of Technology; 2016. PhD thesis.

Marion B ̈ornhorst is head of the “Multiphase Processes and
Reactors" group at the Institute for Chemical Technology and
Polymer Chemistry (ITCP) at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT),  Germany.  She  received  her  Ph.D.  in  Chemical  Engi-
neering in 2019. She received the 2020 award of the Friedrich
and  Elisabeth  Boysen  Foundation  for  her  findings  on  spray/
wall  interaction  and  urea  deposit  formation  in  mobile  NOx
emission control systems. Her current research is centered on
multiphase  reactive  processes.  Her  research  interests include
multiphase interaction and chemistry in emission control sys-
tems such as spray and droplet impingement on solid targets,
film  formation  and  solidification  from  liquid  films.  Further
more, she works on chemical energy storage as well as multi
phase reactor design and optimization.

[266] Shahariar GH, Lim OT. A Study on Urea-Water Solution Spray-Wall Impingement
Process and Solid Deposit Formation in Urea-SCR de-NOx System. Energies 2019;
12(1):125. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12010125.

[267] B ̈ornhorst M, Kuntz C, Tischer S, Deutschmann O. Urea derived deposits in diesel
exhaust gas after-treatment: Integration of urea decomposition kinetics into a CFD
simulation. Chemical Engineering Science 2020;211:115319. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ces.2019.115319.

[268] Budziankou U, B ̈ornhorst M, Kuntz C, Deutschmann O, Lauer T. Deposit

Formation from Urea Injection: a Comprehensive Modeling Approach. Emission
Control Science and Technology 2020;6(2):211–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40825-020-00159-x.

[269] Sun Y, Sharma S, Vernham B, Shibata K, Drennan S. Urea Deposit Predictions on a
Practical Mid/Heavy Duty Vehicle After-Treatment System. SAE Technical Paper
Series. SAE International400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United
States; 2018. https://doi.org/10.4271/2018-01-0960.

[270] Li M, Zhang Y, Liu X, Zhang Q, Li Z. Numerical Investigation on the Urea Deposit
Formation Process in a Selective Catalytic Reduction System of a Diesel Engine
Based on a Fluid-Solid Coupling Method. ACS omega 2021;6(8):5921–32. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c00021.

[271] Munnannur A, Liu ZG. Development and Validation of a Predictive Model for DEF
Injection and Urea Decomposition in Mobile SCR DeNOx Systems. SAE Technical
Paper 2010;(2010-01-0889). https://doi.org/10.4271/2010-01-0889.

Olaf Deutschmann holds the Chair in Chemical Technology at
the  Karlsruhe  Institute  of  Technology  (KIT),  Germany.  He  is
director at the Institute for Chemical Technology and Polymer
Chemistry  and  at  the  Institute  of  Catalysis  Research  and
Technology  at  KIT.  His  group  works  on  heterogeneous  re-
actions  for  the  synthesis  of  chemicals  and  materials,  CO2
reduction in chemical process industry, reduction of pollutant
emissions,  combustion,  and  energy  conversion  by  fuel  and
electrolysis  cells.  Special  focuses  are  given  to  the  kinetics  of
catalytic reactions and their interactions with reactive flows.
The  software  packages  DETCHEM  and  CaRMeN  were  devel-
oped under his guidance. He studied physics and chemistry in
Magdeburg, Berlin, and Heidelberg. In 1996, he obtained his
PhD from Heidelberg University. As Postdoc he worked on high-temperature catalysis at
the University of Minnesota and at the Los Alamos National Laboratory. He joined the
Faculty of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Karlsruhe, now KIT, in 2003.
Olaf Deutschmann is recipient of the DECHEMA Award, the Hermann-Oberth-Medal, and
Fellow of The Combustion Institute.

ProgressinEnergyandCombustionScience87(2021)10094936
